
I.

It is difficult for young people to live things down. We will tolerate vice, grand larceny and the quieter forms of murder in our contemporaries, because we are so strong and incorruptible ourselves, but our children's friends must show a blank service record. When young Josephine Perry was "removed" by her father from the Brereton School, where she had accidentally embraced a young man in the chapel, some of the best people in Chicago would have liked to have seen her drawn and quartered. But the Perrys were rich and powerful, so that friends rallied to their daughter's reputation—and Josephine's lovely face with its expression of just having led the children from a burning orphan asylum did the rest.

Certainly there was no consciousness of disgrace in it when she entered the grand stand at Lake Forest on the first day of the tennis tournament. Same old crowd, she seemed to say, turning, without any curiosity, half left, half right—not that I object, but you can't expect me to get excited.

It was a bright day, with the sun glittering on the crowd; the white figures on the courts threw no shadow. Over in Europe the bloody terror of the Somme was just beginning, but the war had become second-page news and the question agitating the crowd was who would win the tournament. Dresses were long and hats were small and tight, and America, shut in on itself, was bored beyond belief.

Josephine, representing in her own person the future, was not bored; she was merely impatient for a change. She gazed about until she found friends; they waved and she joined them. Only as she sat down did she realize that she was also next to a lady whose lips, in continual process of masking buck teeth, gave her a deceptively pleasant expression. Mrs. McRae belonged to the drawing-and-quartering party. She hated young people, and by some perverse instinct was drawn into contact with them, as organizer of the midsummer vaudeville at Lake Forest and of dancing classes in Chicago during the winter. She chose rich, plain girls and brought them along, bullying boys into dancing with them and comparing them to their advantage with the more popular black sheep—the most prominent representative of this flock being Josephine.

But Josephine was stiffened this afternoon by what her father had said the night before: "If Jenny McRae raises a finger against you, heaven help Jim." This was because of a rumor that Mrs. McRae, as an example for the public weal, was going to omit Josephine's usual dance with Travis de Coppet from the vaudeville that summer.

As a matter of fact, Mrs. McRae had, upon her husband's urgent appeal, reconsidered; she was one large, unconvincing smile. After a short but obvious conference behind her own eyes, she said:

"Do you see that young man on the second court, with the head-band?" And as Josephine gazed apathetically, "That's my nephew from Minneapolis. They say he has a fine chance to win here. I wonder if you'd be a sweet girl and be nice to him and introduce him to the young people."

Again she hesitated. "And I want to see you about the vaudeville soon. We expect you and Travis to do that marvelous, marvelous Maxixe for us."

Josephine's inner response was the monosyllable "Huh!"

She realized that she didn't want to be in the vaudeville, but only to be invited. And another look at Mrs. McRae's nephew decided her that the price was too high.

"The Maxixe is stale now," she answered, but her attention had already wandered. Someone was staring at her from near by, someone whose eyes burned disturbingly, like an uncharted light.

Turning to speak to Travis de Coppet, she could see the pale lower half of a face two rows behind, and during the burst of clapping at the end of a game she turned and made a cerebral photograph of the entire individual as her eyes wandered casually down the row.

He was a tall, even a high young man, with a rather small head set on enormous round shoulders. His face was pale; his eyes were nearly black, with an intense, passionate light in them; his mouth was sensitive and strongly set. He was poorly dressed—green shine on his suit, a shabby string of a necktie and a bum cap. When she turned he looked at her with rigid hunger, and kept looking at her after she had turned away, as if his eyes could burn loopholes through the thin straw of her hat.

Suddenly Josephine realized what a pleasant scene it was, and, relaxing, she listened to the almost regular pat-smack, smack-pat-pat of the balls, the thud of a jump and the overtone of the umpire's "Fault;" "Out;" "Game and set, 6-2, Mr. Oberwalter." The sun moved slowly westward off the games and gossip. The day's matches ended.

Rising, Mrs. McRae said to Josephine: "Then shall I bring Donald to you when he's dressed? He doesn't know a soul. I count on you. Where will you be?"

Josephine accepted the burden patiently: "I'll wait right here."

Already there was music on the outdoor platform beside the club, and there was a sound of clinking waiters as the crowd swayed out of the grand stand. Josephine refused to go and dance, and presently the three young men, each of whom had loved and lost her, moved on to other prospects, and Josephine picked them out presently below a fringe by their well-known feet—Travis de Coppet's deft, dramatic feet; Ed Bement's stern and uncompromising feet; Elsie Kerr's warped ankles; Lillian's new shoes; the high, button shoes of some impossible girl. There were more feet; the stands were almost empty now, and canvas was being spread over the lonely courts. She heard someone coming clumsily down the plank behind her and landing with a plunk upon the board on which she sat, lifting her an abrupt inch into the air.

"D' I jar you?"

It was the man she had noticed and forgotten. He was still very tall.

"Don't you go in for dancing?" he asked, lingering. "I picked you out for the belle of the ball."

"You're rather fresh, aren't you?"

"My error," he said. "I should have known you were too swell to be spoken to."

"I never saw you before."

"I never saw you either, but you looked so nice in your hat, and I saw you smiling to your friends, so I thought I'd take a chance."

"Like you do downstate, hey, Si?" retorted Josephine insolently.

"What's the matter with downstate? I come from Abe Lincoln's town, where the boys are big and brilliant."

"What are you—a dance-hall masher?"

He was extraordinarily handsome, and she liked his imperviousness to insult.

"Thanks. I'm a reporter—not sports, or society either. I came to do the atmosphere—you know, a fine day with the sun sizzling on high and all the sporting world as well as the fashionable world of Lake Forest out in force."

"Hadn't you better go along and write it then?"

"Finished; another fellow took it. Can I sit down for a minute, or do you soil easily? A mere breath of wind and poof! Listen, Miss Potterfield-Swiftcormick, or whatever your name is. I come from good people and I'm going to be a great writer some day." He sat down. "If anybody comes you can say I was interviewing you for the paper. What's your name?"

"Perry."

"Herbert T. Perry?"

She nodded and he looked at her hard for a moment.

"Well, well," he sighed, "most attractive girl I've met for months turns out to be Herbert T. Perry's daughter. As a rule, you society nuts aren't much to look at. I mean, you pass more pretty girls in the Loop in one hour than I've seen here this afternoon, and the ones here have the advantage of dressing and all that. What's your first name?"

She started to say "Miss," but suddenly it seemed pointless, and she answered "Josephine."

"My name's John Boynton Bailey." He handed her his card with CHICAGO TRIBUNE printed in the corner. "Let me inform you I'm the best reporter in this city. I've written a play that ought to be produced this fall. I'm telling you that to prove I'm not just some bum, as you may judge from my old clothes. I've got some better clothes home, but I didn't think I was going to meet you."

"I just thought you were sort of fresh to speak to me without being introduced."

"I take what I can get," he admitted moodily.

At the sudden droop of his mouth, thoughtful and unhappy, Josephine knew that she liked him. For a moment she did not want Mrs. McRae and her nephew to see her with him; then, abruptly, she did not care.

"It must be wonderful to write."

"I'm just getting started, but you'll be proud to know me sometime." He changed the subject. "You've got wonderful features—you know it? You know what features are—the eyes and the mouth together, not separately—the triangle they make. That's how people decide in a flash whether they like other people. A person's nose and shape of the face are just things he's born with and can't change. They don't matter, Miss Gotrocks."

"Please cut out the Stone Age slang."

"All right; but you've got nice features. Is your father good-looking?"

"Very," she answered, appreciating the compliment.

The music started again. Under the trees the wooden floor was red in the sun. Josephine sang softly:

"'Lisibeth Ann-n,
I'm wild a-bow-ow-out you, a-bow-ow-out you—"

"Nice here," he murmured. "Just this time of day and that music under the trees. It's hot in Chicago!"

She was singing to him; the remarked triangle of her eyes and mouth was turned on him, faintly and sadly smiling, her low voice wooed him casually from some impersonal necessity of its own. Realizing it, she broke off, saying: "I've got to go to the city tomorrow. I've been putting it off."

"I bet you have a lot of men worried about you."

"Me? I just sit home and twirl my thumbs all day."

"Yes, you do."

"Everybody hates me and I return the compliment, so I'm going into a convent or else to be a trained nurse in the war. Will you enlist in the French Army and let me nurse you?"

Her words died away; his eyes, following hers, saw Mrs. McRae and her nephew coming in at the gate. "I'll go now," he said quickly. "You wouldn't have lunch with me if you come to Chicago tomorrow? I'll take you to a German place with fine food."

She hesitated; Mrs. McRae's insincerely tickled expression grew larger on the near distance.

"All right."

He wrote swiftly on a piece of paper and handed it to her. Then, lifting his big body awkwardly, he gallumped down the tier of seats, receiving a quick but inquisitive glance from Mrs. McRae as he lumbered past her.

II.

It was easy to arrange. Josephine phoned the aunt with whom she was to lunch, dropped the chauffeur and, not without a certain breathlessness, approached Hoftzer's Rathskeller Garten on North State Street. She wore a blue crepe-de-chine dress sprinkled with soft brown leaves that were the color of her eyes.

John Boynton Bailey was waiting in front of the restaurant, looking distracted, yet protective, and Josephine's uneasiness departed.

He said, "We don't want to eat in this place. It seemed all right when I thought about it, but I just looked inside, and you might get sawdust in your shoes. We better go to some hotel."

Agreeably she turned in the direction of a hotel sacred to tea dancing, but he shook his head.

"You'd meet a lot of your friends. Let's go to the old La Grange."

The old La Grange Hotel, once the pride of the Middle West, was now a rendezvous of small-town transients and a forum for traveling salesmen. The women in the lobby were either hard-eyed types from the Loop or powderless, transpiring mothers from the Mississippi Valley. There were spittoons in patient activity and a busy desk where men mouthed cigars grotesquely and waited for telephone calls.

In the big dining room, John Bailey and Josephine ordered grapefruit, club sandwiches and julienne potatoes. Josephine put her elbows on the table and regarded him as if to say: "Well, now I'm temporarily yours; make the most of your time."

"You're the best-looking girl I ever met," he began. "Of course you're tangled up in all this bogus society hokum, but you can't help that. You think that's sour grapes, but I'll tell you; when I hear people bragging about their social position and who they are, and all that, I just sit back and laugh. Because I happen to be descended directly from Charlemagne. What do you think of that?"

Josephine blushed for him, and he grew a little ashamed of his statement and qualified it:

"But I believe in men, not their ancestors. I want to be the best writer in the world, that's all."

"I love good books," Josephine offered.

"It's the theater that interests me. I've got a play now that I think would go big if the managers would bother to read it. I've got all the stuff—sometimes I walk along the streets so full of it that I feel I could just sail out over the city like a balloon." His mouth drooped suddenly. "It's because I haven't got anything to show yet that I talk like that."

"Mr. Bailey, the great playwright. You'll send me tickets to your plays, won't you?"

"Sure," he said abstractedly, "but by that time you'll be married to some boy from Yale or Harvard with a couple of hundred neckties and a good-looking car, and you'll get to be dumbbell like the rest."

"I guess I am already—but I simply love poetry. Did you ever read 'The Passing of Arthur'?"

"There's more good poetry being written now right in Chi than during the whole last century. There's a man named Carl Sandburg that's as great as Shakespeare."

She was not listening; she was watching him. His sensitive face was glowing with the same strange light as when she had first seen him.

"I like poetry and music better than anything in the world," she said. "They're wonderful."

He believed her, knowing that she spoke of her liking for him. She felt that he was distinguished, and by this she meant something definite and real; the possession of some particular and special passion for life. She knew that she herself was superior in something to the girls who criticized her—though she often confused her superiority with the homage it inspired—and she was apathetic to the judgments of the crowd. The distinction that at fifteen she had found in Travis de Coppet's ballroom romantics she discovered now in John Bailey, in spite of his assertiveness and his snobbishness. She wanted to look at life through his glasses, since he found it so absorbing and exciting. Josephine had developed early and lived hard—if that can be said of one whose face was cousin to a fresh, damp rose—and she had begun to find men less than satisfactory. The strong ones were dull, the clever ones were shy, and all too soon they were responding to Josephine with a fatal sameness, a lack of temperament that blurred their personalities.

The club sandwiches arrived and absorbed them; there was activity from an orchestra placed up near the ceiling in the fashion of twenty years before. Josephine, chewing modestly, looked around the room; just across from them a man and woman were getting up from table, and she started and made one big swallow. The woman was what was called a peroxide blonde, with doll's eyes boldly drawn on a baby-pink face. The sugary perfume that exuded from her garish clothes was almost visible as she preceded her escort to the door. Her escort was Josephine's father.

"Don't you want your potatoes?" John Bailey asked after a minute.

"I think they're very good," she said in a strained voice.

Her father, the cherished ideal of her life—handsome, charming Herbert Perry. Her mother's lover—through so many summer evenings had Josephine seen them in the swinging settee of the veranda, with his head on her lap, smoothing his hair. It was the promise of happiness in her parents' marriage that brought a certain purposefulness into all Josephine's wayward seeking.

Now to see him lunching safely out of the zone of his friends with such a woman! It was different with boys—she rather admired their loud tales of conquest in the nether world, but for her father, a grown man, to be like that. She was trembling; a tear fell and glistened on a fried potato.

"Yes, I'd like very much to go there," she heard herself saying.

"Of course, they are all very serious people," he explained defensively. "I think they've decided to produce my play in their little theater. If they haven't I'll give one or two of them a good sock on the jaw, so that next time they strike any literature they'll recognize it."

In the taxi Josephine tried to put out of her mind what she had seen at the hotel. Her home, the placid haven from which she had made her forays, seemed literally in ruins, and she dreaded her return. Awful, awful, awful!

In a panic she moved close to John Bailey, with the necessity of being near something strong. The car stopped before a new building of yellow stucco from which a blue-jowled, fiery-eyed young man came out.

"Well, what happened?" John demanded.

"The trap dropped at 11:30."

"Yes?"

"I wrote out his farewell speech like he asked me to, but he took too long and they wouldn't let him finish it."

"What a dirty trick on you."

"Wasn't it? Who's your friend?" The man indicated Josephine.

"Lake Forest stuff," said John, grinning. "Miss Perry, Mr. Blacht."

"Here for the triumph of the Springfield Shakespeare? But I hear they may do Uncle Tom's Cabin instead." He winked at Josephine. "So long."

"What did he mean?" she demanded as they went on.

"Why, he's on the Tribune and he had to cover a hanging this morning. What's more, he and I caught the fellow ourselves. Do you think these cops ever catch anybody?"

"This isn't a jail, is it?"

"Lord, no; this is the theater workshop."

"What did he mean about a speech?"

"He wrote the man a dying speech to sort of make up for having caught him."

"How perfectly hectic!" cried Josephine, awed.

They were in a long, dimly lit hall with a stage at one end; upon it, standing about in the murkiness of a few footlights, were a dozen people. Almost at once Josephine realized that everybody there except herself was crazy. She knew it incontrovertibly, although the only person of outward eccentricity was a robust woman in a frock coat and gray morning trousers. And in spite of the fact that of those present seven were later to attain notoriety, and four, actual distinction, Josephine was, for the moment, right. It was their intolerable inadjustability to their surroundings that had plucked them from lonely normal schools, from the frame rows of Midwestern towns and the respectability of shoddy suburbs, and brought them to Chicago in 1916—ignorant, wild with energy, doggedly sensitive and helplessly romantic, wanderers like their pioneer ancestors upon the face of the land.

"This is Miss—," said John Bailey, "and Mrs.—and Caroline—and Mr.—and—"

Their frightened eyes lifted to the young girl's elegant clothes, her confident, beautiful face, and they turned from her rudely in self-protection. Then gradually they came toward her, hinting of their artistic or economic ideals, naive as freshmen, unreticent as Rotarians. All but one, a handsome girl with a dirty neck and furtive eyes—eyes which, from the moment of Josephine's entrance, never left her face. Josephine listened to a flow of talk, rapt of expression, but only half comprehending and thinking often with sharp pain of her father. Her mind wandered to Lake Forest as if it were a place she had left long ago, and she heard the crack-pat-crack of the tennis balls in the still afternoon. Presently the people sat down on kitchen chairs and a gray-haired poet took the floor.

"The meeting of the committee this morning was to decide on our first production. There was some debate. Miss Hammerton's drama"—he bowed in the direction of the trousered lady—"received serious consideration, but since one of our benefactors is opposed to representations of the class war, we have postponed consideration of Miss Hammerton's powerful play until later."

At this point Josephine was startled to hear Miss Hammerton say "Boo!" in a large, angry voice, give a series of groans, varied as if to express the groans of many people—then clap on a soft gray hat and stride angrily from the room.

"Elsie takes it hard," said the chairman. "Unhappily, the benefactor I spoke of, whose identity you have doubtless guessed, is adamant on the subject—a thorough reactionary. So your committee have unanimously voted that our production shall be 'Race Riot', by John Boynton Bailey."

Josephine gasped congratulations. In the applause the girl with the furtive eyes brought her chair over and sat down beside Josephine.

"You live at Lake Forest," she said challengingly.

"In the summer."

"Do you know Emily Kohl?"

"No, I don't."

"I thought you were from Lake Forest."

"I live at Lake Forest," said Josephine, still pleasantly, "but I don't know Emily Kohl."

Rebuffed only for a moment, the girl continued, "I don't suppose all this means much to you."

"It's a sort of dramatic club, isn't it?" said Josephine.

"Dramatic club! Oh, gosh!" cried the girl. "Did you hear that? She thinks it's a dramatic club, like Miss Pinkerton's school." In a moment her uninfectious laughter died away, and she turned to the playwright. "How about it? Have you picked your cast?"

"Not yet," he said shortly, annoyed at the baiting of Josephine.

"I suppose you'll have Mrs. Fiske coming on from New York," the girl continued. "Come on, we're all on pins and needles. Who's going to be in it?"

"I'll tell you one thing, Evelyn. You're not."

She grew red with astonishment and anger. "Oho! When did you decide that?"

"Some time ago."

"Oho! How about all the lines I gave you for Clare?"

"I'll cut them tonight; there were only three. I'd rather not produce the thing than have you play Clare."

The others were listening now.

"Far be it from me," the girl began, her voice trembling a little, "far be it from me—"

Josephine saw that John Bailey's face was even whiter than usual. His mouth was hard and cold. Suddenly the girl got up, cried out, "You fool!" and hurried from the room.

With this second temperamental departure a certain depression settled on those remaining; presently the meeting broke up, convoked for next day.

"Let's take a walk," John said to Josephine as they came out into a different afternoon; the heat had lifted with the first breeze from Lake Michigan.

"Let's take a walk," John repeated. "That made me sort of sick—her talking to you like that."

"I didn't like her, but now I'm sorry for her. Who is she?"

"She's a newspaper woman," he answered vaguely. "Listen. How would you like to be in this play?"

"Oh, I couldn't—I've got to be in a play out at the Lake."

"Society stuff," he said, scornfully mimicking: "'Here come the jolly, jolly golfing girls. Maybe they'll sing us a song.' If you want to be in this thing of mine you can have the lead."

"But how do you know I could act?"

"Come on! With that voice of yours? Listen. The girl in the play is like you. This race riot is caused by two men, one black and one white. The black man is fed up with his black wife and in love with a high-yellow girl, and that makes him bitter, see? And the white man married too young and he's in the same situation. When they both get their domestic affairs straightened the race riot dies down, too, see?"

"It's very original," said Josephine breathlessly. "Which would I be?"

"You'd be the girl the married man was in love with."

"Is that the part that girl was going to play?"

"Yes." He frowned, and then added, "She's my wife."

"Oh—you're married?"

"I married young—like the man in my play. In one way it isn't so bad, because neither of us believed in the old-fashioned bourgeois marriage, living in the same apartment and all. She kept her own name. But we got to hate each other anyhow."

After the first shock was over, it did not seem so strange to Josephine that he was married; there had been a day two years before when only the conscientiousness of a rural justice had prevented Josephine from becoming Mrs. Travis de Coppet.

"We all get what's coming to us," he remarked.

They turned up the boulevard, passing the Blackstone, where faint dance music clung about the windows.

On the street the plate glass of a hundred cars, bound for the country or the North Shore, took the burning sunset, but the city would make shift without them, and Josephine's imagination rested here instead of following the cars; she thought of electric fans in little restaurants with lobsters on ice in the windows, and of pearly signs glittering and revolving against the obscure, urban sky, the hot, dark sky. And pervading everything, a terribly strange, brooding mystery of roof tops and empty apartments, of white dresses in the paths of parks, and fingers for stars and faces instead of moons, and people with strange people scarcely knowing one another's names.

A sensuous shiver went over Josephine, and she knew that the fact that John Bailey was married simply added to his attraction for her. Life broke up a little; barred and forbidden doors swung open, unmasking enchanted corridors. Was it that which drew her father, some call to adventure that she had from him?

"I wish there was some place we could go and be alone together," John Bailey said, and suddenly, "I wish I had a car."

But they were already alone, she thought. She had spun him out a background now that was all his—the summer streets of the city. They were alone here; when he kissed her, finally, they would be less alone. That would be his time; this was hers. Their mutually clinging arms pulled her close to his tall side.

A little later, sitting in the back of a movie with the yellow clock in the corner creeping fatally toward six, she leaned into the hollow of his rounded shoulder and his cool white cheek bent down to hers.

"I'm letting myself in for a lot of suffering," he whispered. She saw his black eyes thinking in the darkness and met them reassuringly with hers.

"I take things pretty hard," he went on. "And what in hell could we ever be to each other?"

She didn't answer. Instead she let the familiar lift and float and flow of love close around them, pulling him back from his far-away uniqueness with the pressure of her hand.

"What will your wife think if I take that part in your play?" she whispered.

***

At the same moment Josephine's wayward parent was being met by her mother at the Lake Forest Station.

"It's deathly hot in town," he said. "What a day!"

"Did you see her?"

"Yes, and after one look I took her to the La Grange for lunch. I wanted to preserve a few shreds of my reputation."

"Is it settled?"

"Yes. She's agreed to leave Will alone and stop using his name for three hundred a month for life. I wired your highly discriminating brother in Hawaii that he can come home."

"Poor Will," sighed Mrs. Perry.

III.

Three days later, in the cool of the evening, Josephine spoke to her father as he came out on the veranda.

"Daddy, do you want to back a play?"

"I never thought about it. I'd always thought I'd like to write one. Is Jenny McRae's vaudeville on the rocks?"

Josephine ticked impatiently with her tongue. "I'm not even going to be in the vaudeville. I'm talking about an attempt to do something fine. What I want to ask is: What would be your possible objections to backing it?"

"My objections?"

"What would they be?"

"You haven't given me time to drum up any."

"I should think you'd want to do something decent with your money."

"What's the play?" He sat down beside her, and she moved just slightly away from him.

"Mother knows some of the patronesses and it's absolutely all right. But the man who was going to be the backer is very narrow and wants to make a lot of changes that would ruin the whole thing; so they want to find another backer."

"What's it about?"

"Oh, the play's all right, don't you worry," she assured him. "The man that wrote it is still alive, but the play is a part of English literature."

He considered. "Well, if you're going to be in it, and your mother thinks it all right, I'd put up a couple of hundred."

"A couple of hundred!" she exclaimed. "A man who goes around throwing away his money like you do! They need at least a thousand."

"Throwing away my money?" he repeated. "What on earth are you talking about?"

"You know what I'm talking about." It seemed to her that he winced slightly, that his voice was uncertain as he said:

"If you mean the way we live, it doesn't seem quite tactful to reproach me about that."

"I don't mean that." Josephine hesitated; then without premeditation took a sudden plunge into blackmail: "I should think you'd rather not have me soil my hands by discussing—"

Mrs. Perry's footsteps sounded in the hall, and Josephine rose quickly. The car rolled up the drive.

"I hope you'll go to bed early," her mother said.

"Lillian and some kids are coming over."

Josephine and her father exchanged a short, hostile glance before the machine drove off.

It was a harvest night, bright enough to read by. Josephine sat on the veranda steps listening to the tossing of sleepless birds, the rattle of a last dish in the kitchen, the sad siren of the Chicago-Milwaukee train. Composed and tranquil, she sat waiting for the telephone; he could not see her there, so she saw herself for him—it was almost the same.

She considered the immediate future in all its gorgeous possibilities—the first night, with the audience whispering: "Do you realize that's the Perry girl?" With the final curtain, tumultuous applause and herself, with arms full of flowers, leading forth a tall, shy man who would say: "I owe it all to her." And Mrs. McRae's furious face in the audience, and the remorseful face of Miss Brereton, of the Brereton School, who happened to be in town. "Had I but known her genius, I wouldn't have acted as I did." Comments jubilant and uproarious from every side: "The greatest young actress on the American stage!"

Then the move to a larger theater; great, staring, electric letters, JOSEPHINE PERRY IN RACE RIOT. "No, father, I'm not going back to school. This is my education and my debut." And her father's answer:

"Well, little girl, I'll have to admit it was a lucky speculation for me to put up that money."

If the figure of John Bailey became a little dim during the latter part of this reverie, it was because the reverie itself opened out to vaguer and vaguer horizons, to return always to that opening night from which it started once more.

Lillian, Travis and Ed came, but she was hardly aware of them, listening for the telephone. They sat, as they had so often, in a row on the steps, surrounded, engulfed, drowned in summer. But they were growing up and the pattern was breaking; they were absorbed in secret destinies of their own, no matter how friendly their voices or how familiar their laughter in the silence. Josephine's boredom with a discussion of the tournament turned to irascibility; she told Travis de Coppet that he smelled of onions.

"I won't eat any onions when we rehearse for the vaudeville," he said.

"You won't be rehearsing with me, because I'm not being in it. I've got a little tired of 'Here come the jolly golfing girls. Hurray!'"

The phone rang and she excused herself.

"Are you alone?"

"There're some people here—that I've known all my life."

"Don't kiss anybody. I don't mean that—go kiss anybody you want to."

"I don't want to." She felt her own lips' warmth in the mouthpiece of the phone.

"I'm out in a pay station. She came up to my room in a crazy humor and I got out."

Josephine didn't answer; something went out of her when he spoke of his wife.

When she went back on the porch her guests, sensing her abstraction, were on their feet.

"No. We want to go. You bore us too."

Her parents' car pursued Ed's around the circular drive. Her father motioned that he wanted to see her alone.

"I didn't quite understand about my spending my money. Is this a Socialist bunch?"

"I told you that mother knew some of the—"

"But who is it you know? The fellow who wrote the play?"

"Yes."

"Where did you meet him?"

"Just around."

"He asked you to raise the money?"

"No."

"I'd certainly like to have a talk with him before you go into this any further. Invite him out to luncheon Saturday?"

"All right," she agreed unwillingly. "If you don't taunt him about his poverty and his ragged clothes."

"What a thing to accuse me of!"

It was with a deep uneasiness that, next Saturday, Josephine drove her roadster to the station. She was relieved to see that he had had a haircut, and he looked very big and powerful and distinguished among the tennis crowd as he got off the train. But finding him nervous, she drove around Lake Forest for half an hour.

"Whose house is that?" he kept asking. "Who are these two people you just spoke to?"

"Oh, I don't know; just somebody. There'll be nobody at lunch, but the family and a boy named Howard Page I've known for years."

"These boys you've known for years," he sighed. "Why wasn't I one?"

"But you don't want to be that. You want to be the best writer in the world."

In the Perrys' living room John Bailey stared at a photograph of bridesmaids at her sister's wedding the previous summer. Then Howard Page, a junior at New Haven, arrived and they talked of the tennis: Mrs. McRae's nephew had done brilliantly and was conceded a chance in the finals this afternoon. When Mrs. Perry came downstairs, just before luncheon, John Bailey could not help turning his back on her suddenly and walking up and down to pretend he was at home. He knew in his heart he was better than these people, and he couldn't bear that they should not know it.

The maid called him to the telephone, and Josephine overheard him say, "I can't help it. You have no right to call me here." It was because of the existence of his wife that she had not let him kiss her, but had fitted him, instead, into her platonic reverie, which should endure until Providence set him free.

At luncheon she was relieved to see John Bailey and her father take a liking to each other. John was expert and illuminating about the race riots, and she saw how thin and meager Howard Page was beside him.

Again John Bailey was summoned to the phone; this time he left the room with an exclamation, said three words into the mouthpiece and hung up with a sharp click.

Back at table, he whispered to Josephine: "Will you tell the maid to say I'm gone if she calls again?"

Josephine was in argument with her mother: "I don't see the use of coming out if I could be an actress instead."

"Why should she come out?" her father agreed. "Hasn't she done enough rushing around?"

"But certainly she's to finish school. There's a course in dramatic art and every year they give a play."

"What do they give?" demanded Josephine scornfully. "Shakespeare or something like that! Do you realize there are at least a dozen poets right here in Chicago that are better than Shakespeare?"

John Bailey demurred with a laugh. "Oh, no. One maybe."

"I think a dozen," insisted the eager convert.

"In Billy Phelps' course at Yale—" began Howard Page, but Josephine said vehemently:

"Anyhow, I don't think you ought to wait till people are dead before you recognize them. Like mother does."

"I do no such thing," objected Mrs. Perry. "Did I say that, Howard?"

"In Billy Phelps' course at Yale—" began Howard again, but this time Mr. Perry interrupted:

"We're getting off the point. This young man wants my daughter in his play. If there's nothing disgraceful in the play I don't object."

"In Billy—"

"But I don't want Josephine in anything sordid."

"Sordid!" Josephine glared at him. "Don't you think there are plenty of sordid things right here in Lake Forest, for instance?"

"But they don't touch you," her father said.

"Don't they, though?"

"No," he said firmly. "Nothing sordid touches you. If it does, then it's your own fault." He turned to John Bailey. "I understand you need money."

John flushed. "We do. But don't think—"

"That's all right. We've stood behind the opera here for many years and I'm not afraid of things simply because they're new. We know some women on your committee and I don't suppose they'd stand for any nonsense. How much do you need?"

"About two thousand dollars."

"Well, you raise half and I'll raise half—on two conditions: First, my name kept entirely out of it and my daughter's name not played up in any way; second, you assure me personally that she doesn't play any questionable part or have any speeches to make that might offend her mother."

John Bailey considered. "That last is a large order," he said. "I don't know what would offend her mother. There wouldn't be any cursing to do, for instance. There's not a bit in the whole damn play."

He flushed slowly at their laughter.

"Nothing sordid is going to touch Josephine unless she steps into it herself," said Mr. Perry.

"I see your point," John Bailey said.

Lunch was over. For some moments Mrs. Perry had been glancing toward the hall, where some loud argument was taking place.

"Shall we—"

They had scarcely crossed the threshold of the living room when the maid appeared, followed by a local personage in a vague uniform of executive blue.

"Hello, Mr. Kelly. You going to take us into custody?"

Kelly hesitated awkwardly. "Is there a Mr. Bailey?"

John, who had wandered off, swung about sharply. "What?"

"There's an important message for you. They've been trying to get you here, but they couldn't, so they telephoned the constable—that's me." He beckoned him, and then, talking to him, tried at the same time to urge him, with nods of his head, toward the privacy of outdoors; his voice, though lowered, was perfectly audible to everybody in the room.

"The St. Anthony's Hospital—your wife slashed both her wrists and turned the gas on—they want you as soon as you can get there." The voice pitched higher as they went through the door: "They don't know yet—If there's no train, you can get a car—" They were both outside now, walking fast down the path. Josephine saw John trip and grasp clumsily at the edge that bordered the gate, and then go on with great strides toward the constable's flivver. The constable was running to keep up with him.

IV.

After a few minutes, when John Bailey's trouble had died away in the distance, they all stopped being stunned and behaved like people again. Mr. and Mrs. Perry were panicky as to how far Josephine was involved; then they became angry at John Bailey for coming there with disaster hanging over him.

Mr. Perry demanded: "Did you know he was married?"

Josephine was crying; her mouth was drawn; he looked away from her.

"They lived separately," she whispered.

"She seemed to know he was out here."

"Of course he's a newspaperman," said her mother, "so he can probably keep it out of the papers. Or do you think you ought to do something, Herbert?"

"I was just wondering."

Howard Page got up awkwardly, not wanting to say he was now going to the tennis finals. Mr. Perry went to the door and talked earnestly for a few minutes, and Howard nodded.

Half an hour passed. Several callers drifted by in cars, but received word that no one was at home. Josephine felt something throbbing on the heat of the summer afternoon; and at first she thought it was pity and then remorse, but finally she knew what the throbbing was. "I must push this thing away from me," it said; "this thing must not touch me. I hardly met his wife. He told me—"

And now John Bailey began slipping away. Who was he but a chance encounter, someone who had spoken to her a week before about a play he had written? He had nothing to do with her.

At four o'clock Mr. Perry went to the phone and called St. Anthony's Hospital; only when he asked for an official whom he knew did he get the information: In the actual face of death, Mrs. Bailey had phoned for the police, and it now seemed that they had reached her in time. She had lost blood, but barring complications—

Now, in the relief, the parents grew angry with Josephine as with a child who has toddled under galloping horses.

"What I can't understand is why you should have to know people like that. Is it necessary to go into the back streets of Chicago?"

"That young man had no business here," her father thundered grimly, "and he knew it."

"But who was he?" wailed Mrs. Perry.

"He told me he was a descendant of Charlemagne," said Josephine.

Mr. Perry grunted. "Well, we want no more of Charlemagne's descendants here. Young people had better stay with their own kind until they can distinguish one from another. You let married men alone."

But now Josephine was herself again. She stood up, her eyes hardening.

"Oh, you make me sick," she cried—"a married man! As if there weren't a lot of married men who met other women besides their wives."

Unable to bear another scene, Mrs. Perry withdrew. Once she was out of hearing, Josephine came out into the open at last: "You're a fine one to talk to me."

"Now look here; you said that the other night, and I don't like it now any better than I did then. What do you mean?"

"I suppose you've never been to lunch with anybody at the La Grange Hotel."

"The La Grange—" The truth broke over him slowly. "Why—" He began laughing. Then he swore suddenly, and going quickly to the foot of the stairs, called his wife.

"You sit down," he said to Josephine. "I'm going to tell you a story."

Half an hour later Miss Josephine Perry left her house and set off for the tennis tournament. She wore one of the new autumn gowns with the straight line, but having a looped effect at the sides of the skirt, and fluffy white cuffs. Some people she met just outside the stands told her that Mrs. McRae's nephew was weakening to the veteran, and this started her thinking of Mrs. McRae and of her decision about the vaudeville with a certain regret. People would think it odd if she wasn't in it.

There was a sudden burst of wild clapping as she went in; the tournament was over. The crowd was swarming around victor and vanquished in the central court, and gravitating with it, she was swept by an eddy to the very front of it, until she was face to face with Mrs. McRae's nephew himself. But she was equal to the occasion. With her most sad and melting smile, as if she had hoped for him from day to day, she held out her hand and spoke to him in her clear, vibrant voice:

"We are all awfully sorry."

For a moment, even in the midst of the excited crowd, a hushed silence fell. Modestly, conscious of her personality, Josephine backed away, aware that he was staring after her, his mouth stupidly open, aware of a burst of laughter around her. Travis de Coppet appeared beside her.

"Well, of all the nuts!" he cried.

"What's the matter? What—"

"Sorry! Why, he won! It was the greatest come-back I ever saw."

So, at the vaudeville, Josephine sat with her family after all. Looking around during the show, she saw John Bailey standing in the rear. He looked very sad, and she felt very sorry, realizing that he had come in hopes of a glimpse of her. He would see, at least, that she was not up there on the stage debasing herself with such inanities.

Then she caught her breath as the lights changed, the music quickened and at the head of the steps, Travis de Coppet in white-satin football suit swung into the spotlight a shimmering blonde in a dress of autumn leaves. It was Madelaine Danby, and it was the role Josephine would have played. With the warm rain of intimate applause, Josephine decided something: That any value she might have was in the immediate, shimmering present—and thus thinking, she threw in her lot with the rich and powerful of this world forever.

THE END






Here and there in a sunless corner skulked a little snow under a
veil of coal specks, but the men taking down storm windows were
laboring in shirt sleeves and the turf was becoming firm underfoot.

In the streets, dresses dyed after fruit, leaf and flower emerged
from beneath the shed somber skins of animals; now only a few old
men wore mousy caps pulled down over their ears.  That was the day
Forrest Winslow forgot the long fret of the past winter as one
forgets inevitable afflictions, sickness, and war, and turned with
blind confidence toward the summer, thinking he already recognized
in it all the summers of the past--the golfing, sailing, swimming
summers.

For eight years Forrest had gone East to school and then to
college; now he worked for his father in a large Minnesota city.
He was handsome, popular and rather spoiled in a conservative way,
and so the past year had been a comedown.  The discrimination that
had picked Scroll and Key at New Haven was applied to sorting furs;
the hand that had signed the Junior Prom expense checks had since
rocked in a sling for two months with mild dermatitis venenata.
After work, Forrest found no surcease in the girls with whom he had
grown up.  On the contrary, the news of a stranger within the tribe
stimulated him and during the transit of a popular visitor he
displayed a convulsive activity.  So far, nothing had happened; but
here was summer.

On the day spring broke through and summer broke through--it is
much the same thing in Minnesota--Forrest stopped his coupé in
front of a music store and took his pleasant vanity inside.  As he
said to the clerk, "I want some records," a little bomb of
excitement exploded in his larynx, causing an unfamiliar and almost
painful vacuum in his upper diaphragm.  The unexpected detonation
was caused by the sight of a corn-colored girl who was being waited
on across the counter.

She was a stalk of ripe corn, but bound not as cereals are but as a
rare first edition, with all the binder's art.  She was lovely and
expensive, and about nineteen, and he had never seen her before.
She looked at him for just an unnecessary moment too long, with so
much self-confidence that he felt his own rush out and away to join
hers--". . . from him that hath not shall be taken away even that
which he hath."  Then her head swayed forward and she resumed her
inspection of a catalogue.

Forrest looked at the list a friend had sent him from New York.
Unfortunately, the first title was:  "When Voo-do-o-do Meets Boop-
boop-a-doop, There'll Soon be a Hot-Cha-Cha."  Forrest read it with
horror.  He could scarcely believe a title could be so repulsive.

Meanwhile the girl was asking:  "Isn't there a record of
Prokofiev's 'Fils Prodigue'?"

"I'll see, madam."  The saleswoman turned to Forrest.

"'When Voo--'" Forrest began, and then repeated, "'When Voo--'"

There was no use; he couldn't say it in front of that nymph of the
harvest across the table.

"Never mind that one," he said quickly.  "Give me 'Huggable--'"

Again he broke off.

"'Huggable, Kissable You'?" suggested the clerk helpfully, and her
assurance that it was very nice suggested a humiliating community
of taste.

"I want Stravinsky's 'Fire Bird,'" said the other customer, "and
this album of Chopin waltzes."

Forrest ran his eye hastily down the rest of his list:  "Digga
Diggity," "Ever So Goosy," "Bunkey Doodle I Do."

"Anybody would take me for a moron," he thought.  He crumpled up
the list and fought for air--his own kind of air, the air of casual
superiority.

"I'd like," he said coldly, "Beethoven's 'Moonlight Sonata.'"

There was a record of it at home, but it didn't matter.  It gave
him the right to glance at the girl again and again.  Life became
interesting; she was the loveliest concoction; it would be easy to
trace her.  With the "Moonlight Sonata" wrapped face to face with
"Huggable, Kissable You," Forrest quitted the shop.

There was a new book store down the street, and here also he
entered, as if books and records could fill the vacuum that spring
was making in his heart.  As he looked among the lifeless words of
many titles together, he was wondering how soon he could find her,
and what then.

"I'd like a hard-boiled detective story," he said.

A weary young man shook his head with patient reproof;
simultaneously, a spring draft from the door blew in with it the
familiar glow of cereal hair.

"We don't carry detective stories or stuff like that," said the
young man in an unnecessarily loud voice.  "I imagine you'll find
it at a department store."

"I thought you carried books," said Forrest feebly.

"Books, yes, but not that kind."  The young man turned to wait on
his other customer.

As Forrest stalked out, passing within the radius of the girl's
perfume, he heard her ask:

"Have you got anything of Louis Arragon's, either in French or in
translation?"

"She's just showing off," he thought angrily.  "They skip right
from Peter Rabbit to Marcel Proust these days."

Outside, parked just behind his own adequate coupé, he found an
enormous silver-colored roadster of English make and custom design.
Disturbed, even upset, he drove homeward through the moist, golden
afternoon.

The Winslows lived in an old, wide-verandaed house on Crest Avenue--
Forrest's father and mother, his great-grandmother and his sister
Eleanor.  They were solid people as that phrase goes since the war.
Old Mrs. Forrest was entirely solid; with convictions based on a
way of life that had worked for eighty-four years.  She was a
character in the city; she remembered the Sioux war and she had
been in Stillwater the day the James brothers shot up the main
street.

Her own children were dead and she looked on these remoter
descendants from a distance, oblivious of the forces that had
formed them.  She understood that the Civil War and the opening up
of the West were forces, while the free-silver movement and the
World War had reached her only as news.  But she knew that her
father, killed at Cold Harbor, and her husband, the merchant, were
larger in scale than her son or her grandson.  People who tried to
explain contemporary phenomena to her seemed, to her, to be talking
against the evidence of their own senses.  Yet she was not
atrophied; last summer she had traveled over half of Europe with
only a maid.

Forrest's father and mother were something else again.  They had
been in the susceptible middle thirties when the cocktail party and
its concomitants arrived in 1921.  They were divided people,
leaning forward and backward.  Issues that presented no difficulty
to Mrs. Forrest caused them painful heat and agitation.  Such an
issue arose before they had been five minutes at table that night.

"Do you know the Rikkers are coming back?" said Mrs. Winslow.
"They've taken the Warner house."  She was a woman with many
uncertainties, which she concealed from herself by expressing her
opinions very slowly and thoughtfully, to convince her own ears.
"It's a wonder Dan Warner would rent them his house.  I suppose
Cathy thinks everybody will fall all over themselves."

"What Cathy?" asked old Mrs. Forrest.

"She was Cathy Chase.  Her father was Reynold Chase.  She and her
husband are coming back here."

"Oh, yes."

"I scarcely knew her," continued Mrs. Winslow, "but I know that
when they were in Washington they were pointedly rude to everyone
from Minnesota--went out of their way.  Mary Cowan was spending a
winter there, and she invited Cathy to lunch or tea at least half a
dozen times.  Cathy never appeared."

"I could beat that record," said Pierce Winslow.  "Mary Cowan could
invite me a hundred times and I wouldn't go."

"Anyhow," pursued his wife slowly, "in view of all the scandal,
it's just asking for the cold shoulder to come out here."

"They're asking for it, all right," said Winslow.  He was a
Southerner, well liked in the city, where he had lived for thirty
years.  "Walter Hannan came in my office this morning and wanted me
to second Rikker for the Kennemore Club.  I said:  'Walter, I'd
rather second Al Capone.'  What's more, Rikker'll get into the
Kennemore Club over my dead body."

"Walter had his nerve.  What's Chauncey Rikker to you?  It'll be
hard to get anyone to second him."

"Who are they?" Eleanor asked.  "Somebody awful?"

She was eighteen and a débutante.  Her current appearances at home
were so rare and brief that she viewed such table topics with as
much detachment as her great-grandmother.

"Cathy was a girl here; she was younger then I was, but I remember
that she was always considered fast.  Her husband, Chauncey Rikker,
came from some little town upstate."

"What did they do that was so awful?"

"Rikker went bankrupt and left town," said her father.  "There were
a lot of ugly stories.  Then he went to Washington and got mixed up
in the alien-property scandal; and then he got in trouble in New
York--he was in the bucket-shop business--but he skipped out to
Europe.  After a few years the chief Government witness died and he
came back to America.  They got him for a few months for contempt
of court."  He expanded into eloquent irony:  "And now, with true
patriotism, he comes back to his beautiful Minnesota, a product of
its lovely woods, its rolling wheat fields--"

Forrest called him impatiently:  "Where do you get that, father?
When did two Kentuckians ever win Nobel prizes in the same year?
And how about an upstate boy named Lind--"

"Have the Rikkers any children?" Eleanor asked.

"I think Cathy has a daughter about your age, and a boy about
sixteen."

Forrest uttered a small, unnoticed exclamation.  Was it possible?
French books and Russian music--that girl this afternoon had lived
abroad.  And with the probability his resentment deepened--the
daughter of a crook putting on all that dog!  He sympathized
passionately with his father's refusal to second Rikker for the
Kennemore Club.

"Are they rich?" old Mrs. Forrest suddenly demanded.

"They must be well off if they took Dan Warner's house."

"Then they'll get in all right."

"They won't get into the Kennemore Club," said Pierce Winslow.  "I
happen to come from a state with certain traditions."

"I've seen the bottom rail get to be the top rail many times in
this town," said the old lady blandly.

"But this man's a criminal, grandma," explained Forrest.  "Can't
you see the difference?  It isn't a social question.  We used to
argue at New Haven whether we'd shake hands with Al Capone if we
met him--"

"Who is Al Capone?" asked Mrs. Forrest.

"He's another criminal, in Chicago."

"Does he want to join the Kennemore Club too?"

They laughed, but Forrest had decided that if Rikker came up for
the Kennemore Club, his father's would not be the only black ball
in the box.

Abruptly it became full summer.  After the last April storm someone
came along the street one night, blew up the trees like balloons,
scattered bulbs and shrubs like confetti, opened a cage full of
robins and, after a quick look around, signaled up the curtain upon
a new backdrop of summer sky.

Tossing back a strayed baseball to some kids in a vacant lot,
Forrest's fingers, on the stitched seams of the stained leather
cover, sent a wave of ecstatic memories to his brain.  One must
hurry and get there--"there" was now the fairway of the golf
course, but his feeling was the same.  Only when he teed off at the
eighteenth that afternoon did he realize that it wasn't the same,
that it would never be enough any more.  The evening stretched
large and empty before him, save for the set pieces of a dinner
party and bed.

While he waited with his partner for a match to play off, Forrest
glanced at the tenth tee, exactly opposite and two hundred yards
away.

One of the two figures on the ladies' tee was addressing her ball;
as he watched, she swung up confidently and cracked a long drive
down the fairway.

"Must be Mrs. Horrick," said his friend.  "No other woman can drive
like that."

At that moment the sun glittered on the girl's hair and Forrest
knew who it was; simultaneously, he remembered what he must do this
afternoon.  That night Chauncey Rikker's name was to come up before
the membership committee on which his father sat, and before going
home, Forrest was going to pass the clubhouse and leave a certain
black slip in a little box.  He had carefully considered all that;
he loved the city where his people had lived honorable lives for
five generations.  His grandfather had been a founder of this club
in the 90's when it went in for sailboat racing instead of golf,
and when it took a fast horse three hours to trot out here from
town.  He agreed with his father that certain people were without
the pale.  Tightening his face, he drove his ball two hundred yards
down the fairway, where it curved gently into the rough.

The eighteenth and tenth holes were parallel and faced in opposite
directions.  Between tees they were separated by a belt of trees
forty feet wide.  Though Forrest did not know it, Miss Rikker's
hostess, Helen Hannan, had dubbed into this same obscurity, and as
he went in search of his ball he heard female voices twenty feet
away.

"You'll be a member after tonight," he heard Helen Hannan say, "and
then you can get some real competition from Stella Horrick."

"Maybe I won't be a member," said a quick, clear voice.  "Then
you'll have to come and play with me on the public links."

"Alida, don't be absurd."

"Why?  I played on the public links in Buffalo all last spring.
For the moment there wasn't anywhere else.  It's like playing on
some courses in Scotland."

"But I'd feel so silly. . . .  Oh, gosh, let's let the ball go."

"There's nobody behind us.  As to feeling silly--if I cared about
public opinion any more, I'd spend my time in my bedroom."  She
laughed scornfully.  "A tabloid published a picture of me going to
see father in prison.  And I've seen people change their tables
away from us on steamers, and once I was cut by all the American
girls in a French school. . . .  Here's your ball."

"Thanks. . . .  Oh, Alida, it seems terrible."

"All the terrible part is over.  I just said that so you wouldn't
be too sorry for us if people didn't want us in this club.  I
wouldn't care; I've got a life of my own and my own standard of
what trouble is.  It wouldn't touch me at all."

They passed out of the clearing and their voices disappeared into
the open sky on the other side.  Forrest abandoned the search for
his lost ball and walked toward the caddie house.

"What a hell of a note," he thought.  "To take it out on a girl
that had nothing to do with it"--which was what he was doing this
minute as he went up toward the club.  "No," he said to himself
abruptly, "I can't do it.  Whatever her father may have done, she
happens to be a lady.  Father can do what he feels he has to do,
but I'm out."

After lunch the next day, his father said rather diffidently:  "I
see you didn't do anything about the Rikkers and the Kennemore
Club."

"No."

"It's just as well," said his father.  "As a matter of fact, they
got by.  The club has got rather mixed anyhow in the last five
years--a good many queer people in it.  And, after all, in a club
you don't have to know anybody you don't want to.  The other people
on the committee felt the same way."

"I see," said Forrest dryly.  "Then you didn't argue against the
Rikkers?"

"Well, no.  The thing is I do a lot of business with Walter Hannan,
and it happened yesterday I was obliged to ask him rather a
difficult favor."

"So you traded with him."  To both father and son, the word
"traded" sounded like traitor.

"Not exactly.  The matter wasn't mentioned."

"I understand," Forrest said.  But he did not understand, and some
old childhood faith in his father died at that moment.


II


To snub anyone effectively one must have him within range.  The
admission of Chauncey Rikker to the Kennemore Club and, later, to
the Downtown Club was followed by angry talk and threats of
resignation that simulated the sound of conflict, but there was no
indication of a will underneath.  On the other hand, unpleasantness
in crowds is easy, and Chauncey Rikker was a facile object for
personal dislike; moreover, a recurrent echo of the bucket-shop
scandal sounded from New York, and the matter was reviewed in the
local newspapers, in case anyone had missed it.  Only the liberal
Hannan family stood by the Rikkers, and their attitude aroused
considerable resentment, and their attempt to launch them with a
series of small parties proved a failure.  Had the Rikkers
attempted to "bring Alida out," it would have been for the
inspection of a motley crowd indeed, but they didn't.

When, occasionally during the summer, Forrest encountered Alida
Rikker, they crossed eyes in the curious way of children who don't
know each other.  For a while he was haunted by her curly yellow
head, by the golden-brown defiance of her eyes; then he became
interested in another girl.  He wasn't in love with Jane Drake,
though he thought he might marry her.  She was "the girl across the
street"; he knew her qualities, good and bad, so that they didn't
matter.  She had an essential reality underneath, like a relative.
It would please their families.  Once, after several highballs and
some casual necking, he almost answered seriously when she provoked
him with "But you don't really care about me"; but he sat tight and
next morning was relieved that he had.  Perhaps in the dull days
after Christmas--Meanwhile, at the Christmas dances among the
Christmas girls he might find the ecstasy and misery, the
infatuation that he wanted.  By autumn he felt that his predestined
girl was already packing her trunk in some Eastern or Southern
city.

It was in his more restless mood that one November Sunday he went
to a small tea.  Even as he spoke to his hostess he felt Alida
Rikker across the firelit room; her glowing beauty and her
unexplored novelty pressed up against him, and there was a relief
in being presented to her at last.  He bowed and passed on, but
there had been some sort of communication.  Her look said that she
knew the stand that his family had taken, that she didn't mind, and
was even sorry to see him in such a silly position, for she knew
that he admired her.  His look said:  "Naturally, I'm sensitive to
your beauty, but you see how it is; we've had to draw the line at
the fact that your father is a dirty dog, and I can't withdraw from
my present position."

Suddenly in a silence, she was talking, and his ears swayed away
from his own conversation.

". . . Helen had this odd pain for over a year and, of course, they
suspected cancer.  She went to have an X ray; she undressed behind
a screen, and the doctor looked at her through the machine, and
then he said, 'But I told you to take off all your clothes,' and
Helen said, 'I have.'  The doctor looked again, and said, 'Listen,
my dear, I brought you into the world, so there's no use being
modest with me.  Take off everything.'  So Helen said, 'I've got
every stitch off; I swear.'  But the doctor said, 'You have not.
The X ray shows me a safety pin in your brassiere.'  Well, they
finally found out that she'd been suspected of swallowing a safety
pin when she was two years old."

The story, floating in her clear, crisp voice upon the intimate
air, disarmed Forrest.  It had nothing to do with what had taken
place in Washington or New York ten years before.  Suddenly he
wanted to go and sit near her, because she was the tongue of flame
that made the firelight vivid.  Leaving, he walked for an hour
through feathery snow, wondering again why he couldn't know her,
why it was his business to represent a standard.

"Well, maybe I'll have a lot of fun some day doing what I ought to
do," he thought ironically--"when I'm fifty."

The first Christmas dance was the charity ball at the armory.  It
was a large, public affair; the rich sat in boxes.  Everyone came
who felt he belonged, and many out of curiosity, so the atmosphere
was tense with a strange haughtiness and aloofness.

The Rikkers had a box.  Forrest, coming in with Jane Drake, glanced
at the man of evil reputation and at the beaten woman frozen with
jewels who sat beside him.  They were the city's villains, gaped at
by the people of reserved and timid lives.  Oblivious of the
staring eyes, Alida and Helen Hannan held court for several young
men from out of town.  Without question, Alida was incomparably the
most beautiful girl in the room.

Several people told Forrest the news--the Rikkers were giving a big
dance after New Year's.  There were written invitations, but these
were being supplemented by oral ones.  Rumor had it that one had
merely to be presented to any Rikker in order to be bidden to the
dance.

As Forrest passed through the hall, two friends stopped him and
with a certain hilarity introduced him to a youth of seventeen, Mr.
Teddy Rikker.

"We're giving a dance," said the young man immediately.  "January
third.  Be very happy if you could come."

Forrest was afraid he had an engagement.

"Well, come if you change your mind."

"Horrible kid, but shrewd," said one of his friends later.  "We
were feeding him people, and when we brought up a couple of saps,
he looked at them and didn't say a word.  Some refuse and a few
accept and most of them stall, but he goes right on; he's got his
father's crust."

Into the highways and byways.  Why didn't the girl stop it?  He was
sorry for her when he found Jane in a group of young women reveling
in the story.

"I hear they asked Bodman, the undertaker, by mistake, and then
took it back."

"Mrs. Carleton pretended she was deaf."

"There's going to be a carload of champagne from Canada."

"Of course, I won't go, but I'd love to, just to see what happens.
There'll be a hundred men to every girl--and that'll be meat for
her."

The accumulated malice repelled him, and he was angry at Jane for
being part of it.  Turning away, his eyes fell on Alida's proud
form swaying along a wall, watched the devotion of her partners
with an unpleasant resentment.  He did not know that he had been a
little in love with her for many months.  Just as two children can
fall in love during a physical struggle over a ball, so their
awareness of each other had grown to surprising proportions.

"She's pretty," said Jane.  "She's not exactly overdressed, but
considering everything, she dresses too elaborately."

"I suppose she ought to wear sackcloth and ashes or half mourning."

"I was honored with a written invitation, but, of course, I'm not
going."

"Why not?"

Jane looked at him in surprise.  "You're not going."

"That's different.  I would if I were you.  You see, you don't care
what her father did."

"Of course, I care."

"No, you don't.  And all this small meanness just debases the whole
thing.  Why don't they let her alone?  She's young and pretty and
she's done nothing wrong."

Later in the week he saw Alida at the Hannans' dance and noticed
that many men danced with her.  He saw her lips moving, heard her
laughter, caught a word or so of what she said; irresistibly he
found himself guiding partners around in her wake.  He envied
visitors to the city who didn't know who she was.

The night of the Rikkers' dance he went to a small dinner; before
they sat down at table he realized that the others were all going
on to the Rikkers'.  They talked of it as a sort of comic
adventure; insisted that he come too.

"Even if you weren't invited, it's all right," they assured him.
"We were told we could bring anyone.  It's just a free-for-all; it
doesn't put you under any obligations.  Norma Nash is going and she
didn't invite Alida Rikker to her party.  Besides, she's really
very nice.  My brother's quite crazy about her.  Mother is worried
sick, because he says he wants to marry her."

Clasping his hand about a new highball, Forrest knew that if he
drank it he would probably go.  All his reasons for not going
seemed old and tired, and, fatally, he had begun to seem absurd to
himself.  In vain he tried to remember the purpose he was serving,
and found none.  His father had weakened on the matter of the
Kennemore Club.  And now suddenly he found reasons for going--men
could go where their women could not.

"All right," he said.

The Rikkers' dance was in the ballroom of the Minnekada Hotel.  The
Rikkers' gold, ill-gotten, tainted, had taken the form of a forest
of palms, vines and flowers.  The two orchestras moaned in pergolas
lit with fireflies, and many-colored spotlights swept the floor,
touching a buffet where dark bottles gleamed.  The receiving line
was still in action when Forrest's party came in, and Forrest
grinned ironically at the prospect of taking Chauncey Rikker by the
hand.  But at the sight of Alida, her look that at last fell
frankly on him, he forgot everything else.

"Your brother was kind enough to invite me," he said.

"Oh, yes," she was polite, but vague; not at all overwhelmed by his
presence.  As he waited to speak to her parents, he started, seeing
his sister in a group of dancers.  Then, one after another, he
identified people he knew: it might have been any one of the
Christmas dances; all the younger crowd were there.  He discovered
abruptly that he and Alida were alone; the receiving line had
broken up.  Alida glanced at him questioningly and with a certain
amusement.

So he danced out on the floor with her, his head high, but slightly
spinning.  Of all things in the world, he had least expected to
lead off the Chauncey Rikkers' ball.


III


Next morning his first realization was that he had kissed her; his
second was a feeling of profound shame for his conduct of the
evening.  Lord help him, he had been the life of the party; he had
helped to run the cotillion.  From the moment when he danced out on
the floor, coolly meeting the surprised and interested glances of
his friends, a mood of desperation had come over him.  He rushed
Alida Rikker, until a friend asked him what Jane was going to say.
"What business is it of Jane's?" he demanded impatiently.  "We're
not engaged."  But he was impelled to approach his sister and ask
her if he looked all right.

"Apparently," Eleanor answered, "but when in doubt, don't take any
more."

So he hadn't.  Exteriorly he remained correct, but his libido was
in a state of wild extroversion.  He sat with Alida Rikker and told
her he had loved her for months.

"Every night I thought of you just before you went to sleep," his
voice trembled with insincerity, "I was afraid to meet you or speak
to you.  Sometimes I'd see you in the distance moving along like a
golden chariot, and the world would be good to live in."

After twenty minutes of this eloquence, Alida began to feel
exceedingly attractive.  She was tired and rather happy, and
eventually she said:

"All right, you can kiss me if you want to, but it won't mean
anything.  I'm just not in that mood."

But Forrest had moods enough for both; he kissed her as if they
stood together at the altar.  A little later he had thanked Mrs.
Rikker with deep emotion for the best time he had ever had in his
life.

It was noon, and as he groped his way upright in bed, Eleanor came
in in her dressing gown.

"How are you?" she asked.

"Awful."

"How about what you told me coming back in the car?  Do you
actually want to marry Alida Rikker?"

"Not this morning."

"That's all right then.  Now, look: the family are furious."

"Why?" he asked with some redundancy.

"Both you and I being there.  Father heard that you led the
cotillion.  My explanation was that my dinner party went, and so I
had to go; but then you went too!"

Forrest dressed and went down to Sunday dinner.  Over the table
hovered an atmosphere of patient, puzzled, unworldly disappointment.
Finally Forrest launched into it:

"Well, we went to Al Capone's party and had a fine time."

"So I've heard," said Pierce Winslow dryly.  Mrs. Winslow said
nothing.

"Everybody was there--the Kayes, the Schwanes, the Martins and the
Blacks.  From now on, the Rikkers are pillars of society.  Every
house is open to them."

"Not this house," said his mother.  "They won't come into this
house."  And after a moment:  "Aren't you going to eat anything,
Forrest?"

"No, thanks.  I mean, yes, I am eating."  He looked cautiously at
his plate.  "The girl is very nice.  There isn't a girl in town
with better manners or more stuff.  If things were like they were
before the war, I'd say--"

He couldn't think exactly what it was he would have said; all he
knew was that he was now on an entirely different road from his
parents'.

"This city was scarcely more than a village before the war," said
old Mrs. Forrest.

"Forrest means the World War, granny," said Eleanor.

"Some things don't change," said Pierce Winslow.  Both he and
Forrest thought of the Kennemore Club matter and, feeling guilty,
the older man lost his temper:

"When people start going to parties given by a convicted criminal,
there's something serious the matter with them."

"We won't discuss it any more at table," said Mrs. Winslow hastily.

About four, Forrest called a number on the telephone in his room.
He had known for some time that he was going to call a number.

"Is Miss Rikker at home? . . .  Oh, hello.  This is Forrest
Winslow."

"How are you?"

"Terrible.  It was a good party."

"Wasn't it?"

"Too good.  What are you doing?"

"Entertaining two awful hangovers."

"Will you entertain me too?"

"I certainly will.  Come on over."

The two young men could only groan and play sentimental music on
the phonograph, but presently they departed; the fire leaped up,
day went out behind the windows, and Forrest had rum in his tea.

"So we met at last," he said.

"The delay was all yours."

"Damn prejudice," he said.  "This is a conservative city, and your
father being in this trouble--"

"I can't discuss my father with you."

"Excuse me.  I only wanted to say that I've felt like a fool lately
for not knowing you.  For cheating myself out of the pleasure of
knowing you for a silly prejudice," he blundered on.  "So I decided
to follow my own instincts."

She stood up suddenly.  "Good-by, Mr. Winslow."

"What?  Why?"

"Because it's absurd for you to come here as if you were doing me a
favor.  And after accepting our hospitality, to remind me of my
father's troubles is simply bad manners."

He was on his feet, terribly upset.  "That isn't what I meant.  I
said I had felt that way, and I despised myself for it.  Please
don't be sore."

"Then don't be condescending."  She sat back in her chair.  Her
mother came in, stayed only a moment, and threw Forrest a glance of
resentment and suspicion as she left.  But her passage through had
brought them together, and they talked frankly for a long time.

"I ought to be upstairs dressing."

"I ought to have gone an hour ago, and I can't."

"Neither can I."

With the admission they had traveled far.  At the door he kissed
her unreluctant lips and walked home, throwing futile buckets of
reason on the wild fire.

Less than two weeks later it happened.  In a car parked in a
blizzard he poured out his worship, and she lay on his chest,
sighing, "Oh, me too--me too."

Already Forrest's family knew where he went in the evenings; there
was a frightened coolness, and one morning his mother said:

"Son, you don't want to throw yourself away on some girl that isn't
up to you.  I thought you were interested in Jane Drake."

"Don't bring that up.  I'm not going to talk about it."

But it was only a postponement.  Meanwhile the days of this
February were white and magical, the nights were starry and
crystalline.  The town lay under a cold glory; the smell of her
furs was incense, her bright cheeks were flames upon a northern
altar.  An ecstatic pantheism for his land and its weather welled
up in him.  She had brought him finally back to it; he would live
here always.

"I want you so much that nothing can stand in the way of that," he
said to Alida.  "But I owe my parents a debt that I can't explain
to you.  They did more than spend money on me; they tried to give
me something more intangible--something that their parents had
given them and that they thought was worth handing on.  Evidently
it didn't take with me, but I've got to make this as easy as
possible for them."  He saw by her face that he had hurt her.
"Darling--"

"Oh, it frightens me when you talk like that," she said.  "Are you
going to reproach me later?  It would be awful.  You'll have to get
it out of your head that you're doing anything wrong.  My standards
are as high as yours, and I can't start out with my father's sins
on my shoulders."  She thought for a moment.  "You'll never be able
to reconcile it all like a children's story.  You've got to choose.
Probably you'll have to hurt either your family or hurt me."

A fortnight later the storm broke at the Winslow house.  Pierce
Winslow came home in a quiet rage and had a session behind closed
doors with his wife.  Afterward she knocked at Forrest's door.

"Your father had a very embarrassing experience today.  Chauncey
Rikker came up to him in the Downtown Club and began talking about
you as if you were on terms of some understanding with his
daughter.  Your father walked away, but we've got to know.  Are you
serious about Miss Rikker?"

"I want to marry her," he said.

"Oh, Forrest!"

She talked for a long time, recapitulating, as if it were a matter
of centuries, the eighty years that his family had been identified
with the city; when she passed from this to the story of his
father's health, Forrest interrupted:

"That's all so irrelevant, mother.  If there was anything against
Alida personally, what you say would have some weight, but there
isn't."

"She's overdressed; she runs around with everybody--"

"She isn't a bit different from Eleanor.  She's absolutely a lady
in every sense.  I feel like a fool even discussing her like this.
You're just afraid it'll connect you in some way with the Rikkers."

"I'm not afraid of that," said his mother, annoyed.  "Nothing would
ever do that.  But I'm afraid that it'll separate you from
everything worth while, everybody that loves you.  It isn't fair
for you to upset our lives, let us in for disgraceful gossip--"

"I'm to give up the girl I love because you're afraid of a little
gossip."

The controversy was resumed next day, with Pierce Winslow debating.
His argument was that he was born in old Kentucky, that he had
always felt uneasy at having begotten a son upon a pioneer
Minnesota family, and that this was what he might have expected.
Forrest felt that his parents' attitude was trivial and
disingenuous.  Only when he was out of the house, acting against
their wishes, did he feel any compunction.  But always he felt that
something precious was being frayed away--his youthful companionship
with his father and his love and trust for his mother.  Hour by hour
he saw the past being irreparably spoiled, and save when he was with
Alida, he was deeply unhappy.

One spring day when the situation had become unendurable, with half
the family meals taken in silence, Forrest's great-grandmother
stopped him on the stair landing and put her hand on his arm.

"Has this girl really a good character?" she asked, her fine,
clear, old eyes resting on his.

"Of course she has, gramma."

"Then marry her."

"Why do you say that?" Forrest asked curiously.

"It would stop all this nonsense and we could have some peace.  And
I've been thinking I'd like to be a great-great-grandmother before
I die."

Her frank selfishness appealed to him more than the righteousness
of the others.  That night he and Alida decided to be married the
first of June, and telephoned the announcement to the papers.

Now the storm broke in earnest.  Crest Avenue rang with gossip--how
Mrs. Rikker had called on Mrs. Winslow, who was not at home.  How
Forrest had gone to live in the University Club.  How Chauncey
Rikker and Pierce Winslow had had words in the Downtown Club.

It was true that Forrest had gone to the University Club.  On a May
night, with summer sounds already gathered on the window screens,
he packed his trunk and his suitcases in the room where he had
lived as a boy.  His throat contracted and he smeared his face with
his dusty hand as he took a row of golf cups off the mantelpiece,
and he choked to himself:  "If they won't take Alida, then they're
not my family any more."

As he finished packing, his mother came in.

"You're not really leaving."  Her voice was stricken.

"I'm moving to the University Club."

"That's so unnecessary.  No one bothers you here.  You do what you
want."

"I can't bring Alida here."

"Father--"

"Hell with father!" he said wildly.

She sat down on the bed beside him.  "Stay here, Forrest.  I
promise not to argue with you any more.  But stay here."

"I can't."

"I can't have you go!" she wailed.  "It seems as if we're driving
you out, and we're not!"

"You mean it looks as though you were driving me out."

"I don't mean that."

"Yes, you do.  And I want to say that I don't think you and father
really care a hang about Chauncey Rikker's moral character."

"That's not true, Forrest.  I hate people that behave badly and
break the laws.  My own father would never have let Chauncey
Rikker--"

"I'm not talking about your father.  But neither you nor my father
care a bit what Chauncey Rikker did.  I bet you don't even know
what it was."

"Of course I know.  He stole some money and went abroad, and when
he came back they put him in prison."

"They put him in prison for contempt of court."

"Now you're defending him, Forrest."

"I'm not!  I hate his guts; undoubtedly he's a crook.  But I tell
you it was a shock to me to find that father didn't have any
principles.  He and his friends sit around the Downtown Club and
pan Chauncey Rikker, but when it comes to keeping him out of a
club, they develop weak spines."

"That was a small thing."

"No, it wasn't.  None of the men of father's age have any
principles.  I don't know why.  I'm willing to make an allowance
for an honest conviction, but I'm not going to be booed by somebody
that hasn't got any principles and simply pretends to have."

His mother sat helplessly, knowing that what he said was true.  She
and her husband and all their friends had no principles.  They were
good or bad according to their natures; often they struck attitudes
remembered from the past, but they were never sure as her father or
her grandfather had been sure.  Confusedly she supposed it was
something about religion.  But how could you get principles just by
wishing for them?

The maid announced the arrival of a taxi.

"Send up Olsen for my baggage," said Forrest; then to his mother,
"I'm not taking the coupé; I left the keys.  I'm just taking my
clothes.  I suppose father will let me keep my job down town."

"Forrest, don't talk that way.  Do you think your father would take
your living away from you, no matter what you did?"

"Such things have happened."

"You're hard and difficult," she wept.  "Please stay here a little
longer, and perhaps things will be better and father will get a
little more reconciled.  Oh, stay, stay!  I'll talk to father
again.  I'll do my best to fix things."

"Will you let me bring Alida here?"

"Not now.  Don't ask me that.  I couldn't bear--"

"All right," he said grimly.

Olsen came in for the bags.  Crying and holding on to his coat
sleeve, his mother went with him to the front door.

"Won't you say good-by to father?"

"Why?  I'll see him tomorrow in the office."

"Forrest, I was thinking, why don't you go to a hotel instead of
the University Club?"

"Why, I thought I'd be more comfortable--"  Suddenly he realized
that his presence would be less conspicuous at a hotel.  Shutting
up his bitterness inside him, he kissed his mother roughly and went
to the cab.

Unexpectedly, it stopped by the corner lamp-post at a hail from the
sidewalk, and the May twilight yielded up Alida, miserable and
pale.

"What is it?" he demanded.

"I had to come," she said.  "Stop the car.  I've been thinking of
you leaving your house on account of me, and how you loved your
family--the way I'd like to love mine--and I thought how terrible
it was to spoil all that.  Listen, Forrest!  Wait!  I want you to
go back.  Yes, I do.  We can wait.  We haven't any right to cause
all this pain.  We're young.  I'll go away for a while, and then
we'll see."

He pulled her toward him by her shoulders.

"You've got more principles than the whole bunch of them," he said.
"Oh, my girl, you love me and, gosh, it's good that you do!"


IV


It was to be a house wedding, Forrest and Alida having vetoed the
Rikkers' idea that it was to be a sort of public revenge.  Only a
few intimate friends were invited.

During the week before the wedding, Forrest deduced from a series
of irresolute and ambiguous telephone calls that his mother wanted
to attend the ceremony, if possible.  Sometimes he hoped
passionately she would; at others it seemed unimportant.

The wedding was to be at seven.  At five o'clock Pierce Winslow was
walking up and down the two interconnecting sitting rooms of his
house.

"This evening," he murmured, "my only son is being married to the
daughter of a swindler."

He spoke aloud so that he could listen to the words, but they had
been evoked so often in the past few months that their strength was
gone and they died thinly upon the air.

He went to the foot of the stairs and called:  "Charlotte!"  No
answer.  He called again, and then went into the dining room, where
the maid was setting the table.

"Is Mrs. Winslow out?"

"I haven't seen her come in, Mr. Winslow."

Back in the sitting room he resumed his walking; unconsciously he
was walking like his father, the judge, dead thirty years ago; he
was parading his dead father up and down the room.

"You can't bring that woman into this house to meet your mother.
Bad blood is bad blood."

The house seemed unusually quiet.  He went upstairs and looked into
his wife's room, but she was not there; old Mrs. Forrest was
slightly indisposed; Eleanor, he knew, was at the wedding.

He felt genuinely sorry for himself as he went downstairs again.
He knew his role--the usual evening routine carried out in complete
obliviousness of the wedding--but he needed support, people begging
him to relent, or else deferring to his wounded sensibilities.
This isolation was different; it was almost the first isolation he
had ever felt, and like all men who are fundamentally of the group,
of the herd, he was incapable of taking a strong stand with the
inevitable loneliness that it implied.  He could only gravitate
toward those who did.

"What have I done to deserve this?" he demanded of the standing ash
tray.  "What have I failed to do for my son that lay within my
power?"

The maid came in.  "Mrs. Winslow told Hilda she wouldn't be here
for dinner, and Hilda didn't tell me."

The shameful business was complete.  His wife had weakened, leaving
him absolutely alone.  For a moment he expected to be furiously
angry with her, but he wasn't; he had used up his anger exhibiting
it to others.  Nor did it make him feel more obstinate, more
determined; it merely made him feel silly.

"That's it.  I'll be the goat.  Forrest will always hold it against
me, and Chauncey Rikker will be laughing up his sleeve."

He walked up and down furiously.

"So I'm left holding the bag.  They'll say I'm an old grouch and
drop me out of the picture entirely.  They've licked me.  I suppose
I might as well be graceful about it."  He looked down in horror at
the hat he held in his hand.  "I can't--I can't bring myself to do
it, but I must.  After all, he's my only son.  I couldn't bear that
he should hate me.  He's determined to marry her, so I might as
well put a good face on the matter."

In sudden alarm he looked at his watch, but there was still time.
After all, it was a large gesture he was making, sacrificing his
principles in this manner.  People would never know what it cost
him.

An hour later, old Mrs. Forrest woke up from her doze and rang for
her maid.

"Where's Mrs. Winslow?"

"She's not in for dinner.  Everybody's out."

The old lady remembered.

"Oh, yes, they've gone over to get married.  Give me my glasses and
the telephone book. . . .  Now, I wonder how you spell Capone."

"Rikker, Mrs. Forrest."

In a few minutes she had the number.  "This is Mrs. Hugh Forrest,"
she said firmly.  "I want to speak to young Mrs. Forrest
Winslow. . . .  No, not to Miss Rikker; to Mrs. Forrest Winslow."
As there was as yet no such person, this was impossible.  "Then I
will call after the ceremony," said the old lady.

When she called again, in an hour, the bride came to the phone.

"This is Forrest's great-grandmother.  I called up to wish you
every happiness and to ask you to come and see me when you get back
from your trip if I'm still alive."

"You're very sweet to call, Mrs. Forrest."

"Take good care of Forrest, and don't let him get to be a ninny
like his father and mother.  God bless you."

"Thank you."

"All right.  Good-by, Miss Capo--Good-by, my dear."

Having done her whole duty, Mrs. Forrest hung up the receiver.









A NEW LEAF


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (4 July 1931)



It was the first day warm enough to eat outdoors in the Bois de
Boulogne, while chestnut blossoms slanted down across the tables
and dropped impudently into the butter and the wine.  Julia Ross
ate a few with her bread and listened to the big goldfish rippling
in the pool and the sparrows whirring about an abandoned table.
You could see everybody again--the waiters with their professional
faces, the watchful Frenchwomen all heels and eyes, Phil Hoffman
opposite her with his heart balanced on his fork, and the
extraordinarily handsome man just coming out on the terrace.


     --the purple noon's transparent might.
     The breath of the moist air is light
     Around each unexpanded bud--


Julia trembled discreetly; she controlled herself; she didn't
spring up and call, "Yi-yi-yi-yi!  Isn't this grand?" and push the
maître d'hôtel into the lily pond.  She sat there, a well-behaved
woman of twenty-one, and discreetly trembled.

Phil was rising, napkin in hand.  "Hi there, Dick!"

"Hi, Phil!"

It was the handsome man; Phil took a few steps forward and they
talked apart from the table.

"--seen Carter and Kitty in Spain--"

"--poured on to the Bremen--"

"--so I was going to--"

The man went on, following the head waiter, and Phil sat down.

"Who is that?" she demanded.

"A friend of mine--Dick Ragland."

"He's without doubt the handsomest man I ever saw in my life."

"Yes, he's handsome," he agreed without enthusiasm.

"Handsome!  He's an archangel, he's a mountain lion, he's something
to eat.  Just why didn't you introduce him?"

"Because he's got the worst reputation of any American in Paris."

"Nonsense; he must be maligned.  It's all a dirty frame-up--a lot
of jealous husbands whose wives got one look at him.  Why, that
man's never done anything in his life except lead cavalry charges
and save children from drowning."

"The fact remains he's not received anywhere--not for one reason
but for a thousand."

"What reasons?"

"Everything.  Drink, women, jails, scandals, killed somebody with
an automobile, lazy, worthless--"

"I don't believe a word of it," said Julia firmly.  "I bet he's
tremendously attractive.  And you spoke to him as if you thought so
too."

"Yes," he said reluctantly, "like so many alcholics, he has a
certain charm.  If he'd only make his messes off by himself
somewhere--except right in people's laps.  Just when somebody's
taken him up and is making a big fuss over him, he pours the soup
down his hostess' back, kisses the serving maid and passes out in
the dog kennel.  But he's done it too often.  He's run through
about everybody, until there's no one left."

"There's me," said Julia.

There was Julia, who was a little too good for anybody and
sometimes regretted that she had been quite so well endowed.
Anything added to beauty has to be paid for--that is to say, the
qualities that pass as substitutes can be liabilities when added to
beauty itself.  Julia's brilliant hazel glance was enough, without
the questioning light of intelligence that flickered in it; her
irrepressible sense of the ridiculous detracted from the gentle
relief of her mouth, and the loveliness of her figure might have
been more obvious if she had slouched and postured rather than sat
and stood very straight, after the discipline of a strict father.

Equally perfect young men had several times appeared bearing gifts,
but generally with the air of being already complete, of having no
space for development.  On the other hand, she found that men of
larger scale had sharp corners and edges in youth, and she was a
little too young herself to like that.  There was, for instance,
this scornful young egotist, Phil Hoffman, opposite her, who was
obviously going to be a brilliant lawyer and who had practically
followed her to Paris.  She liked him as well as anyone she knew,
but he had at present all the overbearance of the son of a chief of
police.

"Tonight I'm going to London, and Wednesday I sail," he said.  "And
you'll be in Europe all summer, with somebody new chewing on your
ear every few weeks."

"When you've been called for a lot of remarks like that you'll
begin to edge into the picture," Julia remarked.  "Just to square
yourself, I want you to introduce that man Ragland."

"My last few hours!" he complained.

"But I've given you three whole days on the chance you'd work out a
better approach.  Be a little civilized and ask him to have some
coffee."

As Mr. Dick Ragland joined them, Julia drew a little breath of
pleasure.  He was a fine figure of a man, in coloring both tan and
blond, with a peculiar luminosity to his face.  His voice was
quietly intense; it seemed always to tremble a little with a sort
of gay despair; the way he looked at Julia made her feel
attractive.  For half an hour, as their sentences floated
pleasantly among the scent of violets and snowdrops, forget-me-nots
and pansies, her interest in him grew.  She was even glad when Phil
said:

"I've just thought about my English visa.  I'll have to leave you
two incipient love birds together against my better judgment.  Will
you meet me at the Gare St. Lazare at five and see me off?"

He looked at Julia hoping she'd say, "I'll go along with you now."
She knew very well she had no business being alone with this man,
but he made her laugh, and she hadn't laughed much lately, so she
said:  "I'll stay a few minutes; it's so nice and springy here."

When Phil was gone, Dick Ragland suggested a "fine" champagne.

"I hear you have a terrible reputation?" she said impulsively.

"Awful.  I'm not even invited out any more.  Do you want me to slip
on my false mustache?"

"It's so odd," she pursued.  "Don't you cut yourself off from all
nourishment?  Do you know that Phil felt he had to warn me about
you before he introduced you?  And I might very well have told him
not to."

"Why didn't you?"

"I thought you seemed so attractive and it was such a pity."

His face grew bland; Julia saw that the remark had been made so
often that it no longer reached him.

"It's none of my business," she said quickly.  She did not realize
that his being a sort of outcast added to his attraction for her--
not the dissipation itself, for never having seen it, it was merely
an abstraction--but its result in making him so alone.  Something
atavistic in her went out to the stranger to the tribe, a being
from a world with different habits from hers, who promised the
unexpected--promised adventure.

"I'll tell you something else," he said suddenly.  "I'm going
permanently on the wagon on June fifth, my twenty-eighth birthday.
I don't have fun drinking any more.  Evidently I'm not one of the
few people who can use liquor."

"You sure you can go on the wagon?"

"I always do what I say I'll do.  Also I'm going back to New York
and go to work."

"I'm really surprised how glad I am."  This was rash, but she let
it stand.

"Have another 'fine'?" Dick suggested.  "Then you'll be gladder
still."

"Will you go on this way right up to your birthday?"

"Probably.  On my birthday I'll be on the Olympic in mid-ocean."

"I'll be on that boat too!" she exclaimed.

"You can watch the quick change; I'll do it for the ship's
concert."

The tables were being cleared off.  Julia knew she should go now,
but she couldn't bear to leave him sitting with that unhappy look
under his smile.  She felt, maternally, that she ought to say
something to help him keep his resolution.

"Tell me why you drink so much.  Probably some obscure reason you
don't know yourself."

"Oh, I know pretty well how it began."

He told her as another hour waned.  He had gone to the war at
seventeen and, when he came back, life as a Princeton freshman with
a little black cap was somewhat tame.  So he went up to Boston Tech
and then abroad to the Beaux Arts; it was there that something
happened to him.

"About the time I came into some money I found that with a few
drinks I got expansive and somehow had the ability to please
people, and the idea turned my head.  Then I began to take a whole
lot of drinks to keep going and have everybody think I was
wonderful.  Well, I got plastered a lot and quarreled with most of
my friends, and then I met a wild bunch and for a while I was
expansive with them.  But I was inclined to get superior and
suddenly think 'What am I doing with this bunch?'  They didn't like
that much.  And when a taxi that I was in killed a man, I was sued.
It was just a graft, but it got in the papers, and after I was
released the impression remained that I'd killed him.  So all I've
got to show for the last five years is a reputation that makes
mothers rush their daughters away if I'm at the same hotel."

An impatient waiter was hovering near and she looked at her watch.

"Gosh, we're to see Phil off at five.  We've been here all the
afternoon."

As they hurried to the Gare St. Lazare, he asked:  "Will you let me
see you again; or do you think you'd better not?"

She returned his long look.  There was no sign of dissipation in
his face, in his warm cheeks, in his erect carriage.

"I'm always fine at lunch," he added, like an invalid.

"I'm not worried," she laughed.  "Take me to lunch day after
tomorrow."

They hurried up the steps of the Gare St. Lazare, only to see the
last carriage of the Golden Arrow disappearing toward the Channel.
Julia was remorseful, because Phil had come so far.

As a sort of atonement, she went to the apartment where she lived
with her aunt and tried to write a letter to him, but Dick Ragland
intruded himself into her thoughts.  By morning the effect of his
good looks had faded a little; she was inclined to write him a note
that she couldn't see him.  Still, he had made her a simple appeal
and she had brought it all on herself.  She waited for him at half-
past twelve on the appointed day.

Julia had said nothing to her aunt, who had company for luncheon
and might mention his name--strange to go out with a man whose name
you couldn't mention.  He was late and she waited in the hall,
listening to the echolalia of chatter from the luncheon party in
the dining room.  At one she answered the bell.

There in the outer hall stood a man whom she thought she had never
seen before.  His face was dead white and erratically shaven, his
soft hat was crushed bunlike on his head, his shirt collar was
dirty, and all except the band of his tie was out of sight.  But at
the moment when she recognized the figure as Dick Ragland she
perceived a change which dwarfed the others into nothing; it was in
his expression.  His whole face was one prolonged sneer--the lids
held with difficulty from covering the fixed eyes, the drooping
mouth drawn up over the upper teeth, the chin wabbling like a made-
over chin in which the paraffin had run--it was a face that both
expressed and inspired disgust.

"H'lo," he muttered.

For a minute she drew back from him; then, at a sudden silence from
the dining room that gave on the hall, inspired by the silence in
the hall itself, she half pushed him over the threshold, stepped
out herself and closed the door behind them.

"Oh-h-h!" she said in a single, shocked breath.

"Haven't been home since yest'day.  Got involve' on a party at--"

With repugnance, she turned him around by his arm and stumbled with
him down the apartment stairs, passing the concierge's wife, who
peered out at them curiously from her glass room.  Then they came
out into the bright sunshine of the Rue Guynemer.

Against the spring freshness of the Luxembourg Gardens opposite, he
was even more grotesque.  He frightened her; she looked desperately
up and down the street for a taxi, but one turning the corner of
the Rue de Vaugirard disregarded her signal.

"Where'll we go lunch?" he asked.

"You're in no shape to go to lunch.  Don't you realize?  You've got
to go home and sleep."

"I'm all right.  I get a drink I'll be fine."

A passing cab slowed up at her gesture.

"You go home and go to sleep.  You're not fit to go anywhere."

As he focused his eyes on her, realizing her suddenly as something
fresh, something new and lovely, something alien to the smoky and
turbulent world where he had spent his recent hours, a faint
current of reason flowed through him.  She saw his mouth twist with
vague awe, saw him make a vague attempt to stand up straight.  The
taxi yawned.

"Maybe you're right.  Very sorry."

"What's your address?"

He gave it and then tumbled into a corner, his face still
struggling toward reality.  Julia closed the door.

When the cab had driven off, she hurried across the street and into
the Luxembourg Gardens as if someone were after her.


II


Quite by accident, she answered when he telephoned at seven that
night.  His voice was strained and shaking:

"I suppose there's not much use apologizing for this morning.  I
didn't know what I was doing, but that's no excuse.  But if you
could let me see you for a while somewhere tomorrow--just for a
minute--I'd like the chance of telling you in person how terribly
sorry--"

"I'm busy tomorrow."

"Well, Friday then, or any day."

"I'm sorry, I'm very busy this week."

"You mean you don't ever want to see me again?"

"Mr. Ragland, I hardly see the use of going any further with this.
Really, that thing this morning was a little too much.  I'm very
sorry.  I hope you feel better.  Good-by."

She put him entirely out of her mind.  She had not even associated
his reputation with such a spectacle--a heavy drinker was someone
who sat up late and drank champagne and maybe in the small hours
rode home singing.  This spectacle at high noon was something else
again.  Julia was through.

Meanwhile there were other men with whom she lunched at Ciro's and
danced in the Bois.  There was a reproachful letter from Phil
Hoffman in America.  She liked Phil better for having been so right
about this.  A fortnight passed and she would have forgotten Dick
Ragland, had she not heard his name mentioned with scorn in several
conversations.  Evidently he had done such things before.

Then, a week before she was due to sail, she ran into him in the
booking department of the White Star Line.  He was as handsome--she
could hardly believe her eyes.  He leaned with an elbow on the
desk, his fine figure erect, his yellow gloves as stainless as his
clear, shining eyes.  His strong, gay personality had affected the
clerk who served him with fascinated deference; the stenographers
behind looked up for a minute and exchanged a glance.  Then he saw
Julia; she nodded, and with a quick, wincing change of expression
he raised his hat.

They were together by the desk a long time and the silence was
oppressive.

"Isn't this a nuisance?" she said.

"Yes," he said jerkily, and then:  "You going by the Olympic?"

"Oh, yes."

"I thought you might have changed."

"Of course not," she said coldly.

"I thought of changing; in fact, I was here to ask about it."

"That's absurd."

"You don't hate the sight of me?  So it'll make you seasick when we
pass each other on the deck?"

She smiled.  He seized his advantage:

"I've improved somewhat since we last met."

"Don't talk about that."

"Well then, you have improved.  You've got the loveliest costume on
I ever saw."

This was presumptuous, but she felt herself shimmering a little at
the compliment.

"You wouldn't consider a cup of coffee with me at the café next
door, just to recover from this ordeal?"

How weak of her to talk to him like this, to let him make advances.
It was like being under the fascination of a snake.

"I'm afraid I can't."  Something terribly timid and vulnerable came
into his face, twisting a little sinew in her heart.  "Well, all
right," she shocked herself by saying.

Sitting at the sidewalk table in the sunlight, there was nothing to
remind her of that awful day two weeks ago.  Jekyll and Hyde.  He
was courteous, he was charming, he was amusing.  He made her feel,
oh, so attractive!  He presumed on nothing.

"Have you stopped drinking?" she asked.

"Not till the fifth."

"Oh!"

"Not until I said I'd stop.  Then I'll stop."

When Julia rose to go, she shook her head at his suggestion of a
further meeting.

"I'll see you on the boat.  After your twenty-eighth birthday."

"All right; one more thing:  It fits in with the high price of
crime that I did something inexcusable to the one girl I've ever
been in love with in my life."

She saw him the first day on board, and then her heart sank into
her shoes as she realized at last how much she wanted him.  No
matter what his past was, no matter what he had done.  Which was
not to say that she would ever let him know, but only that he moved
her chemically more than anyone she had ever met, that all other
men seemed pale beside him.

He was popular on the boat; she heard that he was giving a party on
the night of his twenty-eighth birthday.  Julia was not invited;
when they met they spoke pleasantly, nothing more.

It was the day after the fifth that she found him stretched in his
deck chair looking wan and white.  There were wrinkles on his fine
brow and around his eyes, and his hand, as he reached out for a cup
of bouillon, was trembling.  He was still there in the late
afternoon, visibly suffering, visibly miserable.  After three times
around, Julia was irresistibly impelled to speak to him:

"Has the new era begun?"

He made a feeble effort to rise, but she motioned him not to and
sat on the next chair.

"You look tired."

"I'm just a little nervous.  This is the first day in five years
that I haven't had a drink."

"It'll be better soon."

"I know," he said grimly.

"Don't weaken."

"I won't."

"Can't I help you in any way?  Would you like a bromide?"

"I can't stand bromides," he said almost crossly.  "No, thanks, I
mean."

Julia stood up:  "I know you feel better alone.  Things will be
brighter tomorrow."

"Don't go, if you can stand me."

Julia sat down again.

"Sing me a song--can you sing?"

"What kind of a song?"

"Something sad--some sort of blues."

She sang him Libby Holman's "This is how the story ends," in a low,
soft voice.

"That's good.  Now sing another.  Or sing that again."

"All right.  If you like, I'll sing to you all afternoon."


III


The second day in New York he called her on the phone.  "I've
missed you so," he said.  "Have you missed me?"

"I'm afraid I have," she said reluctantly.

"Much?"

"I've missed you a lot.  Are you better?"

"I'm all right now.  I'm still just a little nervous, but I'm
starting work tomorrow.  When can I see you?"

"When you want."

"This evening then.  And look--say that again."

"What?"

"That you're afraid you have missed me."

"I'm afraid that I have," Julia said obediently.

"Missed me," he added.

"I'm afraid I have missed you."

"All right.  It sounds like a song when you say it."

"Good-by, Dick."

"Good-by, Julia dear."

She stayed in New York two months instead of the fortnight she had
intended, because he would not let her go.  Work took the place of
drink in the daytime, but afterward he must see Julia.

Sometimes she was jealous of his work when he telephoned that he
was too tired to go out after the theater.  Lacking drink, night
life was less than nothing to him--something quite spoiled and well
lost.  For Julia, who never drank, it was a stimulus in itself--the
music and the parade of dresses and the handsome couple they made
dancing together.  At first they saw Phil Hoffman once in a while;
Julia considered that he took the matter rather badly; then they
didn't see him any more.

A few unpleasant incidents occurred.  An old schoolmate, Esther
Cary, came to her to ask if she knew of Dick Ragland's reputation.
Instead of growing angry, Julia invited her to meet Dick and was
delighted with the ease with which Esther's convictions were
changed.  There were other, small, annoying episodes, but Dick's
misdemeanors had, fortunately, been confined to Paris and assumed
here a far-away unreality.  They loved each other deeply now--the
memory of that morning slowly being effaced from Julia's
imagination--but she wanted to be sure.

"After six months, if everything goes along like this, we'll
announce our engagement.  After another six months we'll be
married."

"Such a long time," he mourned.

"But there were five years before that," Julia answered.  "I trust
you with my heart and with my mind, but something else says wait.
Remember, I'm also deciding for my children."

Those five years--oh, so lost and gone.

In August, Julia went to California for two months to see her
family.  She wanted to know how Dick would get along alone.  They
wrote every day; his letters were by turns cheerful, depressed,
weary and hopeful.  His work was going better.  As things came back
to him, his uncle had begun really to believe in him, but all the
time he missed his Julia so.  It was when an occasional note of
despair began to appear that she cut her visit short by a week and
came East to New York.

"Oh, thank God you're here!" he cried as they linked arms and
walked out of the Grand Central station.  "It's been so hard.  Half
a dozen times lately I've wanted to go on a bust and I had to think
of you, and you were so far away."

"Darling--darling, you're so tired and pale.  You're working too
hard."

"No, only that life is so bleak alone.  When I go to bed my mind
churns on and on.  Can't we get married sooner?"

"I don't know; we'll see.  You've got your Julia near you now, and
nothing matters."

After a week, Dick's depression lifted.  When he was sad, Julia
made him her baby, holding his handsome head against her breast,
but she liked it best when he was confident and could cheer her up,
making her laugh and feel taken care of and secure.  She had rented
an apartment with another girl and she took courses in biology and
domestic science in Columbia.  When deep fall came, they went to
football games and the new shows together, and walked through the
first snow in Central Park, and several times a week spent long
evenings together in front of her fire.  But time was going by and
they were both impatient.  Just before Christmas, an unfamiliar
visitor--Phil Hoffman--presented himself at her door.  It was the
first time in many months.  New York, with its quality of many
independent ladders set side by side, is unkind to even the
meetings of close friends; so, in the case of strained relations,
meetings are easy to avoid.

And they were strange to each other.  Since his expressed
skepticism of Dick, he was automatically her enemy; on another
count, she saw that he had improved, some of the hard angles were
worn off; he was now an assistant district attorney, moving around
with increasing confidence through his profession.

"So you're going to marry Dick?" he said.  "When?"

"Soon now.  When mother comes East."

He shook his head emphatically.  "Julia, don't marry Dick.  This
isn't jealousy--I know when I am licked--but it seems awful for a
lovely girl like you to take a blind dive into a lake full of
rocks.  What makes you think that people change their courses?
Sometimes they dry up or even flow into a parallel channel, but
I've never known anybody to change."

"Dick's changed."

"Maybe so.  But isn't that an enormous 'maybe'?  If he was
unattractive and you liked him, I'd say go ahead with it.  Maybe
I'm all wrong, but it's so darn obvious that what fascinates you is
that handsome pan of his and those attractive manners."

"You don't know him," Julia answered loyally.  "He's different with
me.  You don't know how gentle he is, and responsive.  Aren't you
being rather small and mean?"

"Hm."  Phil thought for a moment.  "I want to see you again in a
few days.  Or perhaps I'll speak to Dick."

"You let Dick alone," she cried.  "He has enough to worry him
without your nagging him.  If you were his friend you'd try to help
him instead of coming to me behind his back."

"I'm your friend first."

"Dick and I are one person now."

But three days later Dick came to see her at an hour when he would
usually have been at the office.

"I'm here under compulsion," he said lightly, "under threat of
exposure by Phil Hoffman."

Her heart dropping like a plummet.  "Has he given up?" she thought.
"Is he drinking again?"

"It's about a girl.  You introduced me to her last summer and told
me to be very nice to her--Esther Cary."

Now her heart was beating slowly.

"After you went to California I was lonesome and I ran into her.
She'd liked me that day, and for a while we saw quite a bit of each
other.  Then you came back and I broke it off.  It was a little
difficult; I hadn't realized that she was so interested."

"I see."  Her voice was starved and aghast.

"Try and understand.  Those terribly lonely evenings.  I think if
it hadn't been for Esther, I'd have fallen off the wagon.  I never
loved her--I never loved anybody but you--but I had to see somebody
who liked me."

He put his arm around her, but she felt cold all over and he drew
away.

"Then any woman would have done," Julia said slowly.  "It didn't
matter who."

"No!" he cried.

"I stayed away so long to let you stand on your own feet and get
back your self-respect by yourself."

"I only love you, Julia."

"But any woman can help you.  So you don't really need me, do you?"

His face wore that vulnerable look that Julia had seen several
times before; she sat on the arm of his chair and ran her hand over
his cheek.

"Then what do you bring me?" she demanded.  "I thought that there'd
be the accumulated strength of having beaten your weakness.  What
do you bring me now?"

"Everything I have."

She shook her head.  "Nothing.  Just your good looks--and the head
waiter at dinner last night had that."

They talked for two days and decided nothing.  Sometimes she would
pull him close and reach up to his lips that she loved so well, but
her arms seemed to close around straw.

"I'll go away and give you a chance to think it over," he said
despairingly.  "I can't see any way of living without you, but I
suppose you can't marry a man you don't trust or believe in.  My
uncle wanted me to go to London on some business--"

The night he left, it was sad on the dim pier.  All that kept her
from breaking was that it was not an image of strength that was
leaving her; she would be just as strong without him.  Yet as the
murky lights fell on the fine structure of his brow and chin, as
she saw the faces turn toward him, the eyes that followed him, an
awful emptiness seized her and she wanted to say:  "Never mind,
dear; we'll try it together."

But try what?  It was human to risk the toss between failure and
success, but to risk the desperate gamble between adequacy and
disaster--

"Oh, Dick, be good and be strong and come back to me.  Change,
change, Dick--change!"

"Good-by, Julia--good-by."

She last saw him on the deck, his profile cut sharp as a cameo
against a match as he lit a cigarette.


IV


It was Phil Hoffman who was to be with her at the beginning and the
end.  It was he who broke the news as gently as it could be broken.
He reached her apartment at half-past eight and carefully threw
away the morning paper outside.  Dick Ragland had disappeared at
sea.

After her first wild burst of grief, he became purposely a little
cruel.

"He knew himself.  His will had given out; he didn't want life any
more.  And, Julia, just to show you how little you can possibly
blame yourself, I'll tell you this:  He'd hardly gone to his office
for four months--since you went to California.  He wasn't fired
because of his uncle; the business he went to London on was of no
importance at all.  After his first enthusiasm was gone he'd given
up."

She looked at him sharply.  "He didn't drink, did he?  He wasn't
drinking?"

For a fraction of a second Phil hesitated.  "No, he didn't drink;
he kept his promise--he held on to that."

"That was it," she said.  "He kept his promise and he killed
himself doing it."

Phil waited uncomfortably.

"He did what he said he would and broke his heart doing it," she
went on chokingly.  "Oh, isn't life cruel sometimes--so cruel,
never to let anybody off.  He was so brave--he died doing what he
said he'd do."

Phil was glad he had thrown away the newspaper that hinted of
Dick's gay evening in the bar--one of many gay evenings that Phil
had known of in the past few months.  He was relieved that was
over, because Dick's weakness had threatened the happiness of the
girl he loved; but he was terribly sorry for him--even understanding
how it was necessary for him to turn his maladjustment to life
toward one mischief or another--but he was wise enough to leave
Julia with the dream that she had saved out of wreckage.

There was a bad moment a year later, just before their marriage,
when she said:

"You'll understand the feeling I have and always will have about
Dick, won't you, Phil?  It wasn't just his good looks.  I believed
in him--and I was right in a way.  He broke rather than bent; he
was a ruined man, but not a bad man.  In my heart I knew when I
first looked at him."

Phil winced, but he said nothing.  Perhaps there was more behind it
than they knew.  Better let it all alone in the depths of her heart
and the depths of the sea.








A NICE QUIET PLACE


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)



The Saturday Evening Post (31 May, 1930)



I


All that week she couldn't decide whether she was a lollipop or a
roman candle--through her dreams, dreams that promised uninterrupted
sleep through many vacation mornings, drove a series of long,
incalculable murmuring in tune with the put-put-put of their cut-
outs, "I love you--I love you," over and over.  She wrote in the
evening:


Dear Ridge:  When I think of not being able to come to the freshman
dance with you this June, I could lie down and DIE, but mother is
sort of narrow-minded in some ways, and she feels that sixteen is
too young to go to a prom; and Lil Hammel's mother feels the same
way.  When I think of you dancing around with SOME OTHER GIRL and
hear you handing her a line, like you do to everybody, I could lie
down and SCREAM.  Oh, I KNOW--because a girl here at school met you
after I left Hot Springs at Easter.  Anyhow, if you start rushing
some other kid when you come out to Ed Bement's house party this
summer, I intend to CUT HER THROAT, or my own, or something
desperate.  And probably no one will even be sorry I'm dead.  Ha-ha--



Summer, summer, summer--bland inland sun and friendly rain.  Lake
Forest, with its thousand enchanted verandas, the dancing on the
outdoor platform at the club, and always the boys, centaurs, in new
cars.  Her mother came East to meet her, and as they walked
together out of the Grand Central Station, the symphony of promise
became so loud that Josephine's face was puckered and distorted, as
with the pressure of strong sunshine.

"We've got the best plans," her mother said.

"Oh, what?  What, mother?"

"A real change.  I'll tell you all about it when we get to the
hotel."

There was a sudden discord; a shadow fell upon Josephine's heart.

"What do you mean?  Aren't we going to Lake Forest?"

"Some place much better"--her mother's voice was alarmingly
cheerful.  "I'm saving it till we get to the hotel."

Before Mrs. Perry had left Chicago, she and Josephine's father had
decided, from observations of their own and some revelations on the
part of their elder daughter, Constance, that Josephine knew her
way around Lake Forest all too well.  The place had changed in the
twenty years that it had been the summer rendezvous of fashionable
Chicago; less circumscribed children of new families were
resoundingly in evidence and, like most parents, Mrs. Perry thought
of her daughter as one easily led into mischief by others.  The
more impartial eyes of other members of the colony had long
regarded Josephine herself as the principal agent of corruption.
But, preventive or penalty, the appalling thing to Josephine was
that the Perrys were going to a "nice quiet place" this summer.

"Mother, I simply can't go to Island Farms.  I simply--"

"Father feels--"

"Why don't you take me to a reform school if I'm so awful?  Or to
state's penitentiary?  I simply can't go to a horrible old farm
with a lot of country jakes and no fun and no friends except a lot
of hicks."

"But, dear, it's not like that at all.  They just call it Island
Farms.  In fact, your aunt's place isn't a farm; it's really a nice
little resort up in Michigan where lots of people spend the summer.
Tennis and swimming and--and fishing."

"Fishing?" repeated Josephine incredulously.  "Do you call THAT
something to do?"  She shook her head in mute incomprehension.
"I'll just be forgotten, that's all.  When it's my year to come out
nobody will know who I am.  They'll just say, 'Who in heck is this
Josephine Perry?  I never saw her around here.'  'Oh, she's just
some hick from a horrible old farm up in Michigan.  Let's not
invite her.'  Just when everybody else is having a wonderful time--"

"Nobody'll forget you in one summer, dear."

"Yes, they will.  Everybody'll have new friends and know new
dances, and I'll be up there in the backwoods, full of hayseed,
forgetting everything I know.  If it's so wonderful why isn't
Constance coming?"

Lying awake in their drawing-room on the Twentieth Century,
Josephine brooded upon the terrible injustice of it all.  She knew
that her mother was going on her account, and mostly because of the
gossip of a few ugly and jealous girls.  These ugly and jealous
girls, her relentless enemies, were not entirely creatures of
Josephine's imagination.  There was something in the frank
sensuousness of her beauty that plain women found absolutely
intolerable; they stared at her in a frightened, guarded way.

It was only recently that gossip had begun to worry Josephine.  Her
own theory was that, though at thirteen or fourteen she had been
"speedy"--a convenient word that lacked the vulgar implication of
"fast"--she was now trying to do her best, and a difficult enough
business it was, without the past being held against her; for the
only thing she cared about in the world was being in love and being
with the person she currently loved.

Toward midnight her mother spoke to her softly and found that she
was asleep.  Turning on the berth light, she looked for a moment at
the flushed young face, smoothed now of all its disappointment by a
faint, peculiar smile.  She leaned over and kissed Josephine's
brow, behind which, doubtless, were passing in review those tender
and eagerly awaited orgies of which she was to be deprived this
summer.


II


Into Chicago, resonant with shrill June clamor; out to Lake Forest,
where her friends moved already in an aura of new boys, new tunes,
parties and house parties yet to be.  One concession was granted
her--she was to come back from Island Farms in time for Ed Bement's
house party--which is to say, for Ridgeway Saunders' visit, the
first of September.

Then northward, leaving all gayety behind, to the nice quiet place,
implicit in its very station, which breathed no atmosphere of
hectic arrivals or feverish partings: there was her aunt, her
fifteen-year-old cousin, Dick, with the blank resentful stare of
youth in spectacles, there were the dozen or so estates with tired
people asleep inside them and the drab village three miles away.
It was worse, even, than Josephine had imagined; to her the
vicinity was literally unpopulated, for, as a representative of her
generation, she stood alone.  In despair, she buried herself in
ceaseless correspondence with the outer world or, as a variant,
played tennis with Dick and carried on a slow indifferent quarrel
at his deliberately spiteful immaturity.

"Are you going to be this way always?" she demanded, breaking down
at his stupidity one day.  "Can't you do anything about it?  Does
it hurt?"

"What way?"  Dick shambled around the tennis net in the way that so
offended her.

"Oh, such a pill!  You ought to be sent away to some good school."

"I am going to be."

"Why, at your age most of the boys in Chicago have cars of their
own."

"Too many," he responded.

"How do you mean?" Josephine flared up.

"I heard my aunt say there was too much of that there.  That's why
they made you come up here.  You're too much for that sort of
thing."

Josephine flushed.  "Couldn't you HELP being such a pill, if you
honestly tried?"

"I don't know," admitted Dick.  "I don't even think that maybe I AM
one."

"Oh, yes, you are.  I can assure you of that."

It occurred to her, not very hopefully, that under proper
supervision something might be made of him.  Perhaps she could
teach him to dance or have him learn to drive his mother's car.
She went to the extent of trying to smarten him up, to make him
wash his hands bidiurnally and to soak his hair and cleave it down
the middle.  She suggested that he would be more beautiful without
his spectacles, and he obediently bumped around without them for
several afternoons.  But when he developed a feverish headache one
night and confessed to his mother why he had been "so utterly
insane," Josephine gave him up without a pang.

But she could have cared for almost anyone.  She wanted to hear the
mystical terminology of love, to feel the lift and pull inside
herself that each one of a dozen affairs had given her.  She had
written, of course, to Ridgeway Saunders.  He answered.  She wrote
again.  He answered--but after two weeks.  On the first of August,
with one month gone and one to go, came a letter from Lillian
Hammel, her best friend in Lake Forest.


Dearest Jo:  You said to write you every single thing, and I will,
but some of it will be sort of a fatal blow to you--about Ridgeway
Saunders.  Ed Bement visited him in Philadelphia, and he says he is
so crazy about a girl there that he wants to leave Yale and get
married.  Her name is Evangeline Ticknor and she was fired from
Foxcroft last year for smoking; quite a speed and said to be
beautiful and something like you, from what I hear.  Ed said that
Ridgeway was so crazy about her that he wouldn't even come out here
in September unless Ed invited her, too; so Ed did.  Probably a lot
you care!  You've probably had lots of crushes up there where you
are, or aren't there any attractive boys--


Josephine walked slowly up and down her room.  Her parents had what
they wanted now; the plot against her was complete.  For the first
time in her life she had been thrown over, and by the most
attractive, the most desirable boy she had ever known, cut out by a
girl "very much like herself."  Josephine wished passionately that
she had been fired from school--then the family might have given up
and let her alone.

She was not so much humiliated as full of angry despair, but for
the sake of her pride, she had a letter to write immediately.  Her
eyes were bright with tears as she began:


Dearest Lil:  I was not surprised when I heard that about R. S.  I
knew he was fickle and never gave him a second THOUGHT after school
closed in June.  As a matter of fact, you know how fickle I am
myself, darling, and you can imagine that I haven't had time to let
it worry ME.  Everybody has a right to do what they want, say I.
Live and let live is my motto.  I wish you could have been here
this summer.  More WONDERFUL parties--


She paused, knowing that she should invent more circumstantial
evidence of gayety.  Pen in air, she gazed out into the deep, still
mass of northern trees.  Inventing was delicate work, and having
dealt always in realities, her imagination was ill-adapted to the
task.  Nevertheless, after several minutes a vague, synthetic
figure began to take shape in her mind.  She dipped the pen and
wrote:  "One of the darlingest--" hesitated and turned again for
inspiration to the window.

Suddenly she started and bent forward, the tears drying in her
eyes.  Striding down the road, not fifty feet from her window, was
the handsomest, the most fascinating boy she had ever seen in her
life.


III


He was about nineteen and tall, with a blond viking head; the fresh
color in his slender, almost gaunt cheeks was baked warm and dry by
the sun.  She had a glimpse of his eyes--enough to know that they
were "sad" and of an extraordinary glistening blue.  His model legs
were in riding breeches, above which he wore a soft sweater jacket
of blue chamois, and as he walked he swung a crop acrimoniously at
the overhanging leaves.

For a moment the vision endured; then the path turned into a clump
of trees and he was gone, save for the small crunch of his boots on
the pine needles.

Josephine did not move.  The dark green trees that had seemed so
lacking in promise were suddenly like a magic wall that had opened
and revealed a short cut to possible delight; the trees gave forth
a great trembling rustle.  For another instant she waited; then she
threw herself at the unfinished letter:


--he usually wears the best-looking riding clothes.  He has the
MOST beautiful eyes.  On top he usually wears a blue chamois thing
that is simply DIVINE.


IV


When her mother came in, half an hour later, she found Josephine
getting into her best afternoon dress with an expression that was
at once animated and far away.

"I thought--" she said.  "I don't suppose you'd want to come with
me and pay a few calls?"

"I'd adore to," said Josephine unexpectedly.

Her mother hesitated.  "I'm afraid it's been a rather stupid month
for you.  I didn't realize that there wouldn't be anyone your age.
But something nice has happened that I can't tell you about yet,
and perhaps I'll soon have some news for you."

Josephine did not appear to hear.

"Who shall we call on?" she demanded eagerly.  "Let's just call on
everybody, even if it takes until ten o'clock tonight.  Let's start
at the nearest house and just keep going until we've killed
everybody off."

"I don't know whether we can do that."

"Come on."  Josephine was putting on her hat.  "Let's get going,
mother."

Perhaps, Mrs. Perry thought, the summer was really making a
difference in her daughter; perhaps it was developing in her a more
gently social vein.  At each house they visited she positively
radiated animation, and displayed sincere disappointment when they
found no one home.  When her mother called it a day, the light in
her eyes went out.

"We can try again tomorrow," she said impatiently.  "We'll kill the
rest of them off.  We'll go back to those houses where there was no
one home."

It was almost seven--a nostalgic hour, for it had been the
loveliest of all at Lake Forest a year ago.  Bathed and positively
shining, one had intruded then for a last minute into the departing
day, and, sitting alone on the veranda, turned over the romantic
prospects of the night, while lighted windows sprang out on the
blurring shapes of houses, and cars flew past with people late home
from tea.

But tonight the murmurous Indian twilight of the lake country had a
promise of its own, and strolling out into the lane that passed the
house, Josephine broke suddenly into a certain walk, rather an
externallized state of mind, that had been hitherto reserved for
more sophisticated localities.  It implied, through a skimming lift
of the feet, through an impatience of the moving hips, through an
abstracted smile, lastly through a glance that fell twenty feet
ahead, that this girl was about to cross some material threshold
where she was eagerly awaited; that, in fact, she had already
crossed it in her imagination and left her surroundings behind.  It
was just at that moment she heard a strong clear whistle in front
of her and the sound as of a stick swishing through leaves:


               "Hello,
               Fris-co,
               Hello!

     How do you do, my dear?
     I only wish that you were here."


Her heart beat a familiar tattoo; she realized that they would pass
each other just where a last rift of sunset came down through the
pines.


               "Hello,
               Fris-co,
               Hel-lo!"


There he was, a fine shape against the foreground.  His gallant
face, drawn in a single dashing line, his chamois vest, so blue--
she was near enough that she could have touched it.  Then she
realized with a shock that he had passed without noticing her
proximity by a single flicker of his unhappy eyes.

"The conceited pill!" she thought indignantly.  "Of all the
conceited--"

She was silent during dinner; at the end she said to her aunt, with
small preliminary:

"I passed the most conceited-looking young man today.  I wonder who
he could have been."

"Maybe it was the nephew of old Dorrance," offered Dick, "or the
fellow staying at old Dorrance's.  Somebody said it was his nephew
or some sort of relation."

His mother said pointedly to Josephine:  "We don't see the
Dorrances.  Mr. Charles Dorrance considered that my husband was
unjust to him about our boundary some years ago.  Old Mr. Dorrance
was a very stubborn man indeed."

Josephine wondered if that was why he had failed to respond this
afternoon.  It was a silly reason.

But next day, at the same place, at the same hour, he literally
jumped at her soft "Good evening"; he stared at her with
unmistakable signs of dismay.  Then his hand went up as if to
remove a hat, found none, and he bowed instead and went on by.

But Josephine turned swiftly and walked at his side, smiling.

"You might be more sociable.  You really shouldn't be so exclusive,
since we're the only two people in this place.  I do think it's
silly to let older people influence young people."

He was walking so fast that she could scarcely keep up with him.

"Honestly, I'm a nice girl," she persisted, still smiling.  "Quite
a few people rush me at dances and I once had a blind man in love
with me."

They were almost at her aunt's gate, still walking furiously.

"Here's where I live," she said.

"Then I'll say good-by."

"What IS the matter?" she demanded.  "How CAN you be so rude?"

His lips formed the words, "I'm sorry."

"I suppose you've got to hurry home so you can stare at yourself at
the mirror."

She knew this was untrue.  He wore his good looks in almost an
apologetic way.  But it reached him, for he came to a precipitate
halt, immediately moving off a little.

"Excuse my rudeness," he exploded.  "But I'm not used to girls."

She was too winded to answer.  But as her shaken composure
gradually returned, she became aware of an odd weariness in his
face.

"At least you might talk to me for a minute, if I don't come any
nearer."

After a moment's hesitation he hoisted himself tentatively onto a
fence rail.

"If you're so frightened of females, isn't it time something was
done about it?" she inquired.

"It's too late."

"Never," she said positively.  "Why, you're missing half of life.
Don't you want to marry and have children and make some woman a
fine wife--I mean, a fine husband?"

In answer he only shivered.

"I used to be terribly timid myself," she lied kindly.  "But I saw
that I was missing half of life."

"It isn't a question of will power.  It's just that I'm a little
crazy on the subject.  A minute ago I had an instinct to throw a
stone at you.  I know it's terrible, so if you'll excuse me--"

He jumped down off the fence, but she cried quickly:  "Wait!  Let's
talk it all over."

He lingered reluctantly.

"Why, in Chicago," she said, "any man as good-looking as you could
have any girl he wanted.  Everyone would simply pursue him."

The idea seemed to distress him still further; his face grew so sad
that impulsively she moved nearer, but he swung one leg over the
fence.

"All right.  We'll talk about something else," she conceded.
"Isn't this the most dismal place you ever saw?  I was supposed to
be a speed in Lake Forest, so the family sentenced me to this, and
I've had the most KILL-ing month, just sitting and twirling my
thumbs.  Then yesterday I looked out the window and saw you."

"What do you mean you were a speed?" he inquired.

"Just sort of speedy--you know, sort of pash."

He got up--this time with an air of finality.

"You really must excuse me.  I know I'm an idiot on this woman
question, but there's nothing to do about it."

"Will you meet me here tomorrow?"

"Heavens, no!"

Josephine was suddenly angry; she had humbled herself enough for
one afternoon.  With a cold nod, she started homeward down the
lane.

"Wait!"

Now that there was thirty feet between them, his timidity had left
him.  She was tempted to go back, resisted the impulse with
difficulty.

"I'll be here tomorrow," she said coolly.

Walking slowly home, she saw, by instinct rather than logic, that
there was something here she failed to understand.  In general, a
lack of self-confidence was enough to disqualify any boy from her
approval; it was the unforgivable sin, the white flag, the refusal
of battle.  Yet now that this young man was out of sight, she saw
him as he had appeared the previous afternoon--unself-conscious,
probably arrogant, utterly debonair.  Again she wondered if the
unpleasantness between the families could be responsible for his
attitude.

In spite of their unsatisfactory conversation, she was happy.  In
the soft glow of the sunset it seemed certain that it would all
come right tomorrow.  Already the oppressive sense of being wasted
had deserted her.  The boy who had passed her window yesterday
afternoon was capable of anything--love, drama, or even that
desperate recklessness that she loved best of all.

Her mother was waiting on the veranda.

"I wanted to see you alone," she said, "because I thought Aunt
Gladys would be offended if you looked too delighted.  We're going
back to Lake Forest tomorrow."

"Mother!"

"Constance is announcing her engagement tomorrow and getting
married in ten days.  Malcolm Libby is in the State Department and
he's ordered abroad.  Isn't it wonderful?  Your sister's opening up
the Lake Forest house today."

"It'll be marvellous."  After a moment Josephine repeated, with
more conviction:  "Perfectly marvellous."

Lake Forest--she could feel the fast-beating excitement of it
already.  Yet there was something missing, as if the note of an
essential trumpet had become separated from the band.  For five
weeks she had passionately hated Island Farms, but glancing around
her in the gathering dusk, she felt rather sorry for it, a little
ashamed of her desertion.

Throughout dinner the odd feeling persisted.  She would be deep in
exciting thoughts that began, "Won't it be fun to--" then the
imminent brilliance would fade and there would be a stillness
inside her like the stillness of these Michigan nights.  That was
what was lacking in Lake Forest--a stillness for things to happen
in, for people to walk into.

"We'll be terribly busy," her mother said.  "Next week there'll be
bridesmaids in the house, and parties, and the wedding itself.  We
should have left tonight."

Josephine went up to her room immediately and sat looking out into
the darkness.  Too bad; a wasted summer after all.  If yesterday
had happened sooner she might have gone away with some sense of
having lived after all.  Too late.  "But there'll be lots of boys,"
she told herself--Ridgeway Saunders.

She could hear their confident lines, and somehow they rang silly
on her ears.  Suddenly she realized that what she was regretting
was not the lost past but the lost future, not what had not been
but what would never be.  She stood up, breathing quickly.

A few minutes later she left the house by a side door and crossed
the lawn to the gardener's gate.  She heard Dick call after her
uncertainly, but she did not answer.  It was dark and cool, and the
feeling that the summer was rushing away from her.  As if to
overtake it, she walked faster, and in ten minutes turned in at the
gate of the Dorrance house, set behind the jagged silhouettes of
many trees.  Someone on the veranda hailed her as she came near:

"Good evening.  I can't see who it is."

"It's the girl who was so fresh this afternoon."

She heard him catch his breath suddenly.

"May I sit here on the steps for a moment?  See?  Quite safe and
far away.  I came to say good-by, because we're going home
tomorrow."

"Are you really?"  She could not tell whether his tone showed
concern or relief.  "It'll be very quiet."

"I want to explain about this afternoon, because I don't want you
to think I was just being fresh.  Usually I like boys with more
experience, but I just thought that since we were the only ones
here, we might manage to have a good time, and there weren't any
days to waste."

"I see."  After a moment he asked, "What will you do in Lake
Forest?  Be a--a speed?"

"I don't much care what I do.  I've wasted the whole six weeks."

She heard him laugh.

"I gather from your tone that someone is going to have to pay for
it," he said.

"I hope so," she answered rather grimly.  She felt tears rise in
her eyes.  Everything was wrong.  Everything seemed to be fixed
against her.

"Please let me come up there on the settee," she asked suddenly.

There was a creak as it stopped swinging.

"Please don't.  I hate to ask you, but really I'll have to go if
you do.  Let's talk about--Do you like horses?"

She got up swiftly, mounted the steps and walked toward the corner
where he sat.

"No," she said, "I think that what I'd like would be to be liked by
you."

In the light of the moon just lifting over the woods his face was
positively haggard.  He jumped to his feet; then his hands were on
her arms and he was drawing her slowly toward him.

"You simply want to be kissed," he was saying through scarcely
opened lips.  "I knew it the first time I saw that mouth of yours--
that perfectly selfish, self-sufficient look that--"

Suddenly he dropped his arms and stepped away from her with a
gesture of horror.

"Don't stop!" she cried.  "Do anything, tell me anything, even if
it isn't complimentary.  I don't care."

But he had vaulted swiftly over the railing and, with his hands
clasping the back of his head, was walking across the lawn.  In a
minute she overtook him and stood beseechingly in his path, her
small bosom rising and falling.

"Why do you suppose I'm here?" he demanded suddenly.  "Do you think
I'm alone?"

"What--"

"My wife is with me."

Josephine shivered.

"Oh--oh--then why doesn't anybody know?"

"Because my wife is--my wife is colored."

If it had not been so dark Josephine would have seen that for an
instant he was laughing silently and uncontrollably.

"Oh," she repeated.

"I didn't know," he continued.

In spite of a subconscious scepticism, an uncanny feeling stole
over Josephine.

"What dealings could I have with a girl like you?"

She began to weep softly.

"Oh, I'm sorry.  If I could only help you."

"You can't help me."  He turned gruffly away.

"You want me to go."

He nodded.

"All right.  I'll go."

Still sobbing, she half walked, half backed away from him,
intimidated now, yet still hoping he would call to her.  When she
saw him for the last time from the gate, he was standing where she
had left him, his fine thin face clear and handsome in the suddenly
streaming light of an emergent moon.

She had gone a quarter of a mile down the road when she became
conscious of running footsteps behind her.  Before she could do
more than start and turn anxiously, a figure sprang out at her.  It
was her cousin, Dick.

"Oh!" she cried.  "You frightened me!"

"I followed you here.  You had no business going out at night like
this."

"What a sneaky thing!" she said contemptuously.

They walked along side by side.

"I heard you with that fellow.  You had a crush on him, didn't
you?"

"Will you be quiet!  What does a horrible little pill like you know
about anything?"

"I know a lot," said Dick glumly.  "I know there's too much of that
sort of thing at Lake Forest."

She scorned to answer; they reached her aunt's gate in silence.

"I tell you one thing," he said uncertainly.  "I'll bet you
wouldn't want your mother to know about this."

"You mean you're going to my mother?"

"Just hold your horses.  I was going to say I wouldn't say anything
about it--"

"I should hope not."

"--on one condition."

"Well?"

"The condition is--"  He fidgeted uncomfortably.  "You told me once
that a lot of girls at Lake Forest had kissed boys and never
thought anything about it."

"Yes."  Suddenly she guessed what was coming, and an astonished
laugh rose to her lips.

"Well, will you, then--kiss me?"

A vision of her mother arose--of a return to Lake Forest in chains.
Deciding quickly, she bent toward him.  Less than a minute later
she was in her room, almost hysterical with tears and laughter.
That, then, was the kiss with which destiny had seen fit to crown
the summer.


V


Josephine's sensational return to Lake Forest that August marked a
revision of opinion about her; it can be compared to the moment
when the robber bandit evolved through sheer power into the feudal
seignior.

To the three months of nervous energy conserved since Easter
beneath the uniform of her school were added six weeks of
resentment--added, that is, as the match might be said to be added
to the powder.  For Josephine exploded with an audible, visible
bang; for weeks thereafter pieces of her were gathered up from Lake
Forest's immaculate lawns.

It began quietly; it began with the long-awaited house party, on
the first evening of which she was placed next to the unfaithful
Ridgeway Saunders at dinner.

"I certainly felt pretty badly when you threw me over," Josephine
said indifferently--to rid him of any lingering idea that he had
thrown her over.  Once she had chilled him into wondering if, after
all, he had come off best in the affair, she turned to the man on
the other side.  By the time the salad was served, Ridgeway was
explaining himself to her.  And his girl from the East, Miss
Ticknor, was becoming increasingly aware of what an obnoxious
person Josephine Perry was.  She made the mistake of saying so to
Ridgeway.  Josephine made no such mistake; toward the end of dinner
she merely asked him the innocent question as to who was his friend
with the high button shoes.

By ten o'clock Josephine and Ridgeway were out in somebody's car--
far out where the colony becomes a prairie.  As minute by minute
she grew wearier of his softness, his anguish increased.  She let
him kiss her, just to be sure; and it was a desperate young man who
returned to his host's that night.

All next day his eyes followed her about miserably; Miss Ticknor
was unexpectedly called East the following afternoon.  This was
pathetic, but certainly someone had to pay for Josephine's summer.
That score settled, she returned her attention to her sister's
wedding.

Immediately on her return she had demanded a trousseau in keeping
with the splendor of a maid of honor, and under cover of the family
rush had so managed to equip herself as to add a charming year to
her age.  Doubtless this contributed to the change of attitude
toward her, for though her emotional maturity, cropping out of a
schoolgirl dress, had seemed not quite proper, in more sophisticated
clothes she was an incontestable little beauty; and as such she was
accepted by at least the male half of the wedding party.

Constance was openly hostile.  On the morning of the wedding
itself, she unburdened herself to her mother.

"I do hope you'll take her in hand after I'm gone, mother.  It's
really unendurable the way she's behaving.  None of the bridesmaids
have had a good time."

"Let's not worry," Mrs. Perry urged.  "After all, she's had a very
quiet summer."

"I'm not worrying about HER," said Constance indignantly.

The wedding party were lunching at the club, and Josephine found
herself next to a jovial usher who had arrived inebriated and
remained in that condition ever since.  However, it was early
enough in the day for him to be coherent.

"The belle of Chicago, the golden girl of the golden West.  Oh, why
didn't I come out here this summer?"

"I wasn't here.  I was up in a place called Island Farms."

"Ah!" he exclaimed.  "Ah-ha!  That accounts for a lot of things--
that accounts for the sudden pilgrimage of Sonny Dorrance."

"Of who?"

"The famous Sonny Dorrance, the shame of Harvard, but the maiden's
prayer.  Now don't tell me you didn't exchange a few warm glances
with Sonny Dorrance."

"But isn't he," she demanded faintly--"isn't he supposed to be--
married?"

He roared with laughter.

"Married--sure, married to a mulatto!  You didn't fall for THAT old
line.  He always pulls it when he's reacting from some violent
affair--that's to protect himself while he recovers.  You see, his
whole life has been cursed by that fatal beauty."

In a few minutes she had the story.  Apart from everything else,
Sonny Dorrance was fabulously rich--women had pursued him since he
was fifteen--married women, débutantes, chorus girls.  It was
legendary.

There actually had been plots to entangle him into marriage, to
entangle him into anything.  There was the girl who tried to kill
herself, there was the one who tried to kill him.  Then, this
spring, there was the annulled marriage business that had cost him
an election to Porcellian at Harvard, and was rumored to have cost
his father fifty thousand dollars.

"And now," Josephine asked tensely, "you say he doesn't like
women?"

"Sonny?  I tell you he's the most susceptible man in America.  This
last thing shook him, and so he keeps off admirers by telling them
anything.  But by this time next month he'll be involved again."

As he talked, the dining room faded out like a scene in a moving
picture, and Josephine was back at Island Farms, staring out the
window, as a young man appeared between the pine trees.

"He was afraid of me," she thought to herself, her heart tapping
like a machine gun.  "He thought I was like the others."

Half an hour later she interrupted her mother in the midst of the
wedding's last and most violent confusion.

"Mother, I want to go back to Island Farms for the rest of the
summer," she said at once.

Mrs. Perry looked at her in a daze, and Josephine repeated her
statement.

"Why, in less than a month you'll be starting back to school."

"I want to go anyhow."

"I simply can't understand you.  In the first place, you haven't
been invited, and in the second place, I think a little gayety is
good for you before you go back to school, and in the third place,
I want you here with me."

"Mother," Josephine wailed, "don't you understand?  I want to go!
You take me up there all summer when I don't want to go, and just
when I DO want to, you make me stay in this ghastly place.  Let me
tell you this isn't any place for a sixteen-year-old girl, if you
knew everything."

"What nonsense to be bothering me with just at this time!"

Josephine threw up her hands in despair; the tears were streaming
down her cheeks.

"It's ruining me here!" she cried.  "Nobody thinks of anything but
boys and dances from morning till night.  They go out in their cars
and kiss them from morning till night."

"Well, I know my little girl doesn't do anything like that."

Josephine hesitated, taken a little aback.

"Well, I will," she announced.  "I'm weak.  You told me I was.  I
always do what anybody tells me to do, and all these boys are just
simply immoral, that's all.  The first thing you know I'll be
entirely ruined, and then you'll be sorry you didn't let me go to
Island Farms.  You'll be sorry--"

She was working herself into hysteria.  Her distracted mother took
her by the shoulders and forced her down into a chair.

"I've never heard such silly talk.  If you weren't so old I'd spank
you.  If you keep this up you'll be punished."

Suddenly dry-eyed, Josephine got up and stalked out of the room.
Punished!  They had been punishing her all summer, and now they
refused to punish her, refused to send her away.  Oh, she was tired
of trying.  If she could think of something really awful to do, so
that they would send her away forever--

Mr. Malcolm Libby, the prospective bridegroom, happened upon her
fifteen minutes later, in an obscure corner of the garden.  He was
pacing restlessly about, steadying himself for the rehearsal at
four o'clock and for the ceremony two hours later.

"Why, hello!" he cried.  "Why, what's the matter?  You've been
crying."

He sat down on the bench, full of sympathy for Constance's little
sister.

"I'm not crying," she sobbed.  "I'm just angry."

"About Constance going away?  Don't you think I'll take good care
of her?"

Leaning over, he patted her hand.  If he had seen the look that
flashed suddenly across her face it would have alarmed him, for it
was curiously like the expression associated with a prominent
character in Faust.

When she spoke, her voice was calm, almost cool, and yet tenderly
sad:

"No, that wasn't it.  It was something else."

"Tell me about it.  Maybe I can help."

"I was crying"--she hesitated delicately--"I was crying because
Constance has all the luck."

Half an hour later when, with the rehearsal twenty minutes late,
the frantic bride-to-be came searching through the garden and
happened upon them suddenly, Malcolm Libby's arm was around
Josephine, who seemed dissolved in uncontrollable grief, and on his
face was a wildly harassed expression she had never seen there
before.  Constance gave a little gasping cry and sank down upon the
pebbled path.

The next hour passed in an uproar.  There was a doctor; there were
shut doors; there was Mr. Malcolm Libby in an agonized condition,
the sweat pouring off his brow, explaining to Mrs. Perry over and
over that he could explain if he could only see Constance.  There
was Josephine, tight-lipped, in a room, being talked to coldly by
various members of the family.  There was the clamor of arriving
guests; then frantic last minutes' patching up of things, with
Constance and Malcolm in each other's arms and Josephine,
unforgiven, being bundled into her dress.

Then a solemn silence fell and, moving to music, the maid of honor,
her head demurely bowed, followed her sister up the two aisles of
people that crowded the drawing-room.  It was a lovely, sad
wedding; the two sisters, light and dark, were a lovely contrast;
there was as much interest in one as in the other.  Josephine had
become a great beauty and the prophets were busy; she stood for the
radiant future, there at her sister's side.

The crush was so great at the reception that not until it was over
was Josephine missed.  And long before nine o'clock, before Mrs.
Perry had time to be uneasy, a note from the station had been
handed in at the door:


My Dearest Mother:  Ed Bement brought me here in his car, and I am
catching the train to Island Farms at seven.  I have wired the
housekeeper to meet me, so don't worry.  I feel I have behaved
TERRIBLY and am ashamed to FACE anyone, and I am punishing myself
as I deserve by going back to the SIMPLE life.  It is, after all,
better for a girl of sixteen, I feel, and when you think it over
you will agree.  With dearest love.

                                                    Josephine.


After all, thought Mrs. Perry, perhaps it was just as well.  Her
husband was really angry, and she herself was exhausted and didn't
feel up to another problem at the moment.  Perhaps a nice quiet
place was best.










A NIGHT AT THE FAIR


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


The Saturday Evening Post (July 21, 1928)



The two cities were separated only by a thin well-bridged river;
their tails curling over the banks met and mingled, and at the
juncture, under the jealous eye of each, lay, every fall, the State
Fair.  Because of this advantageous position, and because of the
agricultural eminence of the state, the fair was one of the most
magnificent in America.  There were immense exhibits of grain,
livestock and farming machinery; there were horse races and
automobile races and, lately, aeroplanes that really left the
ground; there was a tumultuous Midway with Coney Island thrillers
to whirl you through space, and a whining, tinkling hoochie-coochie
show.  As a compromise between the serious and the trivial, a grand
exhibition of fireworks, culminating in a representation of the
Battle of Gettysburg, took place in the Grand Concourse every
night.

At the late afternoon of a hot September day two boys of fifteen,
somewhat replete with food and pop, and fatigued by eight hours of
constant motion, issued from the Penny Arcade.  The one with dark,
handsome, eager eyes was, according to the cosmic inscription in
his last year's Ancient History, "Basil Duke Lee, Holly Avenue, St.
Paul, Minnesota, United States, North America, Western Hemisphere,
the World, the Universe."  Though slightly shorter than his
companion, he appeared taller, for he projected, so to speak, from
short trousers, while Riply Buckner, Jr., had graduated into long
ones the week before.  This event, so simple and natural, was
having a disrupting influence on the intimate friendship between
them that had endured for several years.

During that time Basil, the imaginative member of the firm, had
been the dominating partner, and the displacement effected by two
feet of blue serge filled him with puzzled dismay--in fact, Riply
Buckner had become noticeably indifferent to the pleasure of
Basil's company in public.  His own assumption of long trousers
had seemed to promise a liberation from the restraints and
inferiorities of boyhood, and the companionship of one who was, in
token of his short pants, still a boy was an unwelcome reminder of
how recent was his own metamorphosis.  He scarcely admitted this to
himself, but a certain shortness of temper with Basil, a certain
tendency to belittle him with superior laughter, had been in
evidence all afternoon.  Basil felt the new difference keenly.  In
August a family conference had decided that even though he was
going East to school, he was too small for long trousers.  He had
countered by growing an inch and a half in a fortnight, which added
to his reputation for unreliability, but led him to hope that his
mother might be persuaded, after all.

Coming out of the stuffy tent into the glow of sunset, the two boys
hesitated, glancing up and down the crowded highway with
expressions compounded of a certain ennui and a certain
inarticulate yearning.  They were unwilling to go home before it
became necessary, yet they knew they had temporarily glutted their
appetite for sights; they wanted a change in the tone, the motif,
of the day.  Near them was the parking space, as yet a modest yard;
and as they lingered indecisively, their eyes were caught and held
by a small car, red in color and slung at that proximity to the
ground which indicated both speed of motion and speed of life.  It
was a Blatz Wildcat, and for the next five years it represented the
ambition of several million American boys.  Occupying it, in the
posture of aloof exhaustion exacted by the sloping seat, was a
blonde, gay, baby-faced girl.

The two boys stared.  She bent upon them a single cool glance and
then returned to her avocation of reclining in a Blatz Wildcat and
looking haughtily at the sky.  The two boys exchanged a glance, but
made no move to go.  They watched the girl--when they felt that
their stares were noticeable they dropped their eyes and gazed at
the car.

After several minutes a young man with a very pink face and pink
hair, wearing a yellow suit and hat and drawing on yellow gloves,
appeared and got into the car.  There was a series of frightful
explosions; then, with a measured tup-tup-tup from the open cut-
out, insolent, percussive and thrilling as a drum, the car and the
girl and the young man whom they had recognized as Speed Paxton
slid smoothly away.

Basil and Riply turned and strolled back thoughtfully toward the
Midway.  They knew that Speed Paxton was dimly terrible--the wild
and pampered son of a local brewer--but they envied him--to ride
off into the sunset in such a chariot, into the very hush and
mystery of night, beside him the mystery of that baby-faced girl.
It was probably this envy that made them begin to shout when they
perceived a tall youth of their own age issuing from a shooting
gallery.

"Oh, El!  Hey, El!  Wait a minute!"

Elwood Leaming turned around and waited.  He was the dissipated one
among the nice boys of the town--he had drunk beer, he had learned
from chauffeurs, he was already thin from too many cigarettes.  As
they greeted him eagerly, the hard, wise expression of a man of the
world met them in his half-closed eyes.

"Hello, Rip.  Put it there, Rip.  Hello, Basil, old boy.  Put it
there."

"What you doing, El?" Riply asked.

"Nothing.  What are you doing?"

"Nothing."

Elwood Leaming narrowed his eyes still further, seemed to give
thought, and then made a decisive clicking sound with his teeth.

"Well, what do you say we pick something up?" he suggested.  "I saw
some pretty good stuff around here this afternoon."

Riply and Basil drew tense, secret breaths.  A year before they had
been shocked because Elwood went to the burlesque shows at the Star--
now here he was holding the door open to his own speedy life.

The responsibility of his new maturity impelled Riply to appear
most eager.  "All right with me," he said heartily.

He looked at Basil.

"All right with me," mumbled Basil.

Riply laughed, more from nervousness than from derision.  "Maybe
you better grow up first, Basil."  He looked at Elwood, seeking
approval.  "You better stick around till you get to be a man."

"Oh, dry up!" retorted Basil.  "How long have you had yours?  Just
a week!"

But he realized that there was a gap separating him from these two,
and it was with a sense of tagging them that he walked along
beside.

Glancing from right to left with the expression of a keen and
experienced frontiersman, Elwood Leaming led the way.  Several
pairs of strolling girls met his mature glance and smiled
encouragingly, but he found them unsatisfactory--too fat, too plain
or too hard.  All at once their eyes fell upon two who sauntered
along a little ahead of them, and they increased their pace, Elwood
with confidence, Riply with its nervous counterfeit and Basil
suddenly in the grip of wild excitement.

They were abreast of them.  Basil's heart was in his throat.  He
looked away as he heard Elwood's voice.

"Hello, girls!  How are you this evening?"

Would they call for the police?  Would his mother and Riply's
suddenly turn the corner?

"Hello, yourself, kiddo!"

"Where you going, girls?"

"Nowhere."

"Well, let's all go together."

Then all of them were standing in a group and Basil was relieved to
find that they were only girls his own age, after all.  They were
pretty, with clear skins and red lips and maturely piled up hair.
One he immediately liked better than the other--her voice was
quieter and she was shy.  Basil was glad when Elwood walked on with
the bolder one, leaving him and Riply to follow with the other,
behind.

The first lights of the evening were springing into pale existence;
the afternoon crowd had thinned a little, and the lanes, empty of
people, were heavy with the rich various smells of pop corn and
peanuts, molasses and dust and cooking Wienerwurst and a not-
unpleasant overtone of animals and hay.  The Ferris wheel, pricked
out now in lights, revolved leisurely through the dusk; a few empty
cars of the roller coaster rattled overhead.  The heat had blown
off and there was the crisp stimulating excitement of Northern
autumn in the air.

They walked.  Basil felt that there was some way of talking to this
girl, but he could manage nothing in the key of Elwood Leaming's
intense and confidential manner to the girl ahead--as if he had
inadvertently discovered a kinship of tastes and of hearts.  So to
save the progression from absolute silence--for Riply's contribution
amounted only to an occasional burst of silly laughter--Basil
pretended an interest in the sights they passed and kept up a sort
of comment thereon.

"There's the six-legged calf.  Have you seen it?"

"No, I haven't."

"There's where the man rides the motorcycle around.  Did you go
there?"

"No, I didn't."

"Look!  They're beginning to fill the balloon.  I wonder what time
they start the fireworks."

"Have you been to the fireworks?"

"No, I'm going tomorrow night.  Have you?"

"Yes, I been every night.  My brother works there.  He's one of
them that helps set them off."

"Oh!"

He wondered if her brother cared that she had been picked up by
strangers.  He wondered even more if she felt as silly as he.  It
must be getting late, and he had promised to be home by half-past
seven on pain of not being allowed out tomorrow night.  He walked
up beside Elwood.

"Hey, El," he asked, "where we going?"

Elwood turned to him and winked.  "We're going around the Old
Mill."

"Oh!"

Basil dropped back again--became aware that in his temporary
absence Riply and the girl had linked arms.  A twinge of jealousy
went through him and he inspected the girl again and with more
appreciation, finding her prettier than he had thought.  Her eyes,
dark and intimate, seemed to have wakened at the growing brilliance
of the illumination overhead; there was the promise of excitement
in them now, like the promise of the cooling night.

He considered taking her other arm, but it was too late; she and
Riply were laughing together at something--rather, at nothing.  She
had asked him what he laughed at all the time and he had laughed
again for an answer.  Then they both laughed hilariously and
sporadically together.

Basil looked disgustedly at Riply.  "I never heard such a silly
laugh in my life," he said indignantly.

"Didn't you?" chuckled Riply Buckner.  "Didn't you, little boy?"

He bent double with laughter and the girl joined in.  The words
"little boy" had fallen on Basil like a jet of cold water.  In his
excitement he had forgotten something, as a cripple might forget
his limp only to discover it when he began to run.

"You think you're so big!" he exclaimed.  "Where'd you get the
pants?  Where'd you get the pants?"  He tried to work this up with
gusto and was about to add: "They're your father's pants," when he
remembered that Riply's father, like his own, was dead.

The couple ahead reached the entrance to the Old Mill and waited
for them.  It was an off hour, and half a dozen scows bumped in the
wooden offing, swayed by the mild tide of the artificial river.
Elwood and his girl got into the front seat and he promptly put his
arm around her.  Basil helped the other girl into the rear seat,
but, dispirited, he offered no resistance when Riply wedged in and
sat down between.

They floated off, immediately entering upon a long echoing
darkness.  Somewhere far ahead a group in another boat were
singing, their voices now remote and romantic, now nearer and yet
more mysterious, as the canal doubled back and the boats passed
close to each other with an invisible veil between.

The three boys yelled and called, Basil attempting by his
vociferousness and variety to outdo Riply in the girl's eyes, but
after a few moments there was no sound except his own voice and the
continual bump-bump of the boat against the wooden sides, and he
knew without looking that Riply had put his arm about the girl's
shoulder.

They slid into a red glow--a stage set of hell, with grinning
demons and lurid paper fires--he made out that Elwood and his girl
sat cheek to cheek--then again into the darkness, with the gently
lapping water and the passing of the singing boat now near, now far
away.  For a while Basil pretended that he was interested in this
other boat, calling to them, commenting on their proximity.  Then
he discovered that the scow could be rocked and took to this poor
amusement until Elwood Leaming turned around indignantly and cried:

"Hey!  What are you trying to do?"

They came out finally to the entrance and the two couples broke
apart.  Basil jumped miserably ashore.

"Give us some more tickets," Riply cried.  "We want to go around
again."

"Not me," said Basil with elaborate indifference.  "I have to go
home."

Riply began to laugh in derision and triumph.  The girl laughed
too.

"Well, so long, little boy," Riply cried hilariously.

"Oh, shut up!  So long, Elwood."

"So long, Basil."

The boat was already starting off; arms settled again about the
girls' shoulders.

"So long, little boy!"

"So long, you big cow!" Basil cried.  "Where'd you get the pants?
Where'd you get the pants?"

But the boat had already disappeared into the dark mouth of the
tunnel, leaving the echo of Riply's taunting laughter behind.



It is an ancient tradition that all boys are obsessed with the idea
of being grown.  This is because they occasionally give voice to
their impatience with the restraints of youth, while those great
stretches of time when they are more than content to be boys find
expression in action and not in words.  Sometimes Basil wanted to
be just a little bit older, but no more.  The question of long
pants had not seemed vital to him--he wanted them, but as a costume
they had no such romantic significance as, for example, a football
suit or an officer's uniform, or even the silk hat and opera cape
in which gentlemen burglars were wont to prowl the streets of New
York by night.

But when he awoke next morning they were the most important
necessity in his life.  Without them he was cut off from his
contemporaries, laughed at by a boy whom he had hitherto led.  The
actual fact that last night some chickens had preferred Riply to
himself was of no importance in itself, but he was fiercely
competitive and he resented being required to fight with one hand
tied behind his back.  He felt that parallel situations would occur
at school, and that was unbearable.  He approached his mother at
breakfast in a state of wild excitement.

"Why, Basil," she protested in surprise, "I thought when we talked
it over you didn't especially care."

"I've got to have them," he declared.  "I'd rather be dead than go
away to school without them."

"Well, there's no need of being silly."

"It's true--I'd rather be dead.  If I can't have long trousers I
don't see any use in my going away to school."

His emotion was such that the vision of his demise began actually
to disturb his mother.

"Now stop that silly talk and come and eat your breakfast.  You can
go down and buy some at Barton Leigh's this morning."

Mollified, but still torn by the urgency of his desire, Basil
strode up and down the room.

"A boy is simply helpless without them," he declared vehemently.
The phrase pleased him and he amplified it.  "A boy is simply and
utterly helpless without them.  I'd rather be dead than go away to
school--"

"Basil, stop talking like that.  Somebody has been teasing you
about it."

"Nobody's been teasing me," he denied indignantly--"nobody at all."

After breakfast, the maid called him to the phone.

"This is Riply," said a tentative voice.  Basil acknowledged the
fact coldly.  "You're not sore about last night, are you?" Riply
asked.

"Me?  No.  Who said I was sore?"

"Nobody.  Well, listen, you know about us going to the fireworks
together tonight."

"Yes."  Basil's voice was still cold.

"Well, one of those girls--the one Elwood had--has got a sister
that's even nicer than she is, and she can come out tonight and you
could have her.  And we thought we could meet about eight, because
the fireworks don't start till nine."

"What do?"

"Well, we could go on the Old Mill again.  We went around three
times more last night."

There was a moment's silence.  Basil looked to see if his mother's
door was closed.

"Did you kiss yours?" he demanded into the transmitter.

"Sure I did!"  Over the wire came the ghost of a silly laugh.
"Listen, El thinks he can get his auto.  We could call for you at
seven."

"All right," agreed Basil gruffly, and he added, "I'm going down
and get some long pants this morning."

"Are you?"  Again Basil detected ghostly laughter.  "Well, you be
ready at seven tonight."

Basil's uncle met him at Barton Leigh's clothing store at ten, and
Basil felt a touch of guilt at having put his family to all this
trouble and expense.  On his uncle's advice, he decided finally on
two suits--a heavy chocolate brown for every day and a dark blue
for formal wear.  There were certain alterations to be made but it
was agreed that one of the suits was to be delivered without fail
that afternoon.

His momentary contriteness at having been so expensive made him
save carfare by walking home from downtown.  Passing along Crest
Avenue, he paused speculatively to vault the high hydrant in front
of the Van Schellinger house, wondering if one did such things in
long trousers and if he would ever do it again.  He was impelled to
leap it two or three times as a sort of ceremonial farewell, and
was so engaged when the Van Schellinger limousine turned into the
drive and stopped at the front door.

"Oh, Basil," a voice called.

A fresh delicate face, half buried under a mass of almost white
curls, was turned toward him from the granite portico of the city's
second largest mansion.

"Hello, Gladys."

"Come here a minute, Basil."

He obeyed.  Gladys Van Schellinger was a year younger than Basil--a
tranquil, carefully nurtured girl who, so local tradition had it,
was being brought up to marry in the East.  She had a governess and
always played with a certain few girls at her house or theirs, and
was not allowed the casual freedom of children in a Midwestern
city.  She was never present at such rendezvous as the Whartons'
yard, where the others played games in the afternoons.

"Basil, I wanted to ask you something--are you going to the State
Fair tonight?"

"Why, yes, I am."

"Well, wouldn't you like to come and sit in our box and watch the
fireworks?"

Momentarily he considered the matter.  He wanted to accept, but he
was mysteriously impelled to refuse--to forgo a pleasure in order
to pursue a quest that in cold logic did not interest him at all.

"I can't.  I'm awfully sorry."

A shadow of discontent crossed Gladys' face.  "Oh?  Well, come and
see me sometime soon, Basil.  In a few weeks I'm going East to
school."

He walked on up the street in a state of dissatisfaction.  Gladys
Van Schellinger had never been his girl, nor indeed anyone's girl,
but the fact that they were starting away to school at the same
time gave him a feeling of kinship for her--as if they had been
selected for the glamorous adventure of the East, chosen together
for a high destiny that transcended the fact that she was rich and
he was only comfortable.  He was sorry that he could not sit with
her in her box tonight.

By three o'clock, Basil, reading the Crimson Sweater up in his
room, began giving attentive ear to every ring at the bell.  He
would go to the head of the stairs, lean over and call, "Hilda, was
that a package for me?"  And at four, dissatisfied with her
indifference, her lack of feeling for important things, her
slowness in going to and returning from the door, he moved
downstairs and began attending to it himself.  But nothing came.
He phoned Barton Leigh's and was told by a busy clerk:  "You'll get
that suit.  I'll guarantee that you'll get that suit."  But he did
not believe in the clerk's honor and he moved out on the porch and
watched for Barton Leigh's delivery wagon.

His mother came home at five.  "There were probably more
alterations than they thought," she suggested helpfully.  "You'll
probably get it tomorrow morning."

"Tomorrow morning!" he exclaimed incredulously.  "I've got to have
that suit tonight."

"Well, I wouldn't be too disappointed if I were you, Basil.  The
stores all close at half-past five."

Basil took one agitated look up and down Holly Avenue.  Then he got
his cap and started on a run for the street car at the corner.  A
moment later a cautious afterthought caused him to retrace his
steps with equal rapidity.

"If they get here, keep them for me," he instructed his mother--a
man who thought of everything.

"All right," she promised dryly, "I will."

It was later than he thought.  He had to wait for a trolley, and
when he reached Barton Leigh's he saw with horror that the doors
were locked and the blinds drawn.  He intercepted a last clerk
coming out and explained vehemently that he had to have his suit
tonight.  The clerk knew nothing about the matter. . . .  Was Basil
Mr. Schwartze?

No, Basil was not Mr. Schwartze.  After a vague argument wherein he
tried to convince the clerk that whoever promised him the suit
should be fired, Basil went dispiritedly home.

He would not go to the fair without his suit--he would not go at
all.  He would sit at home and luckier boys would go adventuring
along its Great White Way.  Mysterious girls, young and reckless,
would glide with them through the enchanted darkness of the Old
Mill, but because of the stupidity, selfishness and dishonesty of a
clerk in a clothing store he would not be there.  In a day or so
the fair would be over--forever--those girls, of all living girls
the most intangible, the most desirable, that sister, said to be
nicest of all--would be lost out of his life.  They would ride off
in Blatz Wildcats into the moonlight without Basil having kissed
them.  No, all his life--though he would lose the clerk his
position:  "You see now what your act did to me"--he would look
back with infinite regret upon that irretrievable hour.  Like most
of us, he was unable to perceive that he would have any desires in
the future equivalent to those that possessed him now.

He reached home; the package had not arrived.  He moped dismally
about the house, consenting at half-past six to sit silently at
dinner with his mother, his elbows on the table.

"Haven't you any appetite, Basil?"

"No, thanks," he said absently, under the impression he had been
offered something.

"You're not going away to school for two more weeks.  Why should it
matter--"

"Oh, that isn't the reason I can't eat.  I had a sort of headache
all afternoon."

Toward the end of the meal his eye focused abstractedly on some
slices of angel cake; with the air of a somnambulist, he ate three.

At seven he heard the sounds that should have ushered in a night of
romantic excitement.

The Leaming car stopped outside, and a moment later Riply Buckner
rang the bell.  Basil rose gloomily.

"I'll go," he said to Hilda.  And then to his mother, with vague
impersonal reproach, "Excuse me a minute.  I just want to tell them
I can't go to the fair tonight."

"But of course you can go, Basil.  Don't be silly.  Just because--"

He scarcely heard her.  Opening the door, he faced Riply on the
steps.  Beyond was the Leaming limousine, an old high car,
quivering in silhouette against the harvest moon.

Clop-clop-clop!  Up the street came the Barton Leigh delivery
wagon.  Clop-clop!  A man jumped out, dumped an iron anchor to the
pavement, hurried along the street, turned away, turned back again,
came toward them with a long square box in his hand.

"You'll have to wait a minute," Basil was calling wildly.  "It
can't make any difference.  I'll dress in the library.  Look here,
if you're a friend of mine, you'll wait a minute."  He stepped out
on the porch.  "Hey, El, I've just got my--got to change my
clothes.  You can wait a minute, can't you?"

The spark of a cigarette flushed in the darkness as El spoke to the
chauffeur; the quivering car came to rest with a sigh and the skies
filled suddenly with stars.



Once again the fair--but differing from the fair of the afternoon
as a girl in the daytime differs from her radiant presentation of
herself at night.  The substance of the cardboard booths and
plaster palaces was gone, the forms remained.  Outlined in lights,
these forms suggested things more mysterious and entrancing than
themselves, and the people strolling along the network of little
Broadways shared this quality, as their pale faces singly and in
clusters broke the half darkness.

The boys hurried to their rendezvous, finding the girls in the deep
shadow of the Temple of Wheat.  Their forms had scarcely merged
into a group when Basil became aware that something was wrong.  In
growing apprehension, he glanced from face to face and, as the
introductions were made, he realized the appalling truth--the
younger sister was, in point of fact, a fright, squat and dingy,
with a bad complexion brooding behind a mask of cheap pink powder
and a shapeless mouth that tried ceaselessly to torture itself into
the mold of charm.

In a daze he heard Riply's girl say, "I don't know whether I ought
to go with you.  I had a sort of date with another fellow I met
this afternoon."

Fidgeting, she looked up and down the street, while Riply, in
astonishment and dismay, tried to take her arm.

"Come on," he urged.  "Didn't I have a date with you first?"

"But I didn't know whether you'd come or not," she said perversely.

Elwood and the two sisters added their entreaties.

"Maybe I could go on the Ferris wheel," she said grudgingly, "but
not the Old Mill.  This fellow would be sore."

Riply's confidence reeled with the blow; his mouth fell ajar, his
hand desperately pawed her arm.  Basil stood glancing now with
agonized politeness at his own girl, now at the others, with an
expression of infinite reproach.  Elwood alone was successful and
content.

"Let's go on the Ferris wheel," he said impatiently.  "We can't
stand here all night."

At the ticket booth the recalcitrant Olive hesitated once more,
frowning and glancing about as if she still hoped Riply's rival
would appear.

But when the swooping cars came to rest she let herself be
persuaded in, and the three couples, with their troubles, were
hoisted slowly into the air.

As the car rose, following the imagined curve of the sky, it
occurred to Basil how much he would have enjoyed it in other
company, or even alone, the fair twinkling beneath him with new
variety, the velvet quality of the darkness that is on the edge of
light and is barely permeated by its last attenuations.  But he was
unable to hurt anyone whom he thought of as an inferior.  After a
minute he turned to the girl beside him.

"Do you live in St. Paul or Minneapolis?" he inquired formally.

"St. Paul.  I go to Number 7 School."  Suddenly she moved closer.
"I bet you're not so slow," she encouraged him.

He put his arm around her shoulder and found it warm.  Again they
reached the top of the wheel and the sky stretched out overhead,
again they lapsed down through gusts of music from remote
calliopes.  Keeping his eyes turned carefully away, Basil pressed
her to him, and as they rose again into darkness, leaned and kissed
her cheek.

The significance of the contact stirred him, but out of the corner
of his eye he saw her face--he was thankful when a gong struck
below and the machine settled slowly to rest.

The three couples were scarcely reunited outside when Olive uttered
a yelp of excitement.

"There he is!" she cried.  "That Bill Jones I met this afternoon--
that I had the date with."

A youth of their own age was approaching, stepping like a circus
pony and twirling, with the deftness of a drum major, a small
rattan cane.  Under the cautious alias, the three boys recognized a
friend and contemporary--none other than the fascinating Hubert
Blair.

He came nearer.  He greeted them all with a friendly chuckle.  He
took off his cap, spun it, dropped it, caught it, set it jauntily
on the side of his head.

"You're a nice one," he said to Olive.  "I waited here fifteen
minutes this evening."

He pretended to belabor her with the cane; she giggled with
delight.  Hubert Blair possessed the exact tone that all girls of
fourteen, and a somewhat cruder type of grown women, find
irresistible.  He was a gymnastic virtuoso and his figure was in
constant graceful motion; he had a jaunty piquant nose, a disarming
laugh and a shrewd talent for flattery.  When he took a piece of
toffee from his pocket, placed it on his forehead, shook it off and
caught it in his mouth, it was obvious to any disinterested
observer that Riply was destined to see no more of Olive that
night.

So fascinated were the group that they failed to see Basil's eyes
brighten with a ray of hope, his feet take four quick steps
backward with all the guile of a gentleman burglar, his torso
writhe through the parting of a tent wall into the deserted
premises of the Harvester and Tractor Show.  Once safe, Basil's
tensity relaxed, and as he considered Riply's unconsciousness of
the responsibilities presently to devolve upon him, he bent double
with hilarious laughter in the darkness.



Ten minutes later, in a remote part of the fairgrounds, a youth
made his way briskly and cautiously toward the fireworks exhibit,
swinging as he walked a recently purchased rattan cane.  Several
girls eyed him with interest, but he passed them haughtily; he was
weary of people for a brief moment--a moment which he had almost
mislaid in the bustle of life--he was enjoying his long pants.

He bought a bleacher seat and followed the crowd around the race
track, seeking his section.  A few Union troops were moving cannon
about in preparation for the Battle of Gettysburg, and, stopping to
watch them, he was hailed by Gladys Van Schellinger from the box
behind.

"Oh, Basil, don't you want to come and sit with us?"

He turned about and was absorbed.  Basil exchanged courtesies with
Mr. and Mrs. Van Schellinger and he was affably introduced to
several other people as "Alice Riley's boy," and a chair was placed
for him beside Gladys in front.

"Oh, Basil," she whispered, glowing at him, "isn't this fun?"

Distinctly, it was.  He felt a vast wave of virtue surge through
him.  How anyone could have preferred the society of those common
girls was at this moment incomprehensible.

"Basil, won't it be fun to go East?  Maybe we'll be on the same
train."

"I can hardly wait," he agreed gravely.  "I've got on long pants.
I had to have them to go away to school."

One of the ladies in the box leaned toward him.  "I know your
mother very well," she said.  "And I know another friend of yours.
I'm Riply Buckner's aunt."

"Oh, yes!"

"Riply's such a nice boy," beamed Mrs. Van Schillinger.

And then, as if the mention of his name had evoked him, Riply
Buckner came suddenly into sight.  Along the now empty and brightly
illuminated race track came a short but monstrous procession, a
sort of Lilliputian burlesque of the wild gay life.  At its head
marched Hubert Blair and Olive, Hubert prancing and twirling his
cane like a drum major to the accompaniment of her appreciative
screams of laughter.  Next followed Elwood Leaming and his young
lady, leaning so close together that they walked with difficulty,
apparently wrapped in each other's arms.  And bringing up the rear
without glory were Riply Buckner and Basil's late companion,
rivaling Olive in exhibitionist sound.

Fascinated, Basil stared at Riply, the expression of whose face was
curiously mixed.  At moments he would join in the general tone of
the parade with silly guffaw, at others a pained expression would
flit across his face, as if he doubted that, after all, the evening
was a success.

The procession was attracting considerable notice--so much that not
even Riply was aware of the particular attention focused upon him
from this box, though he passed by it four feet away.  He was out
of hearing when a curious rustling sigh passed over its inhabitants
and a series of discreet whispers began.

"What funny girls," Gladys said.  "Was that first boy Hubert
Blair?"

"Yes."  Basil was listening to a fragment of conversation behind:

"His mother will certainly hear of this in the morning."

As long as Riply had been in sight, Basil had been in an agony of
shame for him, but now a new wave of virtue, even stronger than the
first, swept over him.  His memory of the incident would have
reached actual happiness, save for the fact that Riply's mother
might not let him go away to school.  And a few minutes later, even
that seemed endurable.  Yet Basil was not a mean boy.  The natural
cruelty of his species toward the doomed was not yet disguised by
hypocrisy--that was all.

In a burst of glory, to the alternate strains of Dixie and The Star-
Spangled Banner, the Battle of Gettysburg ended.  Outside by the
waiting cars, Basil, on a sudden impulse, went up to Riply's aunt.

"I think it would be sort of a--a mistake to tell Riply's mother.
He didn't do any harm.  He--"

Annoyed by the event of the evening, she turned on him cool,
patronizing eyes.

"I shall do as I think best," she said briefly.

He frowned.  Then he turned and got into the Van Schellinger
limousine.

Sitting beside Gladys in the little seats, he loved her suddenly.
His hand swung gently against hers from time to time and he felt
the warm bond that they were both going away to school tightened
around them and pulling them together.

"Can't you come and see me tomorrow?" she urged him.  "Mother's
going to be away and she says I can have anybody I like."

"All right."

As the car slowed up for Basil's house, she leaned toward him
swiftly.  "Basil--"

He waited.  Her breath was warm on his cheek.  He wanted her to
hurry, or, when the engine stopped, her parents, dozing in back,
might hear what she said.  She seemed beautiful to him then; that
vague unexciting quality about her was more than compensated for by
her exquisite delicacy, the fine luxury of her life.

"Basil--Basil, when you come tomorrow, will you bring that Hubert
Blair?"

The chauffeur opened the door and Mr. and Mrs. Van Schellinger woke
up with a start.  When the car had driven off, Basil stood looking
after it thoughtfully until it turned the corner of the street.










A SHORT TRIP HOME


by
 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)
 

Saturday Evening Post (17 December 1927)



Author's Note: In a moment of hasty misjudgment a whole paragraph
of description was lifted out of this tale where it originated, and
properly belongs, and applied to quite a different character in a
novel of mine.  I have ventured nonetheless to leave it here, even
at the risk of seeming to serve warmed-over fare.


I was near her, for I had lingered behind in order to get the short
walk with her from the living room to the front door.  That was a
lot, for she had flowered suddenly and I, being a man and only a
year older, hadn't flowered at all, had scarcely dared to come near
her in the week we'd been home.  Nor was I going to say anything in
that walk of ten feet, or touch her; but I had a vague hope she'd
do something, give a gay little performance of some sort, personal
only in so far as we were alone together.

She had bewitchment suddenly in the twinkle of short hairs on her
neck, in the sure, clear confidence that at about eighteen begins
to deepen and sing in attractive American girls.  The lamp light
shopped in the yellow strands of her hair.

Already she was sliding into another world--the world of Joe Jelke
and Jim Cathcart waiting for us now in the car.  In another year
she would pass beyond me forever.

As I waited, feeling the others outside in the snowy night, feeling
the excitement of Christmas week and the excitement of Ellen here,
blooming away, filling the room with "sex appeal"--a wretched
phrase to express a quality that isn't like that at all--a maid
came in from the dining room, spoke to Ellen quietly and handed her
a note.  Ellen read it and her eyes faded down, as when the current
grows weak on rural circuits, and smouldered off into space.  Then
she gave me an odd look--in which I probably didn't show--and
without a word, followed the maid into the dining room and beyond.
I sat turning over the pages of a magazine for a quarter of an
hour.

Joe Jelke came in, red-faced from the cold, his white silk muffler
gleaming at the neck of his fur coat.  He was a senior at New
Haven, I was a sophomore.  He was prominent, a member of Scroll and
Keys, and, in my eyes, very distinguished and handsome.

"Isn't Ellen coming?"

"I don't know," I answered discreetly.  "She was all ready."

"Ellen!" he called.  "Ellen!"

He had left the front door open behind him and a great cloud of
frosty air rolled in from outside.  He went halfway up the stairs--
he was a familiar in the house--and called again, till Mrs. Baker
came to the banister and said that Ellen was below.  Then the maid,
a little excited, appeared in the dining-room door.

"Mr. Jelke," she called in a low voice.

Joe's face fell as he turned toward her, sensing bad news.

"Miss Ellen says for you to go on to the party.  She'll come
later."

"What's the matter?"

"She can't come now.  She'll come later."

He hesitated, confused.  It was the last big dance of vacation, and
he was mad about Ellen.  He had tried to give her a ring for
Christmas, and failing that, got her to accept a gold mesh bag that
must have cost two hundred dollars.  He wasn't the only one--there
were three or four in the same wild condition, and all in the ten
days she'd been home--but his chance came first, for he was rich
and gracious and at that moment the "desirable" boy of St. Paul.
To me it seemed impossible that she could prefer another, but the
rumor was she'd described Joe as much too perfect.  I suppose he
lacked mystery for her, and when a man is up against that with a
young girl who isn't thinking of the practical side of marriage
yet--well--.

"She's in the kitchen," Joe said angrily.

"No, she's not."  The maid was defiant and a little scared.

"She is."

"She went out the back way, Mr. Jelke."

"I'm going to see."

I followed him.  The Swedish servants washing dishes looked up
sideways at our approach and an interested crashing of pans marked
our passage through.  The storm door, unbolted, was flapping in the
wind and as we walked out into the snowy yard we saw the tail light
of a car turn the corner at the end of the back alley.

"I'm going after her," Joe said slowly.  "I don't understand this
at all."

I was too awed by the calamity to argue.  We hurried to his car and
drove in a fruitless, despairing zigzag all over the residence
section, peering into every machine on the streets.  It was half an
hour before the futility of the affair began to dawn upon him--St.
Paul is a city of almost three hundred thousand people--and Jim
Cathcart reminded him that we had another girl to stop for.  Like a
wounded animal he sank into a melancholy mass of fur in the corner,
from which position he jerked upright every few minutes and waved
himself backward and forward a little in protest and despair.

Jim's girl was ready and impatient, but after what had happened her
impatience didn't seem important.  She looked lovely though.
That's one thing about Christmas vacation--the excitement of growth
and change and adventure in foreign parts transforming the people
you've known all your life.  Joe Jelke was polite to her in a daze--
he indulged in one burst of short, loud, harsh laughter by way of
conversation--and we drove to the hotel.

The chauffeur approached it on the wrong side--the side on which
the line of cars was not putting forth guests--and because of that
we came suddenly upon Ellen Baker just getting out of a small
coupé.  Even before we came to a stop, Joe Jelke had jumped
excitedly from the car.

Ellen turned toward us, a faintly distracted look--perhaps of
surprise, but certainly not of alarm--in her face; in fact, she
didn't seem very aware of us.  Joe approached her with a stern,
dignified, injured and, I thought, just exactly correct reproof in
his expression.  I followed.

Seated in the coupé--he had not dismounted to help Ellen out--was a
hard thin-faced man of about thirty-five with an air of being
scarred, and a slight sinister smile.  His eyes were a sort of
taunt to the whole human family--they were the eyes of an animal,
sleepy and quiescent in the presence of another species.  They were
helpless yet brutal, unhopeful yet confident.  It was as if they
felt themselves powerless to originate activity, but infinitely
capable of profiting by a single gesture of weakness in another.

Vaguely I placed him as one of the sort of men whom I had been
conscious of from my earliest youth as "hanging around"--leaning
with one elbow on the counters of tobacco stores, watching, through
heaven knows what small chink of the mind, the people who hurried
in and out.  Intimate to garages, where he had vague business
conducted in undertones, to barber shops and to the lobbies of
theatres--in such places, anyhow, I placed the type, if type it
was, that he reminded me of.  Sometimes his face bobbed up in one
of Tad's more savage cartoons, and I had always from earliest
boyhood thrown a nervous glance toward the dim borderland where he
stood, and seen him watching me and despising me.  Once, in a
dream, he had taken a few steps toward me, jerking his head back
and muttering:  "Say, kid" in what was intended to be a reassuring
voice, and I had broken for the door in terror.  This was that sort
of man.

Joe and Ellen faced each other silently; she seemed, as I have
said, to be in a daze.  It was cold, but she didn't notice that her
coat had blown open; Joe reached out and pulled it together, and
automatically she clutched it with her hand.

Suddenly the man in the coupé, who had been watching them silently,
laughed.  It was a bare laugh, done with the breath--just a noisy
jerk of the head--but it was an insult if I had ever heard one;
definite and not to be passed over.  I wasn't surprised when Joe,
who was quick tempered, turned to him angrily and said:

"What's your trouble?"

The man waited a moment, his eyes shifting and yet staring, and
always seeing.  Then he laughed again in the same way.  Ellen
stirred uneasily.

"Who is this--this--" Joe's voice trembled with annoyance.

"Look out now," said the man slowly.

Joe turned to me.

"Eddie, take Ellen and Catherine in, will you?" he said
quickly. . . .  "Ellen, go with Eddie."

"Look out now," the man repeated.

Ellen made a little sound with her tongue and teeth, but she didn't
resist when I took her arm and moved her toward the side door of
the hotel.  It struck me as odd that she should be so helpless,
even to the point of acquiescing by her silence in this imminent
trouble.

"Let it go, Joe!" I called back over my shoulder.  "Come inside!"

Ellen, pulling against my arm, hurried us on.  As we were caught up
into the swinging doors I had the impression that the man was
getting out of his coupé.

Ten minutes later, as I waited for the girls outside the women's
dressing-room, Joe Jelke and Jim Cathcart stepped out of the
elevator.  Joe was very white, his eyes were heavy and glazed,
there was a trickle of dark blood on his forehead and on his white
muffler.  Jim had both their hats in his hand.

"He hit Joe with brass knuckles," Jim said in a low voice.  "Joe
was out cold for a minute or so.  I wish you'd send a bell boy for
some witch-hazel and court-plaster."

It was late and the hall was deserted; brassy fragments of the
dance below reached us as if heavy curtains were being blown aside
and dropping back into place.  When Ellen came out I took her
directly downstairs.  We avoided the receiving line and went into a
dim room set with scraggly hotel palms where couples sometimes sat
out during the dance; there I told her what had happened.

"It was Joe's own fault," she said, surprisingly.  "I told him not
to interfere."

This wasn't true.  She had said nothing, only uttered one curious
little click of impatience.

"You ran out the back door and disappeared for almost an hour," I
protested.  "Then you turned up with a hard-looking customer who
laughed in Joe's face."

"A hard-looking customer," she repeated, as if tasting the sound of
the words.

"Well, wasn't he?  Where on earth did you get hold of him, Ellen?"

"On the train," she answered.  Immediately she seemed to regret
this admission.  "You'd better stay out of things that aren't your
business, Eddie.  You see what happened to Joe."

Literally I gasped.  To watch her, seated beside me, immaculately
glowing, her body giving off wave after wave of freshness and
delicacy--and to hear her talk like that.

"But that man's a thug!" I cried.  "No girl could be safe with him.
He used brass knuckles on Joe--brass knuckles!"

"Is that pretty bad?"

She asked this as she might have asked such a question a few years
ago.  She looked at me at last and really wanted an answer; for a
moment it was as if she were trying to recapture an attitude that
had almost departed; then she hardened again.  I say "hardened,"
for I began to notice that when she was concerned with this man her
eyelids fell a little, shutting other things--everything else--out
of view.

That was a moment I might have said something, I suppose, but in
spite of everything, I couldn't light into her.  I was too much
under the spell of her beauty and its success.  I even began to
find excuses for her--perhaps that man wasn't what he appeared to
be; or perhaps--more romantically--she was involved with him
against her will to shield some one else.  At this point people
began to drift into the room and come up to speak to us.  We
couldn't talk any more, so we went in and bowed to the chaperones.
Then I gave her up to the bright restless sea of the dance, where
she moved in an eddy of her own among the pleasant islands of
colored favors set out on tables and the south winds from the
brasses moaning across the hall.  After a while I saw Joe Jelke
sitting in a corner with a strip of court-plaster on his forehead
watching Ellen as if she herself had struck him down, but I didn't
go up to him.  I felt queer myself--like I feel when I wake up
after sleeping through an afternoon, strange and portentous, as if
something had gone on in the interval that changed the values of
everything and that I didn't see.

The night slipped on through successive phases of cardboard horns,
amateur tableaux and flashlights for the morning papers.  Then was
the grand march and supper, and about two o'clock some of the
committee dressed up as revenue agents pinched the party, and a
facetious newspaper was distributed, burlesquing the events of the
evening.  And all the time out of the corner of my eye I watched
the shining orchid on Ellen's shoulder as it moved like Stuart's
plume about the room.  I watched it with a definite foreboding
until the last sleepy groups had crowded into the elevators, and
then, bundled to the eyes in great shapeless fur coats, drifted out
into the clear dry Minnesota night.


II


There is a sloping mid-section of our city which lies between the
residence quarter on the hill and the business district on the
level of the river.  It is a vague part of town, broken by its
climb into triangles and odd shapes--there are names like Seven
Corners--and I don't believe a dozen people could draw an accurate
map of it, though every one traversed it by trolley, auto or shoe
leather twice a day.  And though it was a busy section, it would be
hard for me to name the business that comprised its activity.
There were always long lines of trolley cars waiting to start
somewhere; there was a big movie theatre and many small ones with
posters of Hoot Gibson and Wonder Dogs and Wonder Horses outside;
there were small stores with "Old King Brady" and "The Liberty Boys
of '76" in the windows, and marbles, cigarettes and candy inside;
and--one definite place at least--a fancy costumer whom we all
visited at least once a year.  Some time during boyhood I became
aware that one side of a certain obscure street there were bawdy
houses, and all through the district were pawnshops, cheap
jewellers, small athletic clubs and gymnasiums and somewhat too
blatantly run-down saloons.

The morning after the Cotillion Club party, I woke up late and
lazy, with the happy feeling that for a day or two more there was
no chapel, no classes--nothing to do but wait for another party
tonight.  It was crisp and bright--one of those days when you
forget how cold it is until your cheek freezes--and the events of
the evening before seemed dim and far away.  After luncheon I
started downtown on foot through a light, pleasant snow of small
flakes that would probably fall all afternoon, and I was about half
through that halfway section of town--so far as I know, there's no
inclusive name for it--when suddenly whatever idle thought was in
my head blew away like a hat and I began thinking hard of Ellen
Baker.  I began worrying about her as I'd never worried about
anything outside myself before.  I began to loiter, with an
instinct to go up on the hill again and find her and talk to her;
then I remembered that she was at a tea, and I went on again, but
still thinking of her, and harder than ever.  Right then the affair
opened up again.

It was snowing, I said, and it was four o'clock on a December
afternoon, when there is a promise of darkness in the air and the
street lamps are just going on.  I passed a combination pool parlor
and restaurant, with a stove loaded with hot-dogs in the window,
and a few loungers hanging around the door.  The lights were on
inside--not bright lights but just a few pale yellow high up on the
ceiling--and the glow they threw out into the frosty dusk wasn't
bright enough to tempt you to stare inside.  As I went past,
thinking hard of Ellen all this time, I took in the quartet of
loafers out of the corner of my eye.  I hadn't gone half a dozen
steps down the street when one of them called to me, not by name
but in a way clearly intended for my ear.  I thought it was a
tribute to my raccoon coat and paid no attention, but a moment
later whoever it was called to me again in a peremptory voice.  I
was annoyed and turned around.  There, standing in the group not
ten feet away and looking at me with the half-sneer on his face
with which he'd looked at Joe Jelke, was the scarred, thin-faced
man of the night before.

He had on a black fancy-cut coat, buttoned up to his neck as if he
were cold.  His hands were deep in his pockets and he wore a derby
and high button shoes.  I was startled, and for a moment I
hesitated, but I was most of all angry, and knowing that I was
quicker with my hands than Joe Jelke, I took a tentative step back
toward him.  The other men weren't looking at me--I don't think
they saw me at all--but I knew that this one recognized me; there
was nothing casual about his look, no mistake.

"Here I am.  What are you going to do about it?" his eyes seemed to
say.

I took another step toward him and he laughed soundlessly, but with
active contempt, and drew back into the group.  I followed.  I was
going to speak to him--I wasn't sure what I was going to say--but
when I came up he had either changed his mind and backed off, or
else he wanted me to follow him inside, for he had slipped off and
the three men watched my intent approach without curiosity.  They
were the same kind--sporty, but, unlike him, smooth rather than
truculent; I didn't find any personal malice in their collective
glance.

"Did he go inside?" I asked.

They looked at one another in that cagy way; a wink passed between
them, and after a perceptible pause, one said:

"Who go inside?"

"I don't know his name."

There was another wink.  Annoyed and determined, I walked past them
and into the pool room.  There were a few people at a lunch counter
along one side and a few more playing billiards, but he was not
among them.

Again I hesitated.  If his idea was to lead me into any blind part
of the establishment--there were some half-open doors farther back--
I wanted more support.  I went up to the man at the desk.

"What became of the fellow who just walked in here?"

Was he on his guard immediately, or was that my imagination?

"What fellow?"

"Thin face--derby hat."

"How long ago?"

"Oh--a minute."

He shook his head again.  "Didn't see him," he said.

I waited.  The three men from outside had come in and were lined up
beside me at the counter.  I felt that all of them were looking at
me in a peculiar way.  Feeling helpless and increasingly uneasy, I
turned suddenly and went out.  A little way down the street I
turned again and took a good look at the place, so I'd know it and
could find it again.  On the next corner I broke impulsively into a
run, found a taxicab in front of the hotel and drove back up the
hill.



Ellen wasn't home.  Mrs. Baker came downstairs and talked to me.
She seemed entirely cheerful and proud of Ellen's beauty, and
ignorant of anything being amiss or of anything unusual having
taken place the night before.  She was glad that vacation was
almost over--it was a strain and Ellen wasn't very strong.  Then
she said something that relieved my mind enormously.  She was glad
that I had come in, for of course Ellen would want to see me, and
the time was so short.  She was going back at half-past eight
tonight.

"Tonight!" I exclaimed.  "I thought it was the day after tomorrow."

"She's going to visit the Brokaws in Chicago," Mrs. Baker said.
"They want her for some party.  We just decided it today.  She's
leaving with the Ingersoll girls tonight."

I was so glad I could barely restrain myself from shaking her hand.
Ellen was safe.  It had been nothing all along but a moment of the
most casual adventure.  I felt like an idiot, but I realized how
much I cared about Ellen and how little I could endure anything
terrible happening to her.

"She'll be in soon?"

"Any minute now.  She just phoned from the University Club."

I said I'd be over later--I lived almost next door and I wanted to
be alone.  Outside I remembered I didn't have a key, so I started
up the Bakers' driveway to take the old cut we used in childhood
through the intervening yard.  It was still snowing, but the flakes
were bigger now against the darkness, and trying to locate the
buried walk I noticed that the Bakers' back door was ajar.

I scarcely know why I turned and walked into that kitchen.  There
was a time when I would have known the Bakers' servants by name.
That wasn't true now, but they knew me, and I was aware of a sudden
suspension as I came in--not only a suspension of talk but of some
mood or expectation that had filled them.  They began to go to work
too quickly; they made unnecessary movements and clamor--those
three.  The parlor maid looked at me in a frightened way and I
suddenly guessed she was waiting to deliver another message.  I
beckoned her into the pantry.

"I know all about this," I said.  "It's a very serious business.
Shall I go to Mrs. Baker now, or will you shut and lock that back
door?"

"Don't tell Mrs. Baker, Mr. Stinson!"

"Then I don't want Miss Ellen disturbed.  If she is--and if she is
I'll know of it--"  I delivered some outrageous threat about going
to all the employment agencies and seeing she never got another job
in the city.  She was thoroughly intimidated when I went out; it
wasn't a minute before the back door was locked and bolted behind
me.

Simultaneously I heard a big car drive up in front, chains
crunching on the soft snow; it was bringing Ellen home, and I went
in to say good-by.

Joe Jelke and two other boys were along, and none of the three
could manage to take their eyes off her, even to say hello to me.
She had one of those exquisite rose skins frequent in our part of
the country, and beautiful until the little veins begin to break at
about forty; now, flushed with the cold, it was a riot of lovely
delicate pinks like many carnations.  She and Joe had reached some
sort of reconciliation, or at least he was too far gone in love to
remember last night; but I saw that though she laughed a lot she
wasn't really paying any attention to him or any of them.  She
wanted them to go, so that there'd be a message from the kitchen,
but I knew that the message wasn't coming--that she was safe.
There was talk of the Pump and Slipper dance at New Haven and of
the Princeton Prom, and then, in various moods, we four left and
separated quickly outside.  I walked home with a certain depression
of spirit and lay for an hour in a hot bath thinking that vacation
was all over for me now that she was gone; feeling, even more
deeply than I had yesterday, that she was out of my life.

And something eluded me, some one more thing to do, something that
I had lost amid the events of the afternoon, promising myself to go
back and pick it up, only to find that it had escaped me.  I
associated it vaguely with Mrs. Baker, and now I seemed to recall
that it had poked up its head somewhere in the stream of
conversation with her.  In my relief about Ellen I had forgotten to
ask her a question regarding something she had said.

The Brokaws--that was it--where Ellen was to visit.  I knew Bill
Brokaw well; he was in my class at Yale.  Then I remembered and sat
bolt upright in the tub--the Brokaws weren't in Chicago this
Christmas; they were at Palm Beach!

Dripping I sprang out of the tub, threw an insufficient union suit
around my shoulders and sprang for the phone in my room.  I got the
connection quick, but Miss Ellen had already started for the train.

Luckily our car was in, and while I squirmed, still damp, into my
clothes, the chauffeur brought it around to the door.  The night
was cold and dry, and we made good time to the station through the
hard, crusty snow.  I felt queer and insecure starting out this
way, but somehow more confident as the station loomed up bright and
new against the dark, cold air.  For fifty years my family had
owned the land on which it was built and that made my temerity seem
all right somehow.  There was always a possibility that I was
rushing in where angels feared to tread, but that sense of having a
solid foothold in the past made me willing to make a fool of
myself.  This business was all wrong--terribly wrong.  Any idea I
had entertained that it was harmless dropped away now; between
Ellen and some vague overwhelming catastrophe there stood me, or
else the police and a scandal.  I'm no moralist--there was another
element here, dark and frightening, and I didn't want Ellen to go
through it alone.

There are three competing trains from St. Paul to Chicago that all
leave within a few minutes of half-past eight.  Hers was the
Burlington, and as I ran across the station I saw the grating being
pulled over and the light above it go out.  I knew, though, that
she had a drawing-room with the Ingersoll girls, because her mother
had mentioned buying the ticket, so she was, literally speaking,
tucked in until tomorrow.

The C., M. & St. P. gate was down at the other end and I raced for
it and made it.  I had forgotten one thing, though, and that was
enough to keep me awake and worried half the night.  This train got
into Chicago ten minutes after the other.  Ellen had that much time
to disappear into one of the largest cities in the world.

I gave the porter a wire to my family to send from Milwaukee, and
at eight o'clock next morning I pushed violently by a whole line of
passengers, clamoring over their bags parked in the vestibule, and
shot out of the door with a sort of scramble over the porter's
back.  For a moment the confusion of a great station, the
voluminous sounds and echoes and cross-currents of bells and smoke
struck me helpless.  Then I dashed for the exit and toward the only
chance I knew of finding her.

I had guessed right.  She was standing at the telegraph counter,
sending off heaven knows what black lie to her mother, and her
expression when she saw me had a sort of terror mixed up with its
surprise.  There was cunning in it too.  She was thinking quickly--
she would have liked to walk away from me as if I weren't there,
and go about her own business, but she couldn't.  I was too matter-
of-fact a thing in her life.  So we stood silently watching each
other and each thinking hard.

"The Brokaws are in Florida," I said after a minute.

"It was nice of you to take such a long trip to tell me that."

"Since you've found it out, don't you think you'd better go on to
school?"

"Please let me alone, Eddie," she said.

"I'll go as far as New York with you.  I've decided to go back
early myself."

"You'd better let me alone."  Her lovely eyes narrowed and her face
took on a look of dumb-animal-like resistance.  She made a visible
effort, the cunning flickered back into it, then both were gone,
and in their stead was a cheerful reassuring smile that all but
convinced me.

"Eddie, you silly child, don't you think I'm old enough to take
care of myself?"  I didn't answer.  "I'm going to meet a man, you
understand.  I just want to see him today.  I've got my ticket East
on the five o'clock train.  If you don't believe it, here it is in
my bag."

"I believe you."

"The man isn't anybody that you know and--frankly, I think you're
being awfully fresh and impossible."

"I know who the man is."

Again she lost control of her face.  That terrible expression came
back into it and she spoke with almost a snarl:

"You'd better let me alone."

I took the blank out of her hand and wrote out an explanatory
telegram to her mother.  Then I turned to Ellen and said a little
roughly:

"We'll take the five o'clock train East together.  Meanwhile you're
going to spend the day with me."

The mere sound of my own voice saying this so emphatically
encouraged me, and I think it impressed her too; at any rate, she
submitted--at least temporarily--and came along without protest
while I bought my ticket.

When I start to piece together the fragments of that day a sort of
confusion begins, as if my memory didn't want to yield up any of
it, or my consciousness let any of it pass through.  There was a
bright, fierce morning during which we rode about in a taxicab and
went to a department store where Ellen said she wanted to buy
something and then tried to slip away from me by a back way.  I had
the feeling, for an hour, that someone was following us along Lake
Shore Drive in a taxicab, and I would try to catch them by turning
quickly or looking suddenly into the chauffeur's mirror; but I
could find no one, and when I turned back I could see that Ellen's
face was contorted with mirthless, unnatural laughter.

All morning there was a raw, bleak wind off the lake, but when we
went to the Blackstone for lunch a light snow came down past the
windows and we talked almost naturally about our friends, and about
casual things.  Suddenly her tone changed; she grew serious and
looked me in the eye, straight and sincere.

"Eddie, you're the oldest friend I have," she said, "and you
oughtn't to find it too hard to trust me.  If I promise you
faithfully on my word of honor to catch that five o'clock train,
will you let me alone a few hours this afternoon?"

"Why?"

"Well"--she hesitated and hung her head a little--"I guess
everybody has a right to say--good-by."

"You want to say good-by to that--"

"Yes, yes," she said hastily; "just a few hours, Eddie, and I
promise faithfully that I'll be on that train."

"Well, I suppose no great harm could be done in two hours.  If you
really want to say good-by--"

I looked up suddenly, and surprised a look of such tense cunning in
her face that I winced before it.  Her lip was curled up and her
eyes were slits again; there wasn't the faintest touch of fairness
and sincerity in her whole face.

We argued.  The argument was vague on her part and somewhat hard
and reticent on mine.  I wasn't going to be cajoled again into any
weakness or be infected with any--and there was a contagion of evil
in the air.  She kept trying to imply, without any convincing
evidence to bring forward, that everything was all right.  Yet she
was too full of the thing itself--whatever it was--to build up a
real story, and she wanted to catch at any credulous and
acquiescent train of thought that might start in my head, and work
that for all it was worth.  After every reassuring suggestion she
threw out, she stared at me eagerly, as if she hoped I'd launch
into a comfortable moral lecture with the customary sweet at the
end--which in this case would be her liberty.  But I was wearing
her away a little.  Two or three times it needed just a touch of
pressure to bring her to the point of tears--which, of course, was
what I wanted--but I couldn't seem to manage it.  Almost I had her--
almost possessed her interior attention--then she would slip away.

I bullied her remorselessly into a taxi about four o'clock and
started for the station.  The wind was raw again, with a sting of
snow in it, and the people in the streets, waiting for busses and
street cars too small to take them all in, looked cold and
disturbed and unhappy.  I tried to think how lucky we were to be
comfortably off and taken care of, but all the warm, respectable
world I had been part of yesterday had dropped away from me.  There
was something we carried with us now that was the enemy and the
opposite of all that; it was in the cabs beside us, the streets we
passed through.  With a touch of panic, I wondered if I wasn't
slipping almost imperceptibly into Ellen's attitude of mind.  The
column of passengers waiting to go aboard the train were as remote
from me as people from another world, but it was I that was
drifting away and leaving them behind.

My lower was in the same car with her compartment.  It was an old-
fashioned car, its lights somewhat dim, its carpets and upholstery
full of the dust of another generation.  There were half a dozen
other travellers, but they made no special impression on me, except
that they shared the unreality that I was beginning to feel
everywhere around me.  We went into Ellen's compartment, shut the
door and sat down.

Suddenly I put my arms around her and drew her over to me, just as
tenderly as I knew how--as if she were a little girl--as she was.
She resisted a little, but after a moment she submitted and lay
tense and rigid in my arms.

"Ellen," I said helplessly, "you asked me to trust you.  You have
much more reason to trust me.  Wouldn't it help to get rid of all
this, if you told me a little?"

"I can't," she said, very low--"I mean, there's nothing to tell."

"You met this man on the train coming home and you fell in love
with him, isn't that true?"

"I don't know."

"Tell me, Ellen.  You fell in love with him?"

"I don't know.  Please let me alone."

"Call it anything you want," I went on, "he has some sort of hold
over you.  He's trying to use you; he's trying to get something
from you.  He's not in love with you."

"What does that matter?" she said in a weak voice.

"It does matter.  Instead of trying to fight this--this thing--
you're trying to fight me.  And I love you, Ellen.  Do you hear?
I'm telling you all of a sudden, but it isn't new with me.  I love
you."

She looked at me with a sneer on her gentle face; it was an
expression I had seen on men who were tight and didn't want to be
taken home.  But it was human.  I was reaching her, faintly and
from far away, but more than before.

"Ellen, I want you to answer me one question.  Is he going to be on
this train?"

She hesitated; then, an instant too late, she shook her head.

"Be careful, Ellen.  Now I'm going to ask you one thing more, and I
wish you'd try very hard to answer.  Coming West, when did this man
get on the train?"

"I don't know," she said with an effort.

Just at that moment I became aware, with the unquestionable
knowledge reserved for facts, that he was just outside the door.
She knew it, too; the blood left her face and that expression of
low-animal perspicacity came creeping back.  I lowered my face into
my hands and tried to think.

We must have sat there, with scarcely a word, for well over an
hour.  I was conscious that the lights of Chicago, then of
Englewood and of endless suburbs, were moving by, and then there
were no more lights and we were out on the dark flatness of
Illinois.  The train seemed to draw in upon itself; it took on an
air of being alone.  The porter knocked at the door and asked if he
could make up the berth, but I said no and he went away.

After a while I convinced myself that the struggle inevitably
coming wasn't beyond what remained of my sanity, my faith in the
essential all-rightness of things and people.  That this person's
purpose was what we call "criminal," I took for granted, but there
was no need of ascribing to him an intelligence that belonged to a
higher plane of human, or inhuman, endeavor.  It was still as a man
that I considered him, and tried to get at his essence, his self-
interest--what took the place in him of a comprehensible heart--but
I suppose I more than half knew what I would find when I opened the
door.

When I stood up Ellen didn't seem to see me at all.  She was
hunched into the corner staring straight ahead with a sort of film
over her eyes, as if she were in a state of suspended animation of
body and mind.  I lifted her and put two pillows under her head and
threw my fur coat over her knees.  Then I knelt beside her and
kissed her two hands, opened the door and went out into the hall.

I closed the door behind me and stood with my back against it for a
minute.  The car was dark save for the corridor lights at each end.
There was no sound except the groaning of the couplers, the even
click-a-click of the rails and someone's loud sleeping breath
farther down the car.  I became aware after a moment that the
figure of a man was standing by the water cooler just outside the
men's smoking room, his derby hat on his head, his coat collar
turned up around his neck as if he were cold, his hands in his coat
pockets.  When I saw him, he turned and went into the smoking room,
and I followed.  He was sitting in the far corner of the long
leather bench; I took the single armchair beside the door.

As I went in I nodded to him and he acknowledged my presence with
one of those terrible soundless laughs of his.  But this time it
was prolonged, it seemed to go on forever, and mostly to cut it
short, I asked:  "Where are you from?" in a voice I tried to make
casual.

He stopped laughing and looked at me narrowly, wondering what my
game was.  When he decided to answer, his voice was muffled as
though he were speaking through a silk scarf, and it seemed to come
from a long way off.

"I'm from St. Paul, Jack."

"Been making a trip home?"

He nodded.  Then he took a long breath and spoke in a hard,
menacing voice:

"You better get off at Fort Wayne, Jack."

He was dead.  He was dead as hell--he had been dead all along, but
what force had flowed through him, like blood in his veins, out to
St. Paul and back, was leaving him now.  A new outline--the outline
of him dead--was coming through the palpable figure that had
knocked down Joe Jelke.

He spoke again, with a sort of jerking effort:

"You get off at Fort Wayne, Jack, or I'm going to wipe you out."
He moved his hand in his coat pocket and showed me the outline of a
revolver.

I shook my head.  "You can't touch me," I answered.  "You see, I
know."  His terrible eyes shifted over me quickly, trying to
determine whether or not I did know.  Then he gave a snarl and made
as though he were going to jump to his feet.

"You climb off here or else I'm going to get you, Jack!" he cried
hoarsely.  The train was slowing up for Fort Wayne and his voice
rang loud in the comparative quiet, but he didn't move from his
chair--he was too weak, I think--and we sat staring at each other
while workmen passed up and down outside the window banging the
brakes and wheels, and the engine gave out loud mournful pants up
ahead.  No one got into our car.  After a while the porter closed
the vestibule door and passed back along the corridor, and we slid
out of the murky yellow station light and into the long darkness.

What I remember next must have extended over a space of five or six
hours, though it comes back to me as something without any
existence in time--something that might have taken five minutes or
a year.  There began a slow, calculated assault on me, wordless and
terrible.  I felt what I can only call a strangeness stealing over
me--akin to the strangeness I had felt all afternoon, but deeper
and more intensified.  It was like nothing so much as the sensation
of drifting away, and I gripped the arms of the chair convulsively,
as if to hang onto a piece in the living world.  Sometimes I felt
myself going out with a rush.  There would be almost a warm relief
about it, a sense of not caring; then, with a violent wrench of the
will, I'd pull myself back into the room.

Suddenly I realized that from a while back I had stopped hating
him, stopped feeling violently alien to him, and with the
realization, I went cold and sweat broke out all over my head.  He
was getting around my abhorrence, as he had got around Ellen coming
West on the train; and it was just that strength he drew from
preying on people that had brought him up to the point of concrete
violence in St. Paul, and that, fading and flickering out, still
kept him fighting now.

He must have seen that faltering in my heart, for he spoke at once,
in a low, even, almost gentle voice:  "You better go now."

"Oh, I'm not going," I forced myself to say.

"Suit yourself, Jack."

He was my friend, he implied.  He knew how it was with me and he
wanted to help.  He pitied me.  I'd better go away before it was
too late.  The rhythm of his attack was soothing as a song: I'd
better go away--AND LET HIM GET AT ELLEN.  With a little cry I sat
bolt upright.

"What do you want of this girl?" I said, my voice shaking.  "To
make a sort of walking hell of her."

His glance held a quality of dumb surprise, as if I were punishing
an animal for a fault of which he was not conscious.  For an
instant I faltered; then I went on blindly:

"You've lost her; she's put her trust in me."

His countenance went suddenly black with evil, and he cried:
"You're a liar!" in a voice that was like cold hands.

"She trusts me," I said.  "You can't touch her.  She's safe!"

He controlled himself.  His face grew bland, and I felt that
curious weakness and indifference begin again inside me.  What was
the use of all this?  What was the use?

"You haven't got much time left," I forced myself to say, and then,
in a flash of intuition, I jumped at the truth.  "You died, or you
were killed, not far from here!"--Then I saw what I had not seen
before--that his forehead was drilled with a small round hole like
a larger picture nail leaves when it's pulled from a plaster wall.
"And now you're sinking.  You've only got a few hours.  The trip
home is over!"

His face contorted, lost all semblance of humanity, living or dead.
Simultaneously the room was full of cold air and with a noise that
was something between a paroxysm of coughing and a burst of
horrible laughter, he was on his feet, reeking of shame and
blasphemy.

"Come and look!" he cried.  "I'll show you--"

He took a step toward me, then another and it was exactly as if a
door stood open behind him, a door yawning out to an inconceivable
abyss of darkness and corruption.  There was a scream of mortal
agony, from him or from somewhere behind, and abruptly the strength
went out of him in a long husky sigh and he wilted to the
floor. . . .

How long I sat there, dazed with terror and exhaustion, I don't
know.  The next thing I remember is the sleepy porter shining shoes
across the room from me, and outside the window the steel fires of
Pittsburgh breaking the flat perspective also--something too faint
for a man, too heavy for a shadow, of the night.  There was
something extended on the bench.  Even as I perceived it it faded
off and away.

Some minutes later I opened the door of Ellen's compartment.  She
was asleep where I had left her.  Her lovely cheeks were white and
wan, but she lay naturally--her hands relaxed and her breathing
regular and clear.  What had possessed her had gone out of her,
leaving her exhausted but her own dear self again.

I made her a little more comfortable, tucked a blanket around her,
extinguished the light and went out.


III


When I came home for Easter vacation, almost my first act was to go
down to the billiard parlor near Seven Corners.  The man at the
cash register quite naturally didn't remember my hurried visit of
three months before.

"I'm trying to locate a certain party who, I think, came here a lot
some time ago."

I described the man rather accurately, and when I had finished, the
cashier called to a little jockeylike fellow who was sitting near
with an air of having something very important to do that he
couldn't quite remember.

"Hey, Shorty, talk to this guy, will you?  I think he's looking for
Joe Varland."

The little man gave me a tribal look of suspicion.  I went and sat
near him.

"Joe Varland's dead, fella," he said grudgingly.  "He died last
winter."

I described him again--his overcoat, his laugh, the habitual
expression of his eyes.

"That's Joe Varland you're looking for all right, but he's dead."

"I want to find out something about him."

"What you want to find out?"

"What did he do, for instance?"

"How should I know?"

"Look here!  I'm not a policeman.  I just want some kind of
information about his habits.  He's dead now and it can't hurt him.
And it won't go beyond me."

"Well"--he hesitated, looking me over--"he was a great one for
travelling.  He got in a row in the station in Pittsburgh and a
dick got him."

I nodded.  Broken pieces of the puzzle began to assemble in my
head.

"Why was he a lot on trains?"

"How should I know, fella?"

"If you can use ten dollars, I'd like to know anything you may have
heard on the subject."

"Well," said Shorty reluctantly, "all I know is they used to say he
worked the trains."

"Worked the trains?"

"He had some racket of his own he'd never loosen up about.  He used
to work the girls travelling alone on the trains.  Nobody ever knew
much about it--he was a pretty smooth guy--but sometimes he'd turn
up here with a lot of dough and he let 'em know it was the janes he
got it off of."

I thanked him and gave him the ten dollars and went out, very
thoughtful, without mentioning that part of Joe Varland had made a
last trip home.

Ellen wasn't West for Easter, and even if she had been I wouldn't
have gone to her with the information, either--at least I've seen
her almost every day this summer and we've managed to talk about
everything else.  Sometimes, though, she gets silent about nothing
and wants to be very close to me, and I know what's in her mind.

Of course she's coming out this fall, and I have two more years at
New Haven; still, things don't look so impossible as they did a few
months ago.  She belongs to me in a way--even if I lose her she
belongs to me.  Who knows?  Anyhow, I'll always be there.


THE END








ABSOLUTION


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


The American Mercury, June 1924



There was once a priest with cold, watery eyes, who, in the still
of the night, wept cold tears.  He wept because the afternoons were
warm and long, and he was unable to attain a complete mystical
union with our Lord.  Sometimes, near four o'clock, there was a
rustle of Swede girls along the path by his window, and in their
shrill laughter he found a terrible dissonance that made him pray
aloud for the twilight to come.  At twilight the laughter and the
voices were quieter, but several times he had walked past Romberg's
Drug Store when it was dusk and the yellow lights shone inside and
the nickel taps of the soda-fountain were gleaming, and he had
found the scent of cheap toilet soap desperately sweet upon the
air.  He passed that way when he returned from hearing confessions
on Saturday nights, and he grew careful to walk on the other side
of the street so that the smell of the soap would float upward
before it reached his nostrils as it drifted, rather like incense,
toward the summer moon.

But there was no escape from the hot madness of four o'clock.  From
his window, as far as he could see, the Dakota wheat thronged the
valley of the Red River.  The wheat was terrible to look upon and
the carpet pattern to which in agony he bent his eyes sent his
thought brooding through grotesque labyrinths, open always to the
unavoidable sun.

One afternoon when he had reached the point where the mind runs
down like an old clock, his housekeeper brought into his study a
beautiful, intense little boy of eleven named Rudolph Miller.  The
little boy sat down in a patch of sunshine, and the priest, at his
walnut desk, pretended to be very busy.  This was to conceal his
relief that some one had come into his haunted room.

Presently he turned around and found himself staring into two
enormous, staccato eyes, lit with gleaming points of cobalt light.
For a moment their expression startled him--then he saw that his
visitor was in a state of abject fear.

"Your mouth is trembling," said Father Schwartz, in a haggard
voice.

The little boy covered his quivering mouth with his hand.

"Are you in trouble?" asked Father Schwartz, sharply.  "Take your
hand away from your mouth and tell me what's the matter."

The boy--Father Schwartz recognized him now as the son of a
parishioner, Mr. Miller, the freight-agent--moved his hand
reluctantly off his mouth and became articulate in a despairing
whisper.

"Father Schwartz--I've committed a terrible sin."

"A sin against purity?"

"No, Father . . . worse."

Father Schwartz's body jerked sharply.

"Have you killed somebody?"

"No--but I'm afraid--" the voice rose to a shrill whimper.

"Do you want to go to confession?"

The little boy shook his head miserably.  Father Schwartz cleared
his throat so that he could make his voice soft and say some quiet,
kind thing.  In this moment he should forget his own agony, and try
to act like God.  He repeated to himself a devotional phrase,
hoping that in return God would help him to act correctly.

"Tell me what you've done," said his new soft voice.

The little boy looked at him through his tears, and was reassured
by the impression of moral resiliency which the distraught priest
had created.  Abandoning as much of himself as he was able to this
man, Rudolph Miller began to tell his story.

"On Saturday, three days ago, my father he said I had to go to
confession, because I hadn't been for a month, and the family they
go every week, and I hadn't been.  So I just as leave go, I didn't
care.  So I put it off till after supper because I was playing with
a bunch of kids and father asked me if I went, and I said 'no,' and
he took me by the neck and he said 'You go now,' so I said 'All
right,' so I went over to church.  And he yelled after me:  'Don't
come back till you go.' . . ."


II


"On Saturday, Three Days Ago."


The plush curtain of the confessional rearranged its dismal
creases, leaving exposed only the bottom of an old man's old shoe.
Behind the curtain an immortal soul was alone with God and the
Reverend Adolphus Schwartz, priest of the parish.  Sound began, a
labored whispering, sibilant and discreet, broken at intervals by
the voice of the priest in audible question.

Rudolph Miller knelt in the pew beside the confessional and waited,
straining nervously to hear, and yet not to hear what was being
said within.  The fact that the priest was audible alarmed him.
His own turn came next, and the three or four others who waited
might listen unscrupulously while he admitted his violations of the
Sixth and Ninth Commandments.

Rudolph had never committed adultery, nor even coveted his
neighbor's wife--but it was the confession of the associate sins
that was particularly hard to contemplate.  In comparison he
relished the less shameful fallings away--they formed a grayish
background which relieved the ebony mark of sexual offenses upon
his soul.

He had been covering his ears with his hands, hoping that his
refusal to hear would be noticed, and a like courtesy rendered to
him in turn, when a sharp movement of the penitent in the
confessional made him sink his face precipitately into the crook of
his elbow.  Fear assumed solid form, and pressed out a lodging
between his heart and his lungs.  He must try now with all his
might to be sorry for his sins--not because he was afraid, but
because he had offended God.  He must convince God that he was
sorry and to do so he must first convince himself.  After a tense
emotional struggle he achieved a tremulous self-pity, and decided
that he was now ready.  If, by allowing no other thought to enter
his head, he could preserve this state of emotion unimpaired until
he went into that large coffin set on end, he would have survived
another crisis in his religious life.

For some time, however, a demoniac notion had partially possessed
him.  He could go home now, before his turn came, and tell his
mother that he had arrived too late, and found the priest gone.
This, unfortunately, involved the risk of being caught in a lie.
As an alternative he could say that he HAD gone to confession, but
this meant that he must avoid communion next day, for communion
taken upon an uncleansed soul would turn to poison in his mouth,
and he would crumple limp and damned from the altar-rail.

Again Father Schwartz's voice became audible.

"And for your--"

The words blurred to a husky mumble, and Rudolph got excitedly to
his feet.  He felt that it was impossible for him to go to
confession this afternoon.  He hesitated tensely.  Then from the
confessional came a tap, a creak, and a sustained rustle.  The
slide had fallen and the plush curtain trembled.  Temptation had
come to him too late. . . .

"Bless me, Father, for I have sinned. . . .  I confess to Almighty
God and to you, Father, that I have sinned. . . .  Since my last
confession it has been one month and three days. . . .  I accuse
myself of--taking the Name of the Lord in vain. . . ."

This was an easy sin.  His curses had been but bravado--telling of
them was little less than a brag.

". . . of being mean to an old lady."

The wan shadow moved a little on the latticed slat.

"How, my child?"

"Old lady Swenson," Rudolph's murmur soared jubilantly.  "She got
our baseball that we knocked in her window, and she wouldn't give
it back, so we yelled 'Twenty-three, Skidoo,' at her all afternoon.
Then about five o'clock she had a fit, and they had to have the
doctor."

"Go on, my child."

"Of--of not believing I was the son of my parents."

"What?"  The interrogation was distinctly startled.

"Of not believing that I was the son of my parents."

"Why not?"

"Oh, just pride," answered the penitent airily.

"You mean you thought you were too good to be the son of your
parents?"

"Yes, Father."  On a less jubilant note.

"Go on."

"Of being disobedient and calling my mother names.  Of slandering
people behind my back.  Of smoking--"

Rudolph had now exhausted the minor offenses, and was approaching
the sins it was agony to tell.  He held his fingers against his
face like bars as if to press out between them the shame in his
heart.

"Of dirty words and immodest thoughts and desires," he whispered
very low.

"How often?"

"I don't know."

"Once a week?  Twice a week?"

"Twice a week."

"Did you yield to these desires?"

"No, Father."

"Were you alone when you had them?"

"No, Father.  I was with two boys and a girl."

"Don't you know, my child, that you should avoid the occasions of
sin as well as the sin itself?  Evil companionship leads to evil
desires and evil desires to evil actions.  Where were you when this
happened?"

"In a barn in back of--"

"I don't want to hear any names," interrupted the priest sharply.

"Well, it was up in the loft of this barn and this girl and--a
fella, they were saying things--saying immodest things, and I
stayed."

"You should have gone--you should have told the girl to go."

He should have gone!  He could not tell Father Schwartz how his
pulse had bumped in his wrist, how a strange, romantic excitement
had possessed him when those curious things had been said.  Perhaps
in the houses of delinquency among the dull and hard-eyed
incorrigible girls can be found those for whom has burned the
whitest fire.

"Have you anything else to tell me?"

"I don't think so, Father."

Rudolph felt a great relief.  Perspiration had broken out under his
tight-pressed fingers.

"Have you told any lies?"

The question startled him.  Like all those who habitually and
instinctively lie, he had an enormous respect and awe for the
truth.  Something almost exterior to himself dictated a quick, hurt
answer.

"Oh, no, Father, I never tell lies."

For a moment, like the commoner in the king's chair, he tasted the
pride of the situation.  Then as the priest began to murmur
conventional admonitions he realized that in heroically denying he
had told lies, he had committed a terrible sin--he had told a lie
in confession.

In automatic response to Father Schwartz's "Make an act of
contrition," he began to repeat aloud meaninglessly:

"Oh, my God, I am heartily sorry for having offended Thee. . . ."

He must fix this now--it was a bad mistake--but as his teeth shut
on the last words of his prayer there was a sharp sound, and the
slat was closed.

A minute later when he emerged into the twilight the relief in
coming from the muggy church into an open world of wheat and sky
postponed the full realization of what he had done.  Instead of
worrying he took a deep breath of the crisp air and began to say
over and over to himself the words "Blatchford Sarnemington,
Blatchford Sarnemington!"

Blatchford Sarnemington was himself, and these words were in effect
a lyric.  When he became Blatchford Sarnemington a suave nobility
flowed from him.  Blatchford Sarnemington lived in great sweeping
triumphs.  When Rudolph half closed his eyes it meant that
Blatchford had established dominance over him and, as he went by,
there were envious mutters in the air:  "Blatchford Sarnemington!
There goes Blatchford Sarnemington."

He was Blatchford now for a while as he strutted homeward along the
staggering road, but when the road braced itself in macadam in
order to become the main street of Ludwig, Rudolph's exhilaration
faded out and his mind cooled, and he felt the horror of his lie.
God, of course, already knew of it--but Rudolph reserved a corner
of his mind where he was safe from God, where he prepared the
subterfuges with which he often tricked God.  Hiding now in this
corner he considered how he could best avoid the consequences of
his misstatement.

At all costs he must avoid communion next day.  The risk of
angering God to such an extent was too great.  He would have to
drink water "by accident" in the morning, and thus, in accordance
with a church law, render himself unfit to receive communion that
day.  In spite of its flimsiness this subterfuge was the most
feasible that occurred to him.  He accepted its risks and was
concentrating on how best to put it into effect, as he turned the
corner by Romberg's Drug Store and came in sight of his father's
house.


III


Rudolph's father, the local freight-agent, had floated with the
second wave of German and Irish stock to the Minnesota-Dakota
country.  Theoretically, great opportunities lay ahead of a young
man of energy in that day and place, but Carl Miller had been
incapable of establishing either with his superiors or his
subordinates the reputation for approximate immutability which is
essential to success in a hierarchic industry.  Somewhat gross, he
was, nevertheless, insufficiently hard-headed and unable to take
fundamental relationships for granted, and this inability made him
suspicious, unrestful, and continually dismayed.

His two bonds with the colorful life were his faith in the Roman
Catholic Church and his mystical worship of the Empire Builder,
James J. Hill.  Hill was the apotheosis of that quality in which
Miller himself was deficient--the sense of things, the feel of
things, the hint of rain in the wind on the cheek.  Miller's mind
worked late on the old decisions of other men, and he had never in
his life felt the balance of any single thing in his hands.  His
weary, sprightly, undersized body was growing old in Hill's
gigantic shadow.  For twenty years he had lived alone with Hill's
name and God.

On Sunday morning Carl Miller awoke in the dustless quiet of six
o'clock.  Kneeling by the side of the bed he bent his yellow-gray
hair and the full dapple bangs of his mustache into the pillow, and
prayed for several minutes.  Then he drew off his night-shirt--like
the rest of his generation he had never been able to endure pajamas--
and clothed his thin, white, hairless body in woollen underwear.

He shaved.  Silence in the other bedroom where his wife lay
nervously asleep.  Silence from the screened-off corner of the hall
where his son's cot stood, and his son slept among his Alger books,
his collection of cigar-bands, his mothy pennants--"Cornell,"
"Hamlin," and "Greetings from Pueblo, New Mexico"--and the other
possessions of his private life.  From outside Miller could hear
the shrill birds and the whirring movement of the poultry, and, as
an undertone, the low, swelling click-a-tick of the six-fifteen
through-train for Montana and the green coast beyond.  Then as the
cold water dripped from the wash-rag in his hand he raised his head
suddenly--he had heard a furtive sound from the kitchen below.

He dried his razor hastily, slipped his dangling suspenders to his
shoulder, and listened.  Some one was walking in the kitchen, and
he knew by the light footfall that it was not his wife.  With his
mouth faintly ajar he ran quickly down the stairs and opened the
kitchen door.

Standing by the sink, with one hand on the still dripping faucet
and the other clutching a full glass of water, stood his son.  The
boy's eyes, still heavy with sleep, met his father's with a
frightened, reproachful beauty.  He was barefooted, and his pajamas
were rolled up at the knees and sleeves.

For a moment they both remained motionless--Carl Miller's brow went
down and his son's went up, as though they were striking a balance
between the extremes of emotion which filled them.  Then the bangs
of the parent's moustache descended portentously until they
obscured his mouth, and he gave a short glance around to see if
anything had been disturbed.

The kitchen was garnished with sunlight which beat on the pans and
made the smooth boards of the floor and table yellow and clean as
wheat.  It was the center of the house where the fire burned and
the tins fitted into tins like toys, and the steam whistled all day
on a thin pastel note.  Nothing was moved, nothing touched--except
the faucet where beads of water still formed and dripped with a
white flash into the sink below.

"What are you doing?"

"I got awful thirsty, so I thought I'd just come down and get--"

"I thought you were going to communion."

A look of vehement astonishment spread over his son's face.

"I forgot all about it."

"Have you drunk any water?"

"No--"

As the word left his mouth Rudolph knew it was the wrong answer,
but the faded indignant eyes facing him had signalled up the truth
before the boy's will could act.  He realized, too, that he should
never have come downstairs; some vague necessity for verisimilitude
had made him want to leave a wet glass as evidence by the sink; the
honesty of his imagination had betrayed him.

"Pour it out," commanded his father, "that water!"

Rudolph despairingly inverted the tumbler.

"What's the matter with you, anyways?" demanded Miller angrily.

"Nothing."

"Did you go to confession yesterday?"

"Yes."

"Then why were you going to drink water?"

"I don't know--I forgot."

"Maybe you care more about being a little bit thirsty than you do
about your religion."

"I forgot."  Rudolph could feel the tears straining in his eyes.

"That's no answer."

"Well, I did."

"You better look out!"  His father held to a high, persistent,
inquisitory note:  "If you're so forgetful that you can't remember
your religion something better be done about it."

Rudolph filled a sharp pause with:

"I can remember it all right."

"First you begin to neglect your religion," cried his father,
fanning his own fierceness, "the next thing you'll begin to lie and
steal, and the NEXT thing is the REFORM school!"

Not even this familiar threat could deepen the abyss that Rudolph
saw before him.  He must either tell all now, offering his body for
what he knew would be a ferocious beating, or else tempt the
thunderbolts by receiving the Body and Blood of Christ with
sacrilege upon his soul.  And of the two the former seemed more
terrible--it was not so much the beating he dreaded as the savage
ferocity, outlet of the ineffectual man, which would lie behind it.

"Put down that glass and go up-stairs and dress!" his father
ordered, "and when we get to church, before you go to communion,
you better kneel down and ask God to forgive you for your
carelessness."

Some accidental emphasis in the phrasing of this command acted like
a catalytic agent on the confusion and terror of Rudolph's mind.  A
wild, proud anger rose in him, and he dashed the tumbler
passionately into the sink.

His father uttered a strained, husky sound, and sprang for him.
Rudolph dodged to the side, tipped over a chair, and tried to get
beyond the kitchen table.  He cried out sharply when a hand grasped
his pajama shoulder, then he felt the dull impact of a fist against
the side of his head, and glancing blows on the upper part of his
body.  As he slipped here and there in his father's grasp, dragged
or lifted when he clung instinctively to an arm, aware of sharp
smarts and strains, he made no sound except that he laughed
hysterically several times.  Then in less than a minute the blows
abruptly ceased.  After a lull during which Rudolph was tightly
held, and during which they both trembled violently and uttered
strange, truncated words, Carl Miller half dragged, half threatened
his son up-stairs.

"Put on your clothes!"

Rudolph was now both hysterical and cold.  His head hurt him, and
there was a long, shallow scratch on his neck from his father's
finger-nail, and he sobbed and trembled as he dressed.  He was
aware of his mother standing at the doorway in a wrapper, her
wrinkled face compressing and squeezing and opening out into new
series of wrinkles which floated and eddied from neck to brow.
Despising her nervous ineffectuality and avoiding her rudely when
she tried to touch his neck with witch-hazel, he made a hasty,
choking toilet.  Then he followed his father out of the house and
along the road toward the Catholic church.


IV


They walked without speaking except when Carl Miller acknowledged
automatically the existence of passers-by.  Rudolph's uneven
breathing alone ruffled the hot Sunday silence.

His father stopped decisively at the door of the church.

"I've decided you'd better go to confession again.  Go in and tell
Father Schwartz what you did and ask God's pardon."

"You lost your temper, too!" said Rudolph quickly.

Carl Miller took a step toward his son, who moved cautiously
backward.

"All right, I'll go."

"Are you going to do what I say?" cried his father in a hoarse
whisper.

"All right."

Rudolph walked into the church, and for the second time in two days
entered the confessional and knelt down.  The slat went up almost
at once.

"I accuse myself of missing my morning prayers."

"Is that all?"

"That's all."

A maudlin exultation filled him.  Not easily ever again would he be
able to put an abstraction before the necessities of his ease and
pride.  An invisible line had been crossed, and he had become aware
of his isolation--aware that it applied not only to those moments
when he was Blatchford Sarnemington but that it applied to all his
inner life.  Hitherto such phenomena as "crazy" ambitions and petty
shames and fears had been but private reservations, unacknowledged
before the throne of his official soul.  Now he realized
unconsciously that his private reservations were himself--and all
the rest a garnished front and a conventional flag.  The pressure
of his environment had driven him into the lonely secret road of
adolescence.

He knelt in the pew beside his father.  Mass began.  Rudolph knelt
up--when he was alone he slumped his posterior back against the
seat--and tasted the consciousness of a sharp, subtle revenge.
Beside him his father prayed that God would forgive Rudolph, and
asked also that his own outbreak of temper would be pardoned.  He
glanced sidewise at his son, and was relieved to see that the
strained, wild look had gone from his face and that he had ceased
sobbing.  The Grace of God, inherent in the Sacrament, would do the
rest, and perhaps after Mass everything would be better.  He was
proud of Rudolph in his heart, and beginning to be truly as well as
formally sorry for what he had done.

Usually, the passing of the collection box was a significant point
for Rudolph in the services.  If, as was often the case, he had no
money to drop in he would be furiously ashamed and bow his head and
pretend not to see the box, lest Jeanne Brady in the pew behind
should take notice and suspect an acute family poverty.  But to-day
he glanced coldly into it as it skimmed under his eyes, noting with
casual interest the large number of pennies it contained.

When the bell rang for communion, however, he quivered.  There was
no reason why God should not stop his heart.  During the past
twelve hours he had committed a series of mortal sins increasing in
gravity, and he was now to crown them all with a blasphemous
sacrilege.

"Domini, non sum dignus; ut interes sub tectum meum; sed tantum dic
verbo, et sanabitur anima mea. . . ."

There was a rustle in the pews, and the communicants worked their
ways into the aisle with downcast eyes and joined hands.  Those of
larger piety pressed together their finger-tips to form steeples.
Among these latter was Carl Miller.  Rudolph followed him toward
the altar-rail and knelt down, automatically taking up the napkin
under his chin.  The bell rang sharply, and the priest turned from
the altar with the white Host held above the chalice:

"Corpus Domini nostri Jesu Christi custodiat animam meam in vitam
aeternam."

A cold sweat broke out on Rudolph's forehead as the communion
began.  Along the line Father Schwartz moved, and with gathering
nausea Rudolph felt his heart-valves weakening at the will of God.
It seemed to him that the church was darker and that a great quiet
had fallen, broken only by the inarticulate mumble which announced
the approach of the Creator of Heaven and Earth.  He dropped his
head down between his shoulders and waited for the blow.

Then he felt a sharp nudge in his side.  His father was poking him
to sit up, not to slump against the rail; the priest was only two
places away.

"Corpus Domini nostri Jesu Christi custodiat animam meam in vitam
aeternam."

Rudolph opened his mouth.  He felt the sticky wax taste of the
wafer on his tongue.  He remained motionless for what seemed an
interminable period of time, his head still raised, the wafer
undissolved in his mouth.  Then again he started at the pressure of
his father's elbow, and saw that the people were falling away from
the altar like leaves and turning with blind downcast eyes to their
pews, alone with God.

Rudolph was alone with himself, drenched with perspiration and deep
in mortal sin.  As he walked back to his pew the sharp taps of his
cloven hoofs were loud upon the floor, and he knew that it was a
dark poison he carried in his heart.


V


"Sagitta Volante in Dei"


The beautiful little boy with eyes like blue stones, and lashes
that sprayed open from them like flower-petals had finished telling
his sin to Father Schwartz--and the square of sunshine in which he
sat had moved forward half an hour into the room.  Rudolph had
become less frightened now; once eased of the story a reaction had
set in.  He knew that as long as he was in the room with this
priest God would not stop his heart, so he sighed and sat quietly,
waiting for the priest to speak.

Father Schwartz's cold watery eyes were fixed upon the carpet
pattern on which the sun had brought out the swastikas and the flat
bloomless vines and the pale echoes of flowers.  The hall-clock
ticked insistently toward sunset, and from the ugly room and from
the afternoon outside the window arose a stiff monotony, shattered
now and then by the reverberate clapping of a far-away hammer on
the dry air.  The priest's nerves were strung thin and the beads of
his rosary were crawling and squirming like snakes upon the green
felt of his table top.  He could not remember now what it was he
should say.

Of all the things in this lost Swede town he was most aware of this
little boy's eyes--the beautiful eyes, with lashes that left them
reluctantly and curved back as though to meet them once more.

For a moment longer the silence persisted while Rudolph waited, and
the priest struggled to remember something that was slipping
farther and farther away from him, and the clock ticked in the
broken house.  Then Father Schwartz stared hard at the little boy
and remarked in a peculiar voice:

"When a lot of people get together in the best places things go
glimmering."

Rudolph started and looked quickly at Father Schwartz's face.

"I said--" began the priest, and paused, listening.  "Do you hear
the hammer and the clock ticking and the bees?  Well, that's no
good.  The thing is to have a lot of people in the center of the
world, wherever that happens to be.  Then"--his watery eyes widened
knowingly--"things go glimmering."

"Yes, Father," agreed Rudolph, feeling a little frightened.

"What are you going to be when you grow up?"

"Well, I was going to be a baseball-player for a while," answered
Rudolph nervously, "but I don't think that's a very good ambition,
so I think I'll be an actor or a Navy officer."

Again the priest stared at him.

"I see EXACTLY what you mean," he said, with a fierce air.

Rudolph had not meant anything in particular, and at the
implication that he had, he became more uneasy.

"This man is crazy," he thought, "and I'm scared of him.  He wants
me to help him out some way, and I don't want to."

"You look as if things went glimmering," cried Father Schwartz
wildly.  "Did you ever go to a party?"

"Yes, Father."

"And did you notice that everybody was properly dressed?  That's
what I mean.  Just as you went into the party there was a moment
when everybody was properly dressed.  Maybe two little girls were
standing by the door and some boys were leaning over the banisters,
and there were bowls around full of flowers."

"I've been to a lot of parties," said Rudolph, rather relieved that
the conversation had taken this turn.

"Of course," continued Father Schwartz triumphantly, "I knew you'd
agree with me.  But my theory is that when a whole lot of people
get together in the best places things go glimmering all the time."

Rudolph found himself thinking of Blatchford Sarnemington.

"Please listen to me!" commanded the priest impatiently.  "Stop
worrying about last Saturday.  Apostasy implies an absolute
damnation only on the supposition of a previous perfect faith.
Does that fix it?"

Rudolph had not the faintest idea what Father Schwartz was talking
about, but he nodded and the priest nodded back at him and returned
to his mysterious preoccupation.

"Why," he cried, "they have lights now as big as stars--do you
realize that?  I heard of one light they had in Paris or somewhere
that was as big as a star.  A lot of people had it--a lot of gay
people.  They have all sorts of things now that you never dreamed
of."

"Look here--"  He came nearer to Rudolph, but the boy drew away, so
Father Schwartz went back and sat down in his chair, his eyes dried
out and hot.  "Did you ever see an amusement park?"

"No, Father."

"Well, go and see an amusement park."  The priest waved his hand
vaguely.  "It's a thing like a fair, only much more glittering.  Go
to one at night and stand a little way off from it in a dark place--
under dark trees.  You'll see a big wheel made of lights turning
in the air, and a long slide shooting boats down into the water.  A
band playing somewhere, and a smell of peanuts--and everything will
twinkle.  But it won't remind you of anything, you see.  It will
all just hang out there in the night like a colored balloon--like a
big yellow lantern on a pole."

Father Schwartz frowned as he suddenly thought of something.

"But don't get up close," he warned Rudolph, "because if you do
you'll only feel the heat and the sweat and the life."

All this talking seemed particularly strange and awful to Rudolph,
because this man was a priest.  He sat there, half terrified, his
beautiful eyes open wide and staring at Father Schwartz.  But
underneath his terror he felt that his own inner convictions were
confirmed.  There was something ineffably gorgeous somewhere that
had nothing to do with God.  He no longer thought that God was
angry at him about the original lie, because He must have
understood that Rudolph had done it to make things finer in the
confessional, brightening up the dinginess of his admissions by
saying a thing radiant and proud.  At the moment when he had
affirmed immaculate honor a silver pennon had flapped out into the
breeze somewhere and there had been the crunch of leather and the
shine of silver spurs and a troop of horsemen waiting for dawn on a
low green hill.  The sun had made stars of light on their
breastplates like the picture at home of the German cuirassiers at
Sedan.

But now the priest was muttering inarticulate and heart-broken
words, and the boy became wildly afraid.  Horror entered suddenly
in at the open window, and the atmosphere of the room changed.
Father Schwartz collapsed precipitously down on his knees, and let
his body settle back against a chair.

"Oh, my God!" he cried out, in a strange voice, and wilted to the
floor.

Then a human oppression rose from the priest's worn clothes, and
mingled with the faint smell of old food in the corners.  Rudolph
gave a sharp cry and ran in a panic from the house--while the
collapsed man lay there quite still, filling his room, filling it
with voices and faces until it was crowded with echolalia, and rang
loud with a steady, shrill note of laughter.



Outside the window the blue sirocco trembled over the wheat, and
girls with yellow hair walked sensuously along roads that bounded
the fields, calling innocent, exciting things to the young men who
were working in the lines between the grain.  Legs were shaped
under starchless gingham, and rims of the necks of dresses were
warm and damp.  For five hours now hot fertile life had burned in
the afternoon.  It would be night in three hours, and all along the
land there would be these blonde Northern girls and the tall young
men from the farms lying out beside the wheat, under the moon.



THE END








AFTERNOON OF AN AUTHOR


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Esquire (August 1936)



When he woke up he felt better than he had for many weeks, a fact
that became plain to him negatively--he did not feel ill.  He
leaned for a moment against the door frame between his bedroom and
bath till he could be sure he was not dizzy.  Not a bit, not even
when he stooped for a slipper under the bed.

It was a bright April morning, he had no idea what time because his
clock was long unwound but as he went back through the apartment to
the kitchen he saw that his daughter had breakfasted and departed
and that the mail was in, so it was after nine.

"I think I'll go out today," he said to the maid.

"Do you good--it's a lovely day."  She was from New Orleans, with
the features and coloring of an Arab.

"I want two eggs like yesterday and toast, orange juice and tea."

He lingered for a moment in his daughter's end of the apartment and
read his mail.  It was an annoying mail with nothing cheerful in it--
mostly bills and advertisements with the diurnal Oklahoma school
boy and his gaping autograph album.  Sam Goldwyn might do a ballet
picture with Spessiwitza and might not--it would all have to wait
till Mr. Goldwyn got back from Europe when he might have half a
dozen new ideas.  Paramount wanted a release on a poem that had
appeared in one of the author's books, as they didn't know whether
it was an original or quoted.  Maybe they were going to get a title
from it.  Anyhow he had no more equity in that property--he had
sold the silent rights many years ago and the sound rights last
year.

"Never any luck with movies," he said to himself.  "Stick to your
last, boy."

He looked out the window during breakfast at the students changing
classes on the college campus across the way.

"Twenty years ago I was changing classes," he said to the maid.
She laughed her débutante's laugh.

"I'll need a check," she said, "if you're going out."

"Oh, I'm not going out yet.  I've got two or three hours' work.  I
meant late this afternoon."

"Going for a drive?"

"I wouldn't drive that old junk--I'd sell it for fifty dollars.
I'm going on the top of a bus."

After breakfast he lay down for fifteen minutes.  Then he went into
the study and began to work.

The problem was a magazine story that had become so thin in the
middle that it was about to blow away.  The plot was like climbing
endless stairs, he had no element of surprise in reserve, and the
characters who started so bravely day-before-yesterday couldn't
have qualified for a newspaper serial.

"Yes, I certainly need to get out," he thought.  "I'd like to drive
down the Shenandoah Valley, or go to Norfolk on the boat."

But both of these ideas were impractical--they took time and energy
and he had not much of either--what there was must be conserved for
work.  He went through the manuscript underlining good phrases in
red crayon and after tucking these into a file slowly tore up the
rest of the story and dropped it in the waste-basket.  Then he
walked the room and smoked, occasionally talking to himself.

"Wee-l, let's see--"

"Nau-ow, the next thing--would be--"

"Now let's see, now--"

After awhile he sat down thinking:

"I'm just stale--I shouldn't have touched a pencil for two days."

He looked through the heading "Story Ideas" in his notebook until
the maid came to tell him his secretary was on the phone--part time
secretary since he had been ill.

"Not a thing," he said.  "I just tore up everything I'd written.
It wasn't worth a damn.  I'm going out this afternoon."

"Good for you.  It's a fine day."

"Better come up tomorrow afternoon--there's a lot of mail and
bills."

He shaved, and then as a precaution rested five minutes before he
dressed.  It was exciting to be going out--he hoped the elevator
boys wouldn't say they were glad to see him up and he decided to go
down the back elevator where they did not know him.  He put on his
best suit with the coat and trousers that didn't match.  He had
bought only two suits in six years but they were the very best
suits--the coat alone of this one had cost a hundred and ten
dollars.  As he must have a destination--it wasn't good to go
places without a destination--he put a tube of shampoo ointment in
his pocket for his barber to use, and also a small phial of
luminol.

"The perfect neurotic," he said, regarding himself in the mirror.
"By-product of an idea, slag of a dream."


II


He went into the kitchen and said good-by to the maid as if he were
going to Little America.  Once in the war he had commandeered an
engine on sheer bluff and had it driven from New York to Washington
to keep from being A.W.O.L.  Now he stood carefully on the street
corner waiting for the light to change, while young people hurried
past him with a fine disregard for traffic.  On the bus corner
under the trees it was green and cool and he thought of Stonewall
Jackson's last words:  "Let us cross over the river and rest under
the shade of the trees."  Those Civil War leaders seemed to have
realized very suddenly how tired they were--Lee shriveling into
another man, Grant with his desperate memoir-writing at the end.

The bus was all he expected--only one other man on the roof and the
green branches ticking against each window through whole blocks.
They would probably have to trim those branches and it seemed a
pity.  There was so much to look at--he tried to define the color
of one line of houses and could only think of an old opera cloak of
his mother's that was full of tints and yet was of no tint--a mere
reflector of light.  Somewhere church bells were playing "Venite
Adoremus" and he wondered why, because Christmas was eight months
off.  He didn't like bells but it had been very moving when they
played "Maryland, My Maryland" at the governor's funeral.

On the college football field men were working with rollers and a
title occurred to him:  "Turf-keeper" or else "The Grass Grows,"
something about a man working on turf for years and bringing up his
son to go to college and play football there.  Then the son dying
in youth and the man's going to work in the cemetery and putting
turf over his son instead of under his feet.  It would be the kind
of piece that is often placed in anthologies, but not his sort of
thing--it was sheer swollen antithesis, as formalized as a popular
magazine story and easier to write.  Many people, however, would
consider it excellent because it was melancholy, had digging in it
and was simple to understand.

The bus went past a pale Athenian railroad station brought to life
by the blue shirted redcaps out in front.  The street narrowed as
the business section began and there were suddenly brightly dressed
girls, all very beautiful--he thought he had never seen such
beautiful girls.  There were men too but they all looked rather
silly, like himself in the mirror, and there were old undecorative
women, and presently, too, there were plain and unpleasant faces
among the girls; but in general they were lovely, dressed in real
colors all the way from six to thirty, no plans or struggles in
their faces, only a state of sweet suspension, provocative and
serene.  He loved life terribly for a minute, not wanting to give
it up at all.  He thought perhaps he had made a mistake in coming
out so soon.

He got off the bus, holding carefully to all the railings and
walked a block to the hotel barbershop.  He passed a sporting goods
store and looked in the window unmoved except by a first baseman's
glove which was already dark in the pocket.  Next to that was a
haberdasher's and here he stood for quite a while looking at the
deep shade of shirts and the ones of checker and plaid.  Ten years
ago on the summer Riviera the author and some others had bought
dark blue workmen's shirts, and probably that had started that
style.  The checkered shirts were nice looking, bright as uniforms
and he wished he were twenty and going to a beach club all dolled
up like a Turner sunset or Guido Reni's dawn.

The barbershop was large, shining and scented--it had been several
months since the author had come downtown on such a mission and he
found that his familiar barber was laid up with arthritis; however,
he explained to another man how to use the ointment, refused a
newspaper and sat, rather happy and sensually content at the strong
fingers on his scalp, while a pleasant mingled memory of all the
barbershops he had ever known flowed through his mind.

Once he had written a story about a barber.  Back in 1929 the
proprietor of his favorite shop in the city where he was then
living had made a fortune of $300,000 on tips from a local
industrialist and was about to retire.  The author had no stake in
the market, in fact, was about to sail for Europe for a few years
with such accumulation as he had, and that autumn hearing how the
barber had lost all his fortune he was prompted to write a story,
thoroughly disguised in every way yet hinging on the fact of a
barber rising in the world and then tumbling; he heard,
nevertheless, that the story had been identified in the city and
caused some hard feelings.

The shampoo ended.  When he came out into the hall an orchestra had
started to play in the cocktail room across the way and he stood
for a moment in the door listening.  So long since he had danced,
perhaps two evenings in five years, yet a review of his last book
had mentioned him as being fond of night clubs; the same review had
also spoken of him as being indefatigable.  Something in the sound
of the word in his mind broke him momentarily and feeling tears of
weakness behind his eyes he turned away.  It was like in the
beginning fifteen years ago when they said he had "fatal facility,"
and he labored like a slave over every sentence so as not to be
like that.

"I'm getting bitter again," he said to himself.  "That's no good,
no good--I've got to go home."

The bus was a long time coming but he didn't like taxis and he
still hoped that something would occur to him on that upper-deck
passing through the green leaves of the boulevard.  When it came
finally he had some trouble climbing the steps but it was worth it
for the first thing he saw was a pair of high school kids, a boy
and a girl, sitting without any self-consciousness on the high
pedestal of the Lafayette statue, their attention fast upon each
other.  Their isolation moved him and he knew he would get
something out of it professionally, if only in contrast to the
growing seclusion of his life and the increasing necessity of
picking over an already well-picked past.  He needed reforestation
and he was well aware of it, and he hoped the soil would stand one
more growth.  It had never been the very best soil for he had had
an early weakness for showing off instead of listening and
observing.

Here was the apartment house--he glanced up at his own windows on
the top floor before he went in.

"The residence of the successful writer," he said to himself.  "I
wonder what marvelous books he's tearing off up there.  It must be
great to have a gift like that--just sit down with pencil and
paper.  Work when you want--go where you please."

His child wasn't home yet but the maid came out of the kitchen and
said:

"Did you have a nice time?"

"Perfect," he said.  "I went roller skating and bowled and played
around with Man Mountain Dean and finished up in a Turkish Bath.
Any telegrams?"

"Not a thing."

"Bring me a glass of milk, will you?"

He went through the dining room and turned into his study, struck
blind for a moment with the glow of his two thousand books in the
late sunshine.  He was quite tired--he would lie down for ten
minutes and then see if he could get started on an idea in the two
hours before dinner.








AN ALCOHOLIC CASE


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Esquire (February 1937)



CHAPTER I


'Let--go--that--Oh-h-h!  Please, now, will you?  DON'T start
drinking again!  Come on--give me the bottle.  I told you I'd stay
awake givin' it to you.  Come on.  If you do like that a-way--then
what are you going to be like when you go home.  Come on--leave it
with me--I'll leave half in the bottle.  Pul-lease.  You know what
Dr Carter says--I'll stay awake and give it to you, or else fix
some of it in the bottle--come on--like I told you, I'm too tired
to be fightin' you all night. . . .  All right, drink your fool
self to death.'

'Would you like some beer?' he asked.

'No, I don't want any beer.  Oh, to think that I have to look at
you drunk again.  My God!'

'Then I'll drink the Coca Cola.'

The girl sat down panting on the bed.

'Don't you believe in anything?' she demanded.

'Nothing you believe in--please--it'll spill.'

She had no business there, she thought, no business trying to help
him.  Again they struggled, but after this time he sat with his
head in his hands awhile, before he turned around once more.

'Once more you try to get it I'll throw it down,' she said quickly.
'I will--on the tiles in the bathroom.'

'Then I'll step on the broken glass--or you'll step on it.'

'Then let go--oh you promised--'

Suddenly she dropped it like a torpedo, sliding underneath her hand
and slithering with a flash of red and black and the words: SIR
GALAHAD, DISTILLED LOUISVILLE GIN.  He took it by the neck and
tossed it through the open door to the bathroom.

It was on the floor in pieces and everything was silent for a while
and she read Gone With the Wind about things so lovely that had
happened long ago.  She began to worry that he would have to go
into the bathroom and might cut his feet, and looked up from time
to time to see if he would go in.  She was very sleepy--the last
time she looked up he was crying and he looked like an old Jewish
man she had nursed once in California; he had had to go to the
bathroom many times.  On this case she was unhappy all the time but
she thought:

'I guess if I hadn't liked him I wouldn't have stayed on the case.'

With a sudden resurgence of conscience she got up and put a chair
in front of the bathroom door.  She had wanted to sleep because he
had got her up early that morning to get a paper with the story of
the Yale-Dartmouth game in it and she hadn't been home all day.
That afternoon a relative of his had come to see him and she had
waited outside in the hall where there was a draught with no
sweater to put over her uniform.

As well as she could she arranged him for sleeping, put a robe over
his shoulders as he sat slumped over his writing table, and one on
his knees.  She sat down in the rocker but she was no longer
sleepy; there was plenty to enter on the chart and treading lightly
about she found a pencil and put it down:

Pulse 120

Respiration 25

Temp.  98--98.4--98.2

Remarks--

--She could make so many:

Tried to get bottle of gin.  Threw it away and broke it.

She corrected it to read:

In the struggle it dropped and was broken.  Patient was generally
difficult.

She started to add as part of her report: I never want to go on an
alcoholic case again, but that wasn't in the picture.  She knew she
could wake herself at seven and clean up everything before his
niece awakened.  It was all part of the game.  But when she sat
down in the chair she looked at his face, white and exhausted, and
counted his breathing again, wondering why it had all happened.  He
had been so nice today, drawn her a whole strip of his cartoon just
for fun and given it to her.  She was going to have it framed and
hang it in her room.  She felt again his thin wrists wrestling
against her wrist and remembered the awful things he had said, and
she thought too of what the doctor had said to him yesterday:

'You're too good a man to do this to yourself.'

She was tired and didn't want to clean up the glass on the bathroom
floor, because as soon as he breathed evenly she wanted to get him
over to the bed.  But she decided finally to clean up the glass
first; on her knees, searching a last piece of it, she thought:

--This isn't what I ought to be doing.  And this isn't what HE
ought to be doing.

Resentfully she stood up and regarded him.  Through the thin
delicate profile of his nose came a light snore, sighing, remote,
inconsolable.  The doctor had shaken his head in a certain way, and
she knew that really it was a case that was beyond her.  Besides,
on her card at the agency was written, on the advice of her elders,
'No Alcoholics'.

She had done her whole duty, but all she could think of was that
when she was struggling about the room with him with that gin
bottle there had been a pause when he asked her if she had hurt her
elbow against a door and that she had answered:  'You don't know
how people talk about you, no matter how you think of yourself--'
when she knew he had a long time ceased to care about such things.

The glass was all collected--as she got out a broom to make sure,
she realized that the glass, in its fragments, was less than a
window through which they had seen each other for a moment.  He did
not know about her sister, and Bill Markoe whom she had almost
married, and she did not know what had brought him to this pitch,
when there was a picture on his bureau of his young wife and his
two sons and him, all trim and handsome as he must have been five
years ago.  It was so utterly senseless--as she put a bandage on
her finger where she had cut it while picking up the glass she made
up her mind she would never take an alcoholic case again.


CHAPTER II


It was early the next evening.  Some Halloween jokester had split
the side windows of the bus and she shifted back to the Negro
section in the rear for fear the glass might fall out.  She had her
patient's cheque but no way to cash it at this hour; there was a
quarter and a penny in her purse.

Two nurses she knew were waiting in the hall of Mrs Hixson's
Agency.

'What kind of case have you been on?'

'Alcoholic,' she said.

'Oh, yes--Gretta Hawks told me about it--you were on with that
cartoonist who lives at the Forest Park Inn.'

'Yes, I was.'

'I hear he's pretty fresh.'

'He's never done anything to bother me,' she lied.  'You can't
treat them as if they were committed--'

'Oh, don't get bothered--I just heard that around town--oh, you
know--they want you to play around with them--'

'Oh, be quiet,' she said, surprised at her own rising resentment.

In a moment Mrs Hixson came out and, asking the other two to wait,
signalled her into the office.

'I don't like to put young girls on such cases,' she began.  'I got
your call from the hotel.'

'Oh, it wasn't bad, Mrs Hixson.  He didn't know what he was doing
and he didn't hurt me in any way.  I was thinking much more of my
reputation with you.  He was really nice all day yesterday.  He
drew me--'

'I didn't want to send you on that case.'  Mrs Hixson thumbed
through the registration cards.  'You take T.B. cases, don't you?
Yes, I see you do.  Now here's one--'

The phone rang in a continuous chime.  The nurse listened as Mrs
Hixson's voice said precisely:

'I will do what I can--that is simply up to the doctor . . .  That
is beyond my jurisdiction . . .  Oh, hello, Hattie, no, I can't
now.  Look, have you got any nurse that's good with alcoholics?
There's somebody up at the Forest Park Inn who needs somebody.
Call back will you?'

She put down the receiver.  'Suppose you wait outside.  What sort
of man is this, anyhow?  Did he act indecently?'

'He held my hand away,' she said, 'so I couldn't give him an
injection.'

'Oh, an invalid he-man,' Mrs Hixson grumbled.  'They belong in
sanatoria.  I've got a case coming along in two minutes that you
can get a little rest on.  It's an old woman--'

The phone rang again.  'Oh, hello, Hattie. . . .  Well, how about
that big Svensen girl?  She ought to be able to take care of any
alcoholic. . . .  How about Josephine Markham?  Doesn't she live in
your apartment house? . . .  Get her to the phone.'  Then after a
moment, 'Joe, would you care to take the case of a well-known
cartoonist, or artist, whatever they call themselves, at Forest
Park Inn? . . .  No, I don't know, but Dr Carter is in charge and
will be around about ten o'clock.'

There was a long pause; from time to time Mrs Hixson spoke:

'I see . . .  Of course, I understand your point of view.  Yes, but
this isn't supposed to be dangerous--just a little difficult.  I
never like to send girls to a hotel because I know what riff-raff
you're liable to run into. . . .  No, I'll find somebody.  Even at
this hour.  Never mind and thanks.  Tell Hattie I hope that the hat
matches the négligé. . . .'

Mrs Hixson hung up the receiver and made notations on the pad
before her.  She was a very efficient woman.  She had been a nurse
and had gone through the worst of it, had been a proud, idealistic,
overworked probationer, suffered the abuse of smart internees and
the insolence of her first patients, who thought that she was
something to be taken into camp immediately for premature
commitment to the service of old age.  She swung around suddenly
from the desk.

'What kind of cases do you want?  I told you I have a nice old
woman--'

The nurse's brown eyes were alight with a mixture of thoughts--the
movie she had just seen about Pasteur and the book they had all
read about Florence Nightingale when they were student nurses.  And
their pride, swinging across the streets in the cold weather at
Philadelphia General, as proud of their new capes as débutantes in
their furs going into balls at the hotels.

'I--I think I would like to try the case again,' she said amid a
cacophony of telephone bells.  'I'd just as soon go back if you
can't find anybody else.'

'But one minute you say you'll never go on an alcoholic case again
and the next minute you say you want to go back to one.'

'I think I overestimated how difficult it was.  Really, I think I
could help him.'

'That's up to you.  But if he tried to grab your wrists.'

'But he couldn't,' the nurse said.  'Look at my wrists: I played
basketball at Waynesboro High for two years.  I'm quite able to
take care of him.'

Mrs Hixson looked at her for a long minute.  'Well, all right,' she
said.  'But just remember that nothing they say when they're drunk
is what they mean when they're sober--I've been all through that;
arrange with one of the servants that you can call on him, because
you never can tell--some alcoholics are pleasant and some of them
are not, but all of them can be rotten.'

'I'll remember,' the nurse said.

It was an oddly clear night when she went out, with slanting
particles of thin sleet making white of a blue-black sky.  The bus
was the same that had taken her into town, but there seemed to be
more windows broken now and the bus driver was irritated and talked
about what terrible things he would do if he caught any kids.  She
knew he was just talking about the annoyance in general, just as
she had been thinking about the annoyance of an alcoholic.  When
she came up to the suite and found him all helpless and distraught
she would despise him and be sorry for him.

Getting off the bus, she went down the long steps to the hotel,
feeling a little exalted by the chill in the air.  She was going to
take care of him because nobody else would, and because the best
people of her profession had been interested in taking care of the
cases that nobody else wanted.

She knocked at his study door, knowing just what she was going to
say.

He answered it himself.  He was in dinner clothes even to a derby
hat--but minus his studs and tie.

'Oh, hello,' he said casually.  'Glad you're back.  I woke up a
while ago and decided I'd go out.  Did you get a night nurse?'

'I'm the night nurse too,' she said.  'I decided to stay on twenty-
four-hour duty.'

He broke into a genial, indifferent smile.

'I saw you were gone, but something told me you'd come back.
Please find my studs.  They ought to be either in a little
tortoiseshell box or--'

He shook himself a little more into his clothes, and hoisted the
cuffs up inside his coat sleeves.

'I thought you had quit me,' he said casually.

'I thought I had, too.'

'If you look on that table,' he said, 'you'll find a whole strip of
cartoons that I drew you.'

'Who are you going to see?' she asked.

'It's the President's secretary,' he said.  'I had an awful time
trying to get ready.  I was about to give up when you came in.
Will you order me some sherry?'

'One glass,' she agreed wearily.

From the bathroom he called presently:

'Oh, Nurse, Nurse, Light of my Life, where is another stud?'

'I'll put it in.'

In the bathroom she saw the pallor and the fever on his face and
smelled the mixed peppermint and gin on his breath.

'You'll come up soon?' she asked.  'Dr Carter's coming at ten.'

'What nonsense!  You're coming down with me.'

'Me?' she exclaimed.  'In a sweater and skirt?  Imagine!'

'Then I won't go.'

'All right then, go to bed.  That's where you belong anyhow.  Can't
you see these people tomorrow?'

'No, of course not!'

She went behind him and reaching over his shoulder tied his tie--
his shirt was already thumbed out of press where he had put in the
studs, and she suggested:

'Won't you put on another one, if you've got to meet some people
you like?'

'All right, but I want to do it myself.'

'Why can't you let me help you?' she demanded in exasperation.
'Why can't you let me help you with your clothes?  What's a nurse
for--what good am I doing?'

He sat down suddenly on the toilet seat.

'All right--go on.'

'Now don't grab my wrist,' she said, and then, 'Excuse me.'

'Don't worry.  It didn't hurt.  You'll see in a minute.'

She had the coat, vest, and stiff shirt off him but before she
could pull his undershirt over his head he dragged at his
cigarette, delaying her.

'Now watch this,' he said.  'One--two--three.'

She pulled up the undershirt; simultaneously he thrust the crimson-
grey point of the cigarette like a dagger against his heart.  It
crushed out against a copper plate on his left rib about the size
of a silver dollar, and he said 'Ouch!' as a stray spark fluttered
down against his stomach.

Now was the time to be hard-boiled, she thought.  She knew there
were three medals from the war in his jewel box, but she had risked
many things herself: tuberculosis among them and one time something
worse, though she had not known it and had never quite forgiven the
doctor for not telling her.

'You've had a hard time with that, I guess,' she said lightly as
she sponged him.  'Won't it ever heal?'

'Never.  That's a copper plate.'

'Well, it's no excuse for what you're doing to yourself.'

He bent his great brown eyes on her, shrewd--aloof, confused.  He
signalled to her, in one second, his Will to Die, and for all her
training and experience she knew she could never do anything
constructive with him.  He stood up, steadying himself on the wash-
basin and fixing his eyes on some place just ahead.

'Now, if I'm going to stay here you're not going to get at that
liquor,' she said.

Suddenly she knew he wasn't looking for that.  He was looking at
the corner where he had thrown the bottle the night before.  She
stared at his handsome face, weak and defiant--afraid to turn even
half-way because she knew that death was in that corner where he
was looking.  She knew death--she had heard it, smelt its
unmistakable odour, but she had never seen it before it entered
into anyone, and she knew this man saw it in the corner of his
bathroom; that it was standing there looking at him while he spat
from a feeble cough and rubbed the result into the braid of his
trousers.  It shone there crackling for a moment as evidence of the
last gesture he ever made.

She tried to express it next day to Mrs Hixson:

'It's not like anything you can beat--no matter how hard you try.
This one could have twisted my wrists until he strained them and
that wouldn't matter so much to me.  It's just that you can't
really help them and it's so discouraging--it's all for nothing.'



AT YOUR AGE


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (17 August 1929)



Tom Squires came into the drug store to buy a toothbrush, a can of
talcum, a gargle, Castile soap, Epsom salts and a box of cigars.
Having lived alone for many years, he was methodical, and while
waiting to be served he held the list in his hand.  It was
Christmas week and Minneapolis was under two feet of exhilarating,
constantly refreshed snow; with his cane Tom knocked two clean
crusts of it from his overshoes.  Then, looking up, he saw the
blonde girl.

She was a rare blonde, even in that Promised Land of Scandinavians,
where pretty blondes are not rare.  There was warm color in her
cheeks, lips and pink little hands that folded powders into papers;
her hair, in long braids twisted about her head, was shining and
alive.  She seemed to Tom suddenly the cleanest person he knew of,
and he caught his breath as he stepped forward and looked into her
gray eyes.

"A can of talcum."

"What kind?"

"Any kind. . . .  That's fine."

She looked back at him apparently without self-consciousness, and,
as the list melted away, his heart raced with it wildly.

"I am not old," he wanted to say.  "At fifty I'm younger than most
men of forty.  Don't I interest you at all?"

But she only said "What kind of gargle?"

And he answered, "What can you recommend? . . .  That's fine."

Almost painfully he took his eyes from her, went out and got into
his coupé.

"If that young idiot only knew what an old imbecile like me could
do for her," he thought humorously--"what worlds I could open out
to her!"

As he drove away into the winter twilight he followed this train of
thought to a totally unprecedented conclusion.  Perhaps the time of
day was the responsible stimulant, for the shop windows glowing
into the cold, the tinkling bells of a delivery sleigh, the white
gloss left by shovels on the sidewalks, the enormous distance of
the stars, brought back the feel of other nights thirty years ago.
For an instant the girls he had known then slipped like phantoms
out of their dull matronly selves of today and fluttered past him
with frosty, seductive laughter, until a pleasant shiver crawled up
his spine.

"Youth!  Youth!  Youth!" he apostrophized with conscious lack of
originality, and, as a somewhat ruthless and domineering man of no
morals whatsoever, he considered going back to the drug store to
seek the blonde girl's address.  It was not his sort of thing, so
the half-formed intention passed; the idea remained.

"Youth, by heaven--youth!" he repeated under his breath.  "I want
it near me, all around me, just once more before I'm too old to
care."

He was tall, lean and handsome, with the ruddy, bronzed face of a
sportsman and a just faintly graying mustache.  Once he had been
among the city's best beaus, organizer of cotillions and charity
balls, popular with men and women, and with several generations of
them.  After the war he had suddenly felt poor, gone into business,
and in ten years accumulated nearly a million dollars.  Tom Squires
was not introspective, but he perceived now that the wheel of his
life had revolved again, bringing up forgotten, yet familiar,
dreams and yearnings.  Entering his house, he turned suddenly to a
pile of disregarded invitations to see whether or not he had been
bidden to a dance tonight.

Throughout his dinner, which he ate alone at the Downtown Club, his
eyes were half closed and on his face was a faint smile.  He was
practicing so that he would be able to laugh at himself painlessly,
if necessary.

"I don't even know what they talk about," he admitted.  "They pet--
prominent broker goes to petting party with débutante.  What is a
petting party?  Do they serve refreshments?  Will I have to learn
to play a saxophone?"

These matters, lately as remote as China in a news reel, came alive
to him.  They were serious questions.  At ten o'clock he walked up
the steps of the College Club to a private dance with the same
sense of entering a new world as when he had gone into a training
camp back in '17.  He spoke to a hostess of his generation and to
her daughter, overwhelmingly of another, and sat down in a corner
to acclimate himself.

He was not alone long.  A silly young man named Leland Jaques, who
lived across the street from Tom, remarked him kindly and came over
to brighten his life.  He was such an exceedingly fatuous young man
that, for a moment, Tom was annoyed, but he perceived craftily that
he might be of service.

"Hello, Mr. Squires.  How are you, sir?"

"Fine, thanks, Leland.  Quite a dance."

As one man of the world with another, Mr. Jaques sat, or lay, down
on the couch and lit--or so it seemed to Tom--three or four
cigarettes at once.

"You should of been here last night, Mr. Squires.  Oh, boy, that
was a party and a half!  The Caulkins.  Hap-past five!"

"Who's that girl who changes partners every minute?" Tom asked. . . .
"No, the one in white passing the door."

"That's Annie Lorry."

"Arthur Lorry's daughter?"

"Yes."

"She seems popular."

"About the most popular girl in town--anyway, at a dance."

"Not popular except at dances?"

"Oh, sure, but she hangs around with Randy Cambell all the time."

"What Cambell?"

"D. B."

There were new names in town in the last decade.

"It's a boy-and-girl affair."  Pleased with this phrase, Jaques
tried to repeat it:  "One of those boy-and-girls affair--boys-and-
girl affairs--"  He gave it up and lit several more cigarettes,
crushing out the first series on Tom's lap.

"Does she drink?"

"Not especially.  At least I never saw her passed out. . . .
That's Randy Cambell just cut in on her now."

They were a nice couple.  Her beauty sparkled bright against his
strong, tall form, and they floated hoveringly, delicately, like
two people in a nice, amusing dream.  They came near and Tom
admired the faint dust of powder over her freshness, the guarded
sweetness of her smile, the fragility of her body calculated by
Nature to a millimeter to suggest a bud, yet guarantee a flower.
Her innocent, passionate eyes were brown, perhaps; but almost
violet in the silver light.

"Is she out this year?"

"Who?"

"Miss Lorry."

"Yes."

Although the girl's loveliness interested Tom, he was unable to
picture himself as one of the attentive, grateful queue that
pursued her around the room.  Better meet her when the holidays
were over and most of these young men were back in college "where
they belonged."  Tom Squires was old enough to wait.

He waited a fortnight while the city sank into the endless northern
midwinter, where gray skies were friendlier than metallic blue
skies, and dusk, whose lights were a reassuring glimpse into the
continuity of human cheer, was warmer than the afternoons of
bloodless sunshine.  The coat of snow lost its press and became
soiled and shabby, and ruts froze in the street; some of the big
houses on Crest Avenue began to close as their occupants went
South.  In those cold days Tom asked Annie and her parents to go as
his guests to the last Bachelors' Ball.

The Lorrys were an old family in Minneapolis, grown a little
harassed and poor since the war.  Mrs. Lorry, a contemporary of
Tom's, was not surprised that he should send mother and daughter
orchids and dine them luxuriously in his apartment on fresh caviar,
quail and champagne.  Annie saw him only dimly--he lacked
vividness, as the old do for the young--but she perceived his
interest in her and performed for him the traditional ritual of
young beauty--smiles, polite, wide-eyed attention, a profile held
obligingly in this light or in that.  At the ball he danced with
her twice, and, though she was teased about it, she was flattered
that such a man of the world--he had become that instead of a mere
old man--had singled her out.  She accepted his invitation to the
symphony the following week, with the idea that it would be uncouth
to refuse.

There were several "nice invitations" like that.  Sitting beside
him, she dozed in the warm shadow of Brahms and thought of Randy
Cambell and other romantic nebulosities who might appear tomorrow.
Feeling casually mellow one afternoon, she deliberately provoked
Tom to kiss her on the way home, but she wanted to laugh when he
took her hands and told her fervently he was falling in love.

"But how could you?" she protested.  "Really, you musn't say such
crazy things.  I won't go out with you any more, and then you'll be
sorry."

A few days later her mother spoke to her as Tom waited outside in
his car:

"Who's that, Annie?"

"Mr. Squires."

"Shut the door a minute.  You're seeing him quite a bit."

"Why not?"

"Well, dear, he's fifty years old."

"But, mother, there's hardly anybody else in town."

"But you musn't get any silly ideas about him."

"Don't worry.  Actually, he bores me to extinction most of the
time."  She came to a sudden decision:  "I'm not going to see him
any more.  I just couldn't get out of going with him this
afternoon."

And that night, as she stood by her door in the circle of Randy
Cambell's arm, Tom and his single kiss had no existence for her.

"Oh, I do love you so," Randy whispered.  "Kiss me once more."

Their cool cheeks and warm lips met in the crisp darkness, and,
watching the icy moon over his shoulder, Annie knew that she was
his surely and, pulling his face down, kissed him again, trembling
with emotion.

"When'll you marry me then?" he whispered.

"When can you--we afford it?"

"Couldn't you announce our engagement?  If you knew the misery of
having you out with somebody else and then making love to you."

"Oh, Randy, you ask so much."

"It's so awful to say good night.  Can't I come in for a minute?"

"Yes."

Sitting close together in a trance before the flickering, lessening
fire, they were oblivious that their common fate was being coolly
weighed by a man of fifty who lay in a hot bath some blocks away.


II


Tom Squires had guessed from Annie's extremely kind and detached
manner of the afternoon that he had failed to interest her.  He had
promised himself that in such an eventuality he would drop the
matter, but now he found himself in no such humor.  He did not want
to marry her; he simply wanted to see her and be with her a little;
and up to the moment of her sweetly casual, half passionate, yet
wholly unemotional kiss, giving her up would have been easy, for he
was past the romantic age; but since that kiss the thought of her
made his heart move up a few inches in his chest and beat there
steady and fast.

"But this is the time to get out," he said to himself.  "My age; no
possible right to force myself into her life."

He rubbed himself dry, brushed his hair before the mirror, and, as
he laid down the comb, said decisively:  "That is that."  And after
reading for an hour he turned out the lamp with a snap and repeated
aloud:  "That is that."

In other words, that was not that at all, and the click of material
things did not finish off Annie Lorry as a business decision might
be settled by the tap of a pencil on the table.

"I'm going to carry this matter a little further," he said to
himself about half-past four; on that acknowledgment he turned over
and found sleep.

In the morning she had receded somewhat, but by four o'clock in the
afternoon she was all around him--the phone was for calling her, a
woman's footfalls passing his office were her footfalls, the snow
outside the window was blowing, perhaps, against her rosy face.

"There is always the little plan I thought of last night," he said
to himself.  "In ten years I'll be sixty, and then no youth, no
beauty for me ever any more."

In a sort of panic he took a sheet of note paper and composed a
carefully phrased letter to Annie's mother, asking permission to
pay court to her daughter.  He took it himself into the hall, but
before the letter slide he tore it up and dropped the pieces in a
cuspidor.

"I couldn't do such an underhand trick," he told himself, "at my
age."  But this self-congratulation was premature, for he rewrote
the letter and mailed it before he left his office that night.

Next day the reply he had counted on arrived--he could have guessed
its very words in advance.  It was a curt and indignant refusal.

It ended:


I think it best that you and my daughter meet no more.

                           Very Sincerely Yours,

                                          MABEL TOLLMAN LORRY.


"And now," Tom thought coolly, "we'll see what the girl says to
that."  He wrote a note to Annie.  Her mother's letter had
surprised him, it said, but perhaps it was best that they should
meet no more, in view of her mother's attitude.

By return post came Annie's defiant answer to her mother's fiat:
"This isn't the Dark Ages.  I'll see you whenever I like."  She
named a rendezvous for the following afternoon.  Her mother's short-
sightedness brought about what he had failed to achieve directly;
for where Annie had been on the point of dropping him, she was now
determined to do nothing of the sort.  And the secrecy engendered
by disapproval at home simply contributed the missing excitement.
As February hardened into deep, solemn, interminable winter, she
met him frequently and on a new basis.  Sometimes they drove over
to St. Paul to see a picture or to have dinner; sometimes they
parked far out on a boulevard in his coupé, while the bitter sleet
glazed the windshield to opacity and furred his lamps with ermine.
Often he brought along something special to drink--enough to make
her gay, but, carefully, never more; for mingled with his other
emotions about her was something paternally concerned.

Laying his cards on the table, he told her that it was her mother
who had unwittingly pushed her toward him, but Annie only laughed
at his duplicity.

She was having a better time with him than with anyone else she had
ever known.  In place of the selfish exigency of a younger man, he
showed her a never-failing consideration.  What if his eyes were
tired, his cheeks a little leathery and veined, if his will was
masculine and strong.  Moreover, his experience was a window
looking out upon a wider, richer world; and with Randy Cambell next
day she would feel less taken care of, less valued, less rare.

It was Tom now who was vaguely discontented.  He had what he wanted--
her youth at his side--and he felt that anything further would be
a mistake.  His liberty was precious to him and he could offer her
only a dozen years before he would be old, but she had become
something precious to him and he perceived that drifting wasn't
fair.  Then one day late in February the matter was decided out of
hand.

They had ridden home from St. Paul and dropped into the College
Club for tea, breaking together through the drifts that masked the
walk and rimmed the door.  It was a revolving door; a young man
came around in it, and stepping into his space, they smelt onions
and whisky.  The door revolved again after them, and he was back
within, facing them.  It was Randy Cambell; his face was flushed,
his eyes dull and hard.

"Hello, beautiful," he said, approaching Annie.

"Don't come so close," she protested lightly.  "You smell of
onions."

"You're particular all of a sudden."

"Always.  I'm always particular."  Annie made a slight movement
back toward Tom.

"Not always," said Randy unpleasantly.  Then, with increased
emphasis and a fractional glance at Tom:  "Not always."  With his
remark he seemed to join the hostile world outside.  "And I'll just
give you a tip," he continued:  "Your mother's inside."

The jealous ill-temper of another generation reached Tom only
faintly, like the protest of a child, but at this impertinent
warning he bristled with annoyance.

"Come on, Annie," he said brusquely.  "We'll go in."

With her glance uneasily averted from Randy, Annie followed Tom
into the big room.

It was sparsely populated; three middle-aged women sat near the
fire.  Momentarily Annie drew back, then she walked toward them.

"Hello, mother . . . Mrs. Trumble . . . Aunt Caroline."

The two latter responded; Mrs. Trumble even nodded faintly at Tom.
But Annie's mother got to her feet without a word, her eyes frozen,
her mouth drawn.  For a moment she stood staring at her daughter;
then she turned abruptly and left the room.

Tom and Annie found a table across the room.

"Wasn't she terrible?" said Annie, breathing aloud.  He didn't
answer.

"For three days she hasn't spoken to me."  Suddenly she broke out:
"Oh, people can be so small!  I was going to sing the leading part
in the Junior League show, and yesterday Cousin Mary Betts, the
president, came to me and said I couldn't."

"Why not?"

"Because a representative Junior League girl mustn't defy her
mother.  As if I were a naughty child!"

Tom stared on at a row of cups on the mantelpiece--two or three of
them bore his name.  "Perhaps she was right," he said suddenly.
"When I begin to do harm to you it's time to stop."

"What do you mean?"

At her shocked voice his heart poured a warm liquid forth into his
body, but he answered quietly:  "You remember I told you I was
going South?  Well, I'm going tomorrow."

There was an argument, but he had made up his mind.  At the station
next evening she wept and clung to him.

"Thank you for the happiest month I've had in years," he said.

"But you'll come back, Tom."

"I'll be two months in Mexico; then I'm going East for a few
weeks."

He tried to sound fortunate, but the frozen city he was leaving
seemed to be in blossom.  Her frozen breath was a flower on the
air, and his heart sank as he realized that some young man was
waiting outside to take her home in a car hung with blooms.

"Good-by, Annie.  Good-by, sweet!"

Two days later he spent the morning in Houston with Hal Meigs, a
classmate at Yale.

"You're in luck for such an old fella," said Meigs at luncheon,
"because I'm going to introduce you to the cutest little traveling
companion you ever saw, who's going all the way to Mexico City."

The lady in question was frankly pleased to learn at the station
that she was not returning alone.  She and Tom dined together on
the train and later played rummy for an hour; but when, at ten
o'clock, standing in the door of the stateroom, she turned back to
him suddenly with a certain look, frank and unmistakable, and stood
there holding that look for a long moment, Tom Squires was suddenly
in the grip of an emotion that was not the one in question.  He
wanted desperately to see Annie, call her for a second on the
phone, and then fall asleep, knowing she was young and pure as a
star, and safe in bed.

"Good night," he said, trying to keep any repulsion out of his
voice.

"Oh!  Good night."

Arriving in El Paso next day, he drove over the border to Juarez.
It was bright and hot, and after leaving his bags at the station he
went into a bar for an iced drink; as he sipped it a girl's voice
addressed him thickly from the table behind:

"You'n American?"

He had noticed her slumped forward on her elbows as he came in;
now, turning, he faced a young girl of about seventeen, obviously
drunk, yet with gentility in her unsteady, sprawling voice.  The
American bartender leaned confidentially forward.

"I don't know what to do about her," he said.  "She come in about
three o'clock with two young fellows--one of them her sweetie.
They had a fight and the men went off, and this one's been here
ever since."

A spasm of distaste passed over Tom--the rules of his generation
were outraged and defied.  That an American girl should be drunk
and deserted in a tough foreign town--that such things happened,
might happen to Annie.  He looked at his watch, hesitated.

"Has she got a bill?" he asked.

"She owes for five gins.  But suppose her boy friends come back?"

"Tell them she's at the Roosevelt Hotel in El Paso."

Approaching, he put his hand on her shoulder.  She looked up.

"You look like Santa Claus," she said vaguely.  "You couldn't
possibly be Santa Claus, could you?"

"I'm going to take you to El Paso."

"Well," she considered, "you look perfectly safe to me."

She was so young--a drenched little rose.  He could have wept for
her wretched unconsciousness of the old facts, the old penalties of
life.  Jousting at nothing in an empty tilt yard with a shaking
spear.  The taxi moved too slowly through the suddenly poisonous
night.

Having explained things to a reluctant night clerk, he went out and
found a telegraph office.

"Have given up Mexican trip," he wired.  "Leaving here tonight.
Please meet train in the St. Paul station at three o'clock and ride
with me to Minneapolis, as I can't spare you for another minute.
All my love."

He could at least keep an eye on her, advise her, see what she did
with her life.  That silly mother of hers!

On the train, as the baked tropical lands and green fields fell
away and the North swept near again with patches of snow, then
fields of it, fierce winds in the vestibule and bleak, hibernating
farms, he paced the corridors with intolerable restlessness.  When
they drew into the St. Paul station he swung himself off like a
young man and searched the platform eagerly, but his eyes failed to
find her.  He had counted on those few minutes between the cities;
they had become a symbol of her fidelity to their friendship, and
as the train started again he searched it desperately from smoker
to observation car.  But he could not find her, and now he knew
that he was mad for her; at the thought that she had taken his
advice and plunged into affairs with other men, he grew weak with
fear.

Drawing into Minneapolis, his hands fumbled so that he must call
the porter to fasten his baggage.  Then there was an interminable
wait in the corridor while the baggage was taken off and he was
pressed up against a girl in a squirrel-trimmed coat.

"Tom!"

"Well, I'll be--"

Her arms went up around his neck.  "But, Tom," she cried, "I've
been right here in this car since St. Paul!"

His cane fell in the corridor, he drew her very tenderly close and
their lips met like starved hearts.


III


The new intimacy of their definite engagement brought Tom a feeling
of young happiness.  He awoke on winter mornings with the sense of
undeserved joy hovering in the room; meeting young men, he found
himself matching the vigor of his mind and body against theirs.
Suddenly his life had a purpose and a background; he felt rounded
and complete.  On gray March afternoons when she wandered
familiarly in his apartment the warm sureties of his youth flooded
back--ecstasy and poignancy, the mortal and the eternal posed in
their immemorially tragic juxtaposition and, a little astounded, he
found himself relishing the very terminology of young romance.  But
he was more thoughtful than a younger lover; and to Annie he seemed
to "know everything," to stand holding open the gates for her
passage into the truly golden world.

"We'll go to Europe first," he said.

"Oh, we'll go there a lot, won't we?  Let's spend our winters in
Italy and the spring in Paris."

"But, little Annie, there's business."

"Well, we'll stay away as much as we can anyhow.  I hate
Minneapolis."

"Oh, no."  He was a little shocked.  "Minneapolis is all right."

"When you're here it's all right."

Mrs. Lorry yielded at length to the inevitable.  With ill grace she
acknowledged the engagement, asking only that the marriage should
not take place until fall.

"Such a long time," Annie sighed.

"After all, I'm your mother.  It's so little to ask."

It was a long winter, even in a land of long winters.  March was
full of billowy drifts, and when it seemed at last as though the
cold must be defeated, there was a series of blizzards, desperate
as last stands.  The people waited; their first energy to resist
was spent, and man, like weather, simply hung on.  There was less
to do now and the general restlessness was expressed by surliness
in daily contacts.  Then, early in April, with a long sigh the ice
cracked, the snow ran into the ground and the green, eager spring
broke up through.

One day, riding along a slushy road in a fresh, damp breeze with a
little starved, smothered grass in it, Annie began to cry.
Sometimes she cried for nothing, but this time Tom suddenly stopped
the car and put his arm around her.

"Why do you cry like that?  Are you unhappy?"

"Oh, no, no!" she protested.

"But you cried yesterday the same way.  And you wouldn't tell me
why.  You must always tell me."

"Nothing, except the spring.  It smells so good, and it always has
so many sad thoughts and memories in it."

"It's our spring, my sweetheart," he said.  "Annie, don't let's
wait.  Let's be married in June."

"I promised mother, but if you like we can announce our engagement
in June."

The spring came fast now.  The sidewalks were damp, then dry, and
the children roller-skated on them and boys played baseball in the
soft, vacant lots.  Tom got up elaborate picnics of Annie's
contemporaries and encouraged her to play golf and tennis with
them.  Abruptly, with a final, triumphant lurch of Nature, it was
full summer.

On a lovely May evening Tom came up the Lorrys' walk and sat down
beside Annie's mother on the porch.

"It's so pleasant," he said, "I thought Annie and I would walk
instead of driving this evening.  I want to show her the funny old
house I was born in."

"On Chambers Street, wasn't it?  Annie'll be home in a few minutes.
She went riding with some young people after dinner."

"Yes, on Chambers Street."

He looked at his watch presently, hoping Annie would come while it
was still light enough to see.  Quarter of nine.  He frowned.  She
had kept him waiting the night before, kept him waiting an hour
yesterday afternoon.

"If I was twenty-one," he said to himself, "I'd make scenes and
we'd both be miserable."

He and Mrs. Lorry talked; the warmth of the night precipitated the
vague evening lassitude of the fifties and softened them both, and
for the first time since his attentions to Annie began, there was
no unfriendliness between them.  By and by long silences fell,
broken only by the scratch of a match or the creak of her swinging
settee.  When Mr. Lorry came home Tom threw away his second cigar
in surprise and looked at his watch; it was after ten.

"Annie's late," Mrs. Lorry said.

"I hope there's nothing wrong," said Tom anxiously.  "Who is she
with?"

"There were four when they started out.  Randy Cambell and another
couple--I didn't notice who.  They were only going for a soda."

"I hope there hasn't been any trouble.  Perhaps--Do you think I
ought to go and see?"

"Ten isn't late nowadays.  You'll find--"  Remembering that Tom
Squires was marrying Annie, not adopting her, she kept herself from
adding:  "You'll get used to it."

Her husband excused himself and went up to bed, and the
conversation became more forced and desultory.  When the church
clock over the way struck eleven they both broke off and listened
to the beats.  Twenty minutes later just as Tom impatiently crushed
out his last cigar, an automobile drifted down the street and came
to rest in front of the door.

For a minute no one moved on the porch or in the auto.  Then Annie,
with a hat in her hand, got out and came quickly up the walk.
Defying the tranquil night, the car snorted away.

"Oh, hello!" she cried.  "I'm so sorry!  What time is it?  Am I
terribly late?"

Tom didn't answer.  The street lamp threw wine color upon her face
and expressed with a shadow the heightened flush of her cheek.  Her
dress was crushed, her hair was in brief, expressive disarray.  But
it was the strange little break in her voice that made him afraid
to speak, made him turn his eyes aside.

"What happened?" Mrs. Lorry asked casually.

"Oh, a blow-out and something wrong with the engine--and we lost
our way.  Is it terribly late?"

And then, as she stood before them, her hat still in her hand, her
breast rising and falling a little, her eyes wide and bright, Tom
realized with a shock that he and her mother were people of the
same age looking at a person of another.  Try as he might, he could
not separate himself from Mrs. Lorry.  When she excused herself he
suppressed a frantic tendency to say, "But why should you go now?
After sitting here all evening?"

They were alone.  Annie came up to him and pressed his hand.  He
had never been so conscious of her beauty; her damp hands were
touched with dew.

"You were out with young Cambell," he said.

"Yes.  Oh, don't be mad.  I feel--I feel so upset tonight."

"Upset?"

She sat down, whimpering a little.

"I couldn't help it.  Please don't be mad.  He wanted so for me to
take a ride with him and it was such a wonderful night, so I went
just for an hour.  And we began talking and I didn't realize the
time.  I felt so sorry for him."

"How do you think I felt?"  He scorned himself, but it was said
now.

"Don't, Tom.  I told you I was terribly upset.  I want to go to
bed."

"I understand.  Good night, Annie."

"Oh, please don't act that way, Tom.  Can't you understand?"

But he could, and that was just the trouble.  With the courteous
bow of another generation, he walked down the steps and off into
the obliterating moonlight.  In a moment he was just a shadow
passing the street lamps and then a faint footfall up the street.


IV


All through that summer he often walked abroad in the evenings.  He
liked to stand for a minute in front of the house where he was
born, and then in front of another house where he had been a little
boy.  On his customary routes there were other sharp landmarks of
the 90's, converted habitats of gayeties that no longer existed--
the shell of Jansen's Livery Stables and the old Nushka Rink, where
every winter his father had curled on the well-kept ice.

"And it's a darn pity," he would mutter.  "A darn pity."

He had a tendency, too, to walk past the lights of a certain drug
store, because it seemed to him that it had contained the seed of
another and nearer branch of the past.  Once he went in, and
inquiring casually about the blonde clerk, found that she had
married and departed several months before.  He obtained her name
and on an impulse sent her a wedding present "from a dumb admirer,"
for he felt he owed something to her for his happiness and pain.
He had lost the battle against youth and spring, and with his grief
paid the penalty for age's unforgivable sin--refusing to die.  But
he could not have walked down wasted into the darkness without
being used up a little; what he had wanted, after all, was only to
break his strong old heart.  Conflict itself has a value beyond
victory and defeat, and those three months--he had them forever.






THE BABY PARTY


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Hearst's International (February 1925)


When John Andros felt old he found solace in the thought of life
continuing through his child.  The dark trumpets of oblivion were
less loud at the patter of his child's feet or at the sound of his
child's voice babbling mad non sequiturs to him over the telephone.
The latter incident occurred every afternoon at three when his wife
called the office from the country, and he came to look forward to
it as one of the vivid minutes of his day.

He was not physically old, but his life had been a series of
struggles up a series of rugged hills, and here at thirty-eight
having won his battles against ill-health and poverty he cherished
less than the usual number of illusions.  Even his feeling about
his little girl was qualified.  She had interrupted his rather
intense love-affair with his wife, and she was the reason for their
living in a suburban town, where they paid for country air with
endless servant troubles and the weary merry-go-round of the
commuting train.

It was little Ede as a definite piece of youth that chiefly
interested him.  He liked to take her on his lap and examine
minutely her fragrant, downy scalp and her eyes with their irises
of morning blue.  Having paid this homage John was content that the
nurse should take her away.  After ten minutes the very vitality of
the child irritated him; he was inclined to lose his temper when
things were broken, and one Sunday afternoon when she had disrupted
a bridge game by permanently hiding up the ace of spades, he had
made a scene that had reduced his wife to tears.

This was absurd and John was ashamed of himself.  It was inevitable
that such things would happen, and it was impossible that little
Ede should spend all her indoor hours in the nursery upstairs when
she was becoming, as her mother said, more nearly a 'real person'
every day.

She was two and a half, and this afternoon, for instance, she was
going to a baby party.  Grown-up Edith, her mother, had telephoned
the information to the office, and little Ede had confirmed the
business by shouting 'I yam going to a PANTRY!' into John's
unsuspecting left ear.

'Drop in at the Markeys' when you get home, won't you, dear?'
resumed her mother.  'It'll be funny.  Ede's going to be all
dressed up in her new pink dress--'

The conversation terminated abruptly with a squawk which indicated
that the telephone had been pulled violently to the floor.  John
laughed and decided to get an early train out; the prospect of a
baby party in someone else's house amused him.

'What a peach of a mess!' he thought humorously.  'A dozen mothers,
and each one looking at nothing but her own child.  All the babies
breaking things and grabbing at the cake, and each mama going home
thinking about the subtle superiority of her own child to every
other child there.'

He was in a good humour today--all the things in his life were
going better than they had ever gone before.  When he got off the
train at his station he shook his head at an importunate taxi man,
and began to walk up the long hill towards his house through the
crisp December twilight.  It was only six o'clock but the moon was
out, shining with proud brilliance on the thin sugary snow that lay
over the lawns.

As he walked along drawing his lungs full of cold air his happiness
increased, and the idea of a baby party appealed to him more and
more.  He began to wonder how Ede compared to other children of her
own age, and if the pink dress she was to wear was something
radical and mature.  Increasing his gait he came in sight of his
own house, where the lights of a defunct Christmas-tree still
blossomed in the window, but he continued on past the walk.  The
party was at the Markeys' next door.

As he mounted the brick step and rang the bell he became aware of
voices inside, and he was glad he was not too late.  Then he raised
his head and listened--the voices were not children's voices, but
they were loud and pitched high with anger; there were at least
three of them and one, which rose as he listened to a hysterical
sob, he recognized immediately as his wife's.

'There's been some trouble,' he thought quickly.

Trying the door, he found it unlocked and pushed it open.



The baby party started at half past four, but Edith Andros,
calculating shrewdly that the new dress would stand out more
sensationally against vestments already rumpled, planned the
arrival of herself and little Ede for five.  When they appeared it
was already a flourishing affair.  Four baby girls and nine baby
boys, each one curled and washed and dressed with all the care of a
proud and jealous heart, were dancing to the music of a phonograph.
Never more than two or three were dancing at once, but as all were
continually in motion running to and from their mothers for
encouragement, the general effect was the same.

As Edith and her daughter entered, the music was temporarily
drowned out by a sustained chorus, consisting largely of the word
cute and directed towards little Ede, who stood looking timidly
about and fingering the edges of her pink dress.  She was not
kissed--this is the sanitary age--but she was passed along a row of
mamas each one of whom said 'cu-u-ute' to her and held her pink
little hand before passing her on to the next.  After some
encouragement and a few mild pushes she was absorbed into the
dance, and became an active member of the party.

Edith stood near the door talking to Mrs Markey, and keeping an eye
on the tiny figure in the pink dress.  She did not care for Mrs
Markey; she considered her both snippy and common, but John and Joe
Markey were congenial and went in together on the commuting train
every morning, so the two women kept up an elaborate pretence of
warm amity.  They were always reproaching each other for 'not
coming to see me', and they were always planning the kind of
parties that began with 'You'll have to come to dinner with us
soon, and we'll go to the theatre,' but never matured further.

'Little Ede looks perfectly darling,' said Mrs Markey, smiling and
moistening her lips in a way that Edith found particularly
repulsive.'  So GROWN-UP--I can't BELIEVE it!'

Edith wondered if 'little Ede' referred to the fact that Billy
Markey, though several months younger, weighed almost five pounds
more.  Accepting a cup of tea she took a seat with two other ladies
on a divan and launched into the real business of the afternoon,
which of course lay in relating the recent accomplishments and
insouciances of her child.

An hour passed.  Dancing palled and the babies took to sterner
sport.  They ran into the dining-room, rounded the big table, and
essayed the kitchen door, from which they were rescued by an
expeditionary force of mothers.  Having been rounded up they
immediately broke loose, and rushing back to the dining-room tried
the familiar swinging door again.  The word 'overheated' began to
be used, and small white brows were dried with small white
handkerchiefs.  A general attempt to make the babies sit down
began, but the babies squirmed off laps with peremptory cries of
'Down!  Down!' and the rush into the fascinating dining-room began
anew.

This phase of the party came to an end with the arrival of
refreshments, a large cake with two candles, and saucers of vanilla
ice-cream.  Billy Markey, a stout laughing baby with red hair and
legs somewhat bowed, blew out the candles, and placed an
experimental thumb on the white frosting.  The refreshments were
distributed, and the children ate, greedily but without confusion--
they had behaved remarkably well all afternoon.  They were modern
babies who ate and slept at regular hours, so their dispositions
were good, and their faces healthy and pink--such a peaceful party
would not have been possible thirty years ago.

After the refreshments a gradual exodus began.  Edith glanced
anxiously at her watch--it was almost six, and John had not
arrived.  She wanted him to see Ede with the other children--to see
how dignified and polite and intelligent she was, and how the only
ice-cream spot on her dress was some that had dropped from her chin
when she was joggled from behind.

'You're a darling,' she whispered to her child, drawing her
suddenly against her knee.  'Do you know you're a darling?  Do you
know you're a darling?'

Ede laughed.  'Bow-wow,' she said suddenly.

'Bow-wow?'  Edith looked around.  'There isn't any bow-wow.'

'Bow-wow,' repeated Ede.  'I want a bow-wow.'

Edith followed the small pointing finger.

'That isn't a bow-wow, dearest, that's a teddy-bear.'

'Bear?'

'Yes, that's a teddy-bear, and it belongs to Billy Markey.  You
don't want Billy Markey's teddy-bear, do you?'

Ede did want it.

She broke away from her mother and approached Billy Markey, who
held the toy closely in his arms.  Ede stood regarding him with
inscrutable eyes, and Billy laughed.

Grown-up Edith looked at her watch again, this time impatiently.

The party had dwindled until, besides Ede and Billy, there were
only two babies remaining--and one of the two remained only by
virtue of having hidden himself under the dining-room table.  It
was selfish of John not to come.  It showed so little pride in the
child.  Other fathers had come, half a dozen of them, to call for
their wives, and they had stayed for a while and looked on.

There was a sudden wail.  Ede had obtained Billy's teddy-bear by
pulling it forcibly from his arms, and on Billy's attempt to
recover it, she had pushed him casually to the floor.

'Why, Ede!' cried her mother, repressing an inclination to laugh.

Joe Markey, a handsome, broad-shouldered man of thirty-five, picked
up his son and set him on his feet.  'You're a fine fellow,' he
said jovially.  'Let a girl knock you over!  You're a fine fellow.'

'Did he bump his head?' Mrs Markey returned anxiously from bowing
the next to last remaining mother out of the door.

'No-o-o-o,' exclaimed Markey.  'He bumped something else, didn't
you, Billy?  He bumped something else.'

Billy had so far forgotten the bump that he was already making an
attempt to recover his property.  He seized a leg of the bear which
projected from Ede's enveloping arms and tugged at it but without
success.

'No,' said Ede emphatically.

Suddenly, encouraged by the success of her former half-accidental
manoeuvre, Ede dropped the teddy-bear, placed her hands on Billy's
shoulders and pushed him backward off his feet.

This time he landed less harmlessly; his head hit the bare floor
just off the rug with a dull hollow sound, whereupon he drew in his
breath and delivered an agonized yell.

Immediately the room was in confusion.  With an exclamation Markey
hurried to his son, but his wife was first to reach the injured
baby and catch him up into her arms.

'Oh, BILLY,' she cried, 'what a terrible bump!  She ought to be
spanked.'

Edith, who had rushed immediately to her daughter, heard this
remark, and her lips came sharply together.

'Why, Ede,' she whispered perfunctorily, 'you bad girl!'

Ede put back her little head suddenly and laughed.  It was a loud
laugh, a triumphant laugh with victory in it and challenge and
contempt.  Unfortunately it was also an infectious laugh.  Before
her mother realized the delicacy of the situation, she too had
laughed, an audible, distinct laugh not unlike the baby's, and
partaking of the same overtones.

Then, as suddenly, she stopped.

Mrs Markey's face had grown red with anger, and Markey, who had
been feeling the back of the baby's head with one finger, looked at
her, frowning.

'It's swollen already,' he said with a note of reproof in his
voice.  'I'll get some witch-hazel.'

But Mrs Markey had lost her temper.  'I don't see anything funny
about a child being hurt!' she said in a trembling voice.

Little Ede meanwhile had been looking at her mother curiously.  She
noted that her own laugh had produced her mother's and she wondered
if the same cause would always produce the same effect.  So she
chose this moment to throw back her head and laugh again.

To her mother the additional mirth added the final touch of
hysteria to the situation.  Pressing her handkerchief to her mouth
she giggled irrepressibly.  It was more than nervousness--she felt
that in a peculiar way she was laughing with her child--they were
laughing together.

It was in a way a defiance--those two against the world.

While Markey rushed upstairs to the bathroom for ointment, his wife
was walking up and down rocking the yelling boy in her arms.

'Please go home!' she broke out suddenly.  'The child's badly hurt,
and if you haven't the decency to be quiet, you'd better go home.'

'Very well,' said Edith, her own temper rising.  'I've never seen
anyone make such a mountain out of--'

'Get out!' cried Mrs Markey frantically.  'There's the door, get
out--I never want to see you in our house again.  You or your brat
either!'

Edith had taken her daughter's hand and was moving quickly towards
the door, but at this remark she stopped and turned around, her
face contracting with indignation.

'Don't you dare call her that!'

Mrs Markey did not answer but continued walking up and down,
muttering to herself and to Billy in an inaudible voice.

Edith began to cry.

'I will get out!' she sobbed.  'I've never heard anybody so rude
and c-common in my life.  I'm, glad your baby did get pushed down--
he's nothing but a f-fat little fool anyhow.'

Joe Markey reached the foot of the stairs just in time to hear this
remark.

'Why, Mrs Andros,' he said sharply, 'can't you see the child's
hurt.  You really ought to control yourself.'

'Control m-myself!' exclaimed Edith brokenly.  'You better ask her
to c-control herself.  I've never heard anybody so c-common in my
life.'

'She's insulting me!'  Mrs Markey was now livid with rage.  'Did
you hear what she said, Joe?  I wish you'd put her out.  If she
won't go, just take her by the shoulders and put her out!'

'Don't you dare touch me!' cried Edith.  'I'm going just as quick
as I can find my c-coat!'

Blind with tears she took a step towards the hall.  It was just at
this moment that the door opened and John Andros walked anxiously
in.

'John!' cried Edith, and fled to him wildly.

'What's the matter?  Why, what's the matter?'

'They're--they're putting me out!' she wailed, collapsing against
him.  'He'd just started to take me by the shoulders and put me
out.  I want my coat!'

'That's not true,' objected Markey hurriedly.  'Nobody's going to
put you out.'  He turned to John.  'Nobody's going to put her out,'
he repeated.  'She's--'

'What do you mean "put her out"?' demanded John abruptly.  'What's
all this talk, anyhow?'

'Oh, let's go!' cried Edith.  'I want to go.  They're so COMMON,
John!'

'Look here!'  Markey's face darkened.  'You've said that about
enough.  You're acting sort of crazy.'

'They called Ede a brat!'

For the second time that afternoon little Ede expressed emotion at
an inopportune moment.  Confused and frightened at the shouting
voices, she began to cry, and her tears had the effect of conveying
that she felt the insult in her heart.

'What's the idea of this?' broke out John.  'Do you insult your
guests in your own house?'

'It seems to me it's your wife that's done the insulting!' answered
Markey crisply.  'In fact, your baby there started all the
trouble.'

John gave a contemptuous snort.  'Are you calling names at a little
baby?' he inquired.  'That's a fine manly business!'

'Don't talk to him, John,' insisted Edith.  'Find my coat!'

'You must be in a bad way,' went on John angrily, 'if you have to
take out your temper on a helpless little baby.'

'I never heard anything so damn twisted in my life,' shouted
Markey.  'If that wife of yours would shut her mouth for a minute--'

'Wait a minute!  You're not talking to a woman and child now--'

There was an incidental interruption.  Edith had been fumbling on a
chair for her coat, and Mrs Markey had been watching her with hot,
angry eyes.  Suddenly she laid Billy down on the sofa, where he
immediately stopped crying and pulled himself upright, and coming
into the hall she quickly found Edith's coat and handed it to her
without a word.  Then she went back to the sofa, picked up Billy,
and rocking him in her arms looked again at Edith with hot, angry
eyes.  The interruption had taken less than half a minute.

'Your wife comes in here and begins shouting around about how
common we are!' burst out Markey violently.  'Well, if we're so
damn common, you'd better stay away!  And what's more, you'd better
get out now!'

Again John gave a short, contemptuous laugh.

'You're not only common,' he returned, 'you're evidently an awful
bully--when there's any helpless women and children around.'  He
felt for the knob and swung the door open.  'Come on, Edith.'

Taking up her daughter in her arms, his wife stepped outside and
John, still looking contemptuously at Markey, started to follow.

'Wait a minute!'  Markey took a step forward; he was trembling
slightly, and two large veins on his temples were suddenly full of
blood.  'You don't think you can get away with that, do you?  With
me?'

Without a word John walked out the door, leaving it open.

Edith, still weeping, had started for home.  After following her
with his eyes until she reached her own walk, John turned back
towards the lighted doorway where Markey was slowly coming down the
slippery steps.  He took off his overcoat and hat, tossed them off
the path onto the snow.  Then, sliding a little on the iced walk,
he took a step forward.

At the first blow, they both slipped and fell heavily to the
sidewalk, half rising then, and again pulled each other to the
ground.  They found a better foothold in the thin snow to the side
of the walk and rushed at each other, both swinging wildly and
pressing out the snow into a pasty mud underfoot.

The street was deserted, and except for their short tired gasps and
the padded sound as one or the other slipped down into the slushy
mud, they fought in silence, clearly defined to each other by the
full moonlight as well as by the amber glow that shone out of the
open door.  Several times they both slipped down together, and then
for a while the conflict threshed about wildly on the lawn.

For ten, fifteen, twenty minutes they fought there senselessly in
the moonlight.  They had both taken off coats and vests at some
silently agreed upon interval and now their shirts dripped from
their backs in wet pulpy shreds.  Both were torn and bleeding and
so exhausted that they could stand only when by their position they
mutually supported each other--the impact, the mere effort of a
blow, would send them both to their hands and knees.

But it was not weariness that ended the business, and the very
meaninglessness of the fight was a reason for not stopping.  They
stopped because once when they were straining at each other on the
ground, they heard a man's footsteps coming along the sidewalk.
They had rolled somehow into the shadow, and when they heard these
footsteps they stopped fighting, stopped moving, stopped breathing,
lay huddled together like two boys playing Indian until the
footsteps had passed.  Then, staggering to their feet, they looked
at each other like two drunken men.

'I'll be damned if I'm going on with this thing any more,' cried
Markey thickly.

'I'm not going on any more, either,' said John Andros.  'I've had
enough of this thing.'

Again they looked at each other, sulkily this time, as if each
suspected the other of urging him to a renewal of the fight.
Markey spat out a mouthful of blood from a cut lip; then he cursed
softly, and picking up his coat and vest, shook off the snow from
them in a surprised way, as if their comparative dampness was his
only worry in the world.

'Want to come in and wash up?' he asked suddenly.

'No, thanks,' said John.  'I ought to be going home--my wife'll be
worried.'

He too picked up his coat and vest and then his overcoat and hat.
Soaking wet and dripping with perspiration, it seemed absurd that
less than half an hour ago he had been wearing all these clothes.

'Well--good night,' he said hesitantly.

Suddenly they walked towards each other and shook hands.  It was no
perfunctory hand-shake: John Andros's arm went around Markey's
shoulder, and he patted him softly on the back for a little while.

'No harm done,' he said brokenly.

'No--you?'

'No, no harm done.'

'Well,' said John Andros after a minute, 'I guess I'll say good
night.'

Limping slightly and with his clothes over his arm, John Andros
turned away.  The moonlight was still bright as he left the dark
patch of trampled ground and walked over the intervening lawn.
Down at the station, half a mile away, he could hear the rumble of
the seven o'clock train.



'But you must have been crazy,' cried Edith brokenly.  'I thought
you were going to fix it all up there and shake hands.  That's why
I went away.'

'Did you want us to fix it up?'

'Of course not, I never want to see them again.  But I thought of
course that was what you were going to do.'  She was touching the
bruises on his neck and back with iodine as he sat placidly in a
hot bath.  'I'm going to get the doctor,' she said insistently.
'You may be hurt internally.'

He shook his head.  'Not a chance,' he answered.  'I don't want
this to get all over the town.'

'I don't understand yet how it all happened.'

'Neither do I.'  He smiled grimly.  'I guess these baby parties are
pretty rough affairs.'

'Well, one thing--' suggested Edith hopefully, 'I'm certainly glad
we have beef steak in the house for tomorrow's dinner.'

'Why?'

'For your eye, of course.  Do you know I came within an ace of
ordering veal?  Wasn't that the luckiest thing?'

Half an hour later, dressed except that his neck would accommodate
no collar, John moved his limbs experimentally before the glass.
'I believe I'll get myself in better shape,' he said thoughtfully.
'I must be getting old.'

'You mean so that next time you can beat him?'

'I did beat him,' he announced.  'At least, I beat him as much as
he beat me.  And there isn't going to be any next time.  Don't you
go calling people common any more.  If you get in any trouble, you
just take your coat and go home.  Understand?'

'Yes, dear,' she said meekly.  'I was very foolish and now I
understand.'

Out in the hall, he paused abruptly by the baby's door.

'Is she asleep?'

'Sound asleep.  But you can go in and peek at her--just to say good
night.'

They tiptoed in and bent together over the bed.  Little Ede, her
cheeks flushed with health, her pink hands clasped tight together,
was sleeping soundly in the cool, dark room.  John reached over the
railing of the bed and passed his hand lightly over the silken
hair.

'She's asleep,' he murmured in a puzzled way.

'Naturally, after such an afternoon.'

'Miz Andros,' the coloured maid's stage whisper floated in from the
hall.  'Mr and Miz Markey downstairs an' want to see you.  Mr
Markey he's all cut up in pieces, mam'n.  His face look like a
roast beef.  An' Miz Markey she 'pear mighty mad.'

'Why, what incomparable nerve!' exclaimed Edith.  'Just tell them
we're not home.  I wouldn't go down for anything in the world.'

'You most certainly will.'  John's voice was hard and set.

'What?'

'You'll go down right now, and, what's more, whatever that other
woman does, you'll apologize for what you said this afternoon.
After that you don't ever have to see her again.'

'Why--John, I can't.'

'You've got to.  And just remember that she probably hated to come
over here twice as much as you hate to go downstairs.'

'Aren't you coming?  Do I have to go alone?'

'I'll be down--in just a minute.'

John Andros waited until she had closed the door behind her; then
he reached over into the bed, and picking up his daughter, blankets
and all, sat down in the rocking-chair holding her tightly in his
arms.  She moved a little, and he held his breath, but she was
sleeping soundly, and in a moment she was resting quietly in the
hollow of his elbow.  Slowly he bent his head until his cheek was
against her bright hair.  'Dear little girl,' he whispered.  'Dear
little girl, dear little girl.'

John Andros knew at length what it was he had fought for so
savagely that evening.  He had it now, he possessed it forever, and
for some time he sat there rocking very slowly to and fro in the
darkness.



BABYLON REVISITED


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (21 February 1931)



"And where's Mr. Campbell?" Charlie asked.

"Gone to Switzerland.  Mr. Campbell's a pretty sick man, Mr.
Wales."

"I'm sorry to hear that.  And George Hardt?" Charlie inquired.

"Back in America, gone to work."

"And where is the Snow Bird?"

"He was in here last week.  Anyway, his friend, Mr. Schaeffer, is
in Paris."

Two familiar names from the long list of a year and a half ago.
Charlie scribbled an address in his notebook and tore out the page.

"If you see Mr. Schaeffer, give him this," he said.  "It's my
brother-in-law's address.  I haven't settled on a hotel yet."

He was not really disappointed to find Paris was so empty.  But the
stillness in the Ritz bar was strange and portentous.  It was not
an American bar any more--he felt polite in it, and not as if he
owned it.  It had gone back into France.  He felt the stillness
from the moment he got out of the taxi and saw the doorman, usually
in a frenzy of activity at this hour, gossiping with a chasseur by
the servants' entrance.

Passing through the corridor, he heard only a single, bored voice
in the once-clamorous women's room.  When he turned into the bar he
travelled the twenty feet of green carpet with his eyes fixed
straight ahead by old habit; and then, with his foot firmly on the
rail, he turned and surveyed the room, encountering only a single
pair of eyes that fluttered up from a newspaper in the corner.
Charlie asked for the head barman, Paul, who in the latter days of
the bull market had come to work in his own custom-built car--
disembarking, however, with due nicety at the nearest corner.  But
Paul was at his country house today and Alix giving him
information.

"No, no more," Charlie said, "I'm going slow these days."

Alix congratulated him:  "You were going pretty strong a couple of
years ago."

"I'll stick to it all right," Charlie assured him.  "I've stuck to
it for over a year and a half now."

"How do you find conditions in America?"

"I haven't been to America for months.  I'm in business in Prague,
representing a couple of concerns there.  They don't know about me
down there."

Alix smiled.

"Remember the night of George Hardt's bachelor dinner here?" said
Charlie.  "By the way, what's become of Claude Fessenden?"

Alix lowered his voice confidentially:  "He's in Paris, but he
doesn't come here any more.  Paul doesn't allow it.  He ran up a
bill of thirty thousand francs, charging all his drinks and his
lunches, and usually his dinner, for more than a year.  And when
Paul finally told him he had to pay, he gave him a bad check."

Alix shook his head sadly.

"I don't understand it, such a dandy fellow.  Now he's all bloated
up--"  He made a plump apple of his hands.

Charlie watched a group of strident queens installing themselves in
a corner.

"Nothing affects them," he thought.  "Stocks rise and fall, people
loaf or work, but they go on forever."  The place oppressed him.
He called for the dice and shook with Alix for the drink.

"Here for long, Mr. Wales?"

"I'm here for four or five days to see my little girl."

"Oh-h!  You have a little girl?"

Outside, the fire-red, gas-blue, ghost-green signs shone smokily
through the tranquil rain.  It was late afternoon and the streets
were in movement; the bistros gleamed.  At the corner of the
Boulevard des Capucines he took a taxi.  The Place de la Concorde
moved by in pink majesty; they crossed the logical Seine, and
Charlie felt the sudden provincial quality of the Left Bank.

Charlie directed his taxi to the Avenue de l'Opera, which was out
of his way.  But he wanted to see the blue hour spread over the
magnificent façade, and imagine that the cab horns, playing
endlessly the first few bars of La Plus que Lent, were the trumpets
of the Second Empire.  They were closing the iron grill in front of
Brentano's Book-store, and people were already at dinner behind the
trim little bourgeois hedge of Duval's.  He had never eaten at a
really cheap restaurant in Paris.  Five-course dinner, four francs
fifty, eighteen cents, wine included.  For some odd reason he
wished that he had.

As they rolled on to the Left Bank and he felt its sudden
provincialism, he thought, "I spoiled this city for myself.  I
didn't realize it, but the days came along one after another, and
then two years were gone, and everything was gone, and I was gone."

He was thirty-five, and good to look at.  The Irish mobility of his
face was sobered by a deep wrinkle between his eyes.  As he rang
his brother-in-law's bell in the Rue Palatine, the wrinkle deepened
till it pulled down his brows; he felt a cramping sensation in his
belly.  From behind the maid who opened the door darted a lovely
little girl of nine who shrieked "Daddy!" and flew up, struggling
like a fish, into his arms.  She pulled his head around by one ear
and set her cheek against his.

"My old pie," he said.

"Oh, daddy, daddy, daddy, daddy, dads, dads, dads!"

She drew him into the salon, where the family waited, a boy and
girl his daughter's age, his sister-in-law and her husband.  He
greeted Marion with his voice pitched carefully to avoid either
feigned enthusiasm or dislike, but her response was more frankly
tepid, though she minimized her expression of unalterable distrust
by directing her regard toward his child.  The two men clasped
hands in a friendly way and Lincoln Peters rested his for a moment
on Charlie's shoulder.

The room was warm and comfortably American.  The three children
moved intimately about, playing through the yellow oblongs that led
to other rooms; the cheer of six o'clock spoke in the eager smacks
of the fire and the sounds of French activity in the kitchen.  But
Charlie did not relax; his heart sat up rigidly in his body and he
drew confidence from his daughter, who from time to time came close
to him, holding in her arms the doll he had brought.

"Really extremely well," he declared in answer to Lincoln's
question.  "There's a lot of business there that isn't moving at
all, but we're doing even better than ever.  In fact, damn well.
I'm bringing my sister over from America next month to keep house
for me.  My income last year was bigger than it was when I had
money.  You see, the Czechs--"

His boasting was for a specific purpose; but after a moment, seeing
a faint restiveness in Lincoln's eye, he changed the subject:

"Those are fine children of yours, well brought up, good manners."

"We think Honoria's a great little girl too."

Marion Peters came back from the kitchen.  She was a tall woman
with worried eyes, who had once possessed a fresh American
loveliness.  Charlie had never been sensitive to it and was always
surprised when people spoke of how pretty she had been.  From the
first there had been an instinctive antipathy between them.

"Well, how do you find Honoria?" she asked.

"Wonderful.  I was astonished how much she's grown in ten months.
All the children are looking well."

"We haven't had a doctor for a year.  How do you like being back in
Paris?"

"It seems very funny to see so few Americans around."

"I'm delighted," Marion said vehemently.  "Now at least you can go
into a store without their assuming you're a millionaire.  We've
suffered like everybody, but on the whole it's a good deal
pleasanter."

"But it was nice while it lasted," Charlie said.  "We were a sort
of royalty, almost infallible, with a sort of magic around us.  In
the bar this afternoon"--he stumbled, seeing his mistake--"there
wasn't a man I knew."

She looked at him keenly.  "I should think you'd have had enough of
bars."

"I only stayed a minute.  I take one drink every afternoon, and no
more."

"Don't you want a cocktail before dinner?" Lincoln asked.

"I take only one drink every afternoon, and I've had that."

"I hope you keep to it," said Marion.

Her dislike was evident in the coldness with which she spoke, but
Charlie only smiled; he had larger plans.  Her very aggressiveness
gave him an advantage, and he knew enough to wait.  He wanted them
to initiate the discussion of what they knew had brought him to
Paris.

At dinner he couldn't decide whether Honoria was most like him or
her mother.  Fortunate if she didn't combine the traits of both
that had brought them to disaster.  A great wave of protectiveness
went over him.  He thought he knew what to do for her.  He believed
in character; he wanted to jump back a whole generation and trust
in character again as the eternally valuable element.  Everything
wore out.

He left soon after dinner, but not to go home.  He was curious to
see Paris by night with clearer and more judicious eyes than those
of other days.  He bought a strapontin for the Casino and watched
Josephine Baker go through her chocolate arabesques.

After an hour he left and strolled toward Montmartre, up the Rue
Pigalle into the Place Blanche.  The rain had stopped and there
were a few people in evening clothes disembarking from taxis in
front of cabarets, and cocottes prowling singly or in pairs, and
many Negroes.  He passed a lighted door from which issued music,
and stopped with the sense of familiarity; it was Bricktop's, where
he had parted with so many hours and so much money.  A few doors
farther on he found another ancient rendezvous and incautiously put
his head inside.  Immediately an eager orchestra burst into sound,
a pair of professional dancers leaped to their feet and a maître
d'hôtel swooped toward him, crying, "Crowd just arriving, sir!"
But he withdrew quickly.

"You have to be damn drunk," he thought.

Zelli's was closed, the bleak and sinister cheap hotels surrounding
it were dark; up in the Rue Blanche there was more light and a
local, colloquial French crowd.  The Poet's Cave had disappeared,
but the two great mouths of the Café of Heaven and the Café of Hell
still yawned--even devoured, as he watched, the meager contents of
a tourist bus--a German, a Japanese, and an American couple who
glanced at him with frightened eyes.

So much for the effort and ingenuity of Montmartre.  All the
catering to vice and waste was on an utterly childish scale, and he
suddenly realized the meaning of the word "dissipate"--to dissipate
into thin air; to make nothing out of something.  In the little
hours of the night every move from place to place was an enormous
human jump, an increase of paying for the privilege of slower and
slower motion.

He remembered thousand-franc notes given to an orchestra for
playing a single number, hundred-franc notes tossed to a doorman
for calling a cab.

But it hadn't been given for nothing.

It had been given, even the most wildly squandered sum, as an
offering to destiny that he might not remember the things most
worth remembering, the things that now he would always remember--
his child taken from his control, his wife escaped to a grave in
Vermont.

In the glare of a brasserie a woman spoke to him.  He bought her
some eggs and coffee, and then, eluding her encouraging stare, gave
her a twenty-franc note and took a taxi to his hotel.


II


He woke upon a fine fall day--football weather.  The depression of
yesterday was gone and he liked the people on the streets.  At noon
he sat opposite Honoria at Le Grand Vatel, the only restaurant he
could think of not reminiscent of champagne dinners and long
luncheons that began at two and ended in a blurred and vague
twilight.

"Now, how about vegetables?  Oughtn't you to have some vegetables?"

"Well, yes."

"Here's épinards and chou-fleur and carrots and haricots."

"I'd like chou-fleur."

"Wouldn't you like to have two vegetables?"

"I usually only have one at lunch."

The waiter was pretending to be inordinately fond of children.
"Qu'elle est mignonne la petite?  Elle parle exactement comme une
Française."

"How about dessert?  Shall we wait and see?"

The waiter disappeared.  Honoria looked at her father expectantly.

"What are we going to do?"

"First, we're going to that toy store in the Rue Saint-Honoré and
buy you anything you like.  And then we're going to the vaudeville
at the Empire."

She hesitated.  "I like it about the vaudeville, but not the toy
store."

"Why not?"

"Well, you brought me this doll."  She had it with her.  "And I've
got lots of things.  And we're not rich any more, are we?"

"We never were.  But today you are to have anything you want."

"All right," she agreed resignedly.

When there had been her mother and a French nurse he had been
inclined to be strict; now he extended himself, reached out for a
new tolerance; he must be both parents to her and not shut any of
her out of communication.

"I want to get to know you," he said gravely.  "First let me
introduce myself.  My name is Charles J. Wales, of Prague."

"Oh, daddy!" her voice cracked with laughter.

"And who are you, please?" he persisted, and she accepted a role
immediately:  "Honoria Wales, Rue Palatine, Paris."

"Married or single?"

"No, not married.  Single."

He indicated the doll.  "But I see you have a child, madame."

Unwilling to disinherit it, she took it to her heart and thought
quickly:  "Yes, I've been married, but I'm not married now.  My
husband is dead."

He went on quickly, "And the child's name?"

"Simone.  That's after my best friend at school."

"I'm very pleased that you're doing so well at school."

"I'm third this month," she boasted.  "Elsie"--that was her cousin--
"is only about eighteenth, and Richard is about at the bottom."

"You like Richard and Elsie, don't you?"

"Oh, yes.  I like Richard quite well and I like her all right."

Cautiously and casually he asked:  "And Aunt Marion and Uncle
Lincoln--which do you like best?"

"Oh, Uncle Lincoln, I guess."

He was increasingly aware of her presence.  As they came in, a
murmur of ". . . adorable" followed them, and now the people at the
next table bent all their silences upon her, staring as if she were
something no more conscious than a flower.

"Why don't I live with you?" she asked suddenly.  "Because mamma's
dead?"

"You must stay here and learn more French.  It would have been hard
for daddy to take care of you so well."

"I don't really need much taking care of any more.  I do everything
for myself."

Going out of the restaurant, a man and a woman unexpectedly hailed
him.

"Well, the old Wales!"

"Hello there, Lorraine. . . .  Dunc."

Sudden ghosts out of the past: Duncan Schaeffer, a friend from
college.  Lorraine Quarrles, a lovely, pale blonde of thirty; one
of a crowd who had helped them make months into days in the lavish
times of three years ago.

"My husband couldn't come this year," she said, in answer to his
question.  "We're poor as hell.  So he gave me two hundred a month
and told me I could do my worst on that. . . .  This your little
girl?"

"What about coming back and sitting down?" Duncan asked.

"Can't do it."  He was glad for an excuse.  As always, he felt
Lorraine's passionate, provocative attraction, but his own rhythm
was different now.

"Well, how about dinner?" she asked.

"I'm not free.  Give me your address and let me call you."

"Charlie, I believe you're sober," she said judicially.  "I
honestly believe he's sober, Dunc.  Pinch him and see if he's
sober."

Charlie indicated Honoria with his head.  They both laughed.

"What's your address?" said Duncan sceptically.

He hesitated, unwilling to give the name of his hotel.

"I'm not settled yet.  I'd better call you.  We're going to see the
vaudeville at the Empire."

"There!  That's what I want to do," Lorraine said.  "I want to see
some clowns and acrobats and jugglers.  That's just what we'll do,
Dunc."

"We've got to do an errand first," said Charlie.  "Perhaps we'll
see you there."

"All right, you snob. . . .  Good-by, beautiful little girl."

"Good-by."

Honoria bobbed politely.

Somehow, an unwelcome encounter.  They liked him because he was
functioning, because he was serious; they wanted to see him,
because he was stronger than they were now, because they wanted to
draw a certain sustenance from his strength.

At the Empire, Honoria proudly refused to sit upon her father's
folded coat.  She was already an individual with a code of her own,
and Charlie was more and more absorbed by the desire of putting a
little of himself into her before she crystallized utterly.  It was
hopeless to try to know her in so short a time.

Between the acts they came upon Duncan and Lorraine in the lobby
where the band was playing.

"Have a drink?"

"All right, but not up at the bar.  We'll take a table."

"The perfect father."

Listening abstractedly to Lorraine, Charlie watched Honoria's eyes
leave their table, and he followed them wistfully about the room,
wondering what they saw.  He met her glance and she smiled.

"I liked that lemonade," she said.

What had she said?  What had he expected?  Going home in a taxi
afterward, he pulled her over until her head rested against his
chest.

"Darling, do you ever think about your mother?"

"Yes, sometimes," she answered vaguely.

"I don't want you to forget her.  Have you got a picture of her?"

"Yes, I think so.  Anyhow, Aunt Marion has.  Why don't you want me
to forget her?"

"She loved you very much."

"I loved her too."

They were silent for a moment.

"Daddy, I want to come and live with you," she said suddenly.

His heart leaped; he had wanted it to come like this.

"Aren't you perfectly happy?"

"Yes, but I love you better than anybody.  And you love me better
than anybody, don't you, now that mummy's dead?"

"Of course I do.  But you won't always like me best, honey.  You'll
grow up and meet somebody your own age and go marry him and forget
you ever had a daddy."

"Yes, that's true," she agreed tranquilly.

He didn't go in.  He was coming back at nine o'clock and he wanted
to keep himself fresh and new for the thing he must say then.

"When you're safe inside, just show yourself in that window."

"All right.  Good-by, dads, dads, dads, dads."

He waited in the dark street until she appeared, all warm and
glowing, in the window above and kissed her fingers out into the
night.


III


They were waiting.  Marion sat behind the coffee service in a
dignified black dinner dress that just faintly suggested mourning.
Lincoln was walking up and down with the animation of one who had
already been talking.  They were as anxious as he was to get into
the question.  He opened it almost immediately:

"I suppose you know what I want to see you about--why I really came
to Paris."

Marion played with the black stars on her necklace and frowned.

"I'm awfully anxious to have a home," he continued.  "And I'm
awfully anxious to have Honoria in it.  I appreciate your taking in
Honoria for her mother's sake, but things have changed now"--he
hesitated and then continued more forcibly--"changed radically with
me, and I want to ask you to reconsider the matter.  It would be
silly for me to deny that about three years ago I was acting badly--"

Marion looked up at him with hard eyes.

"--but all that's over.  As I told you, I haven't had more than a
drink a day for over a year, and I take that drink deliberately, so
that the idea of alcohol won't get too big in my imagination.  You
see the idea?"

"No," said Marion succinctly.

"It's a sort of stunt I set myself.  It keeps the matter in
proportion."

"I get you," said Lincoln.  "You don't want to admit it's got any
attraction for you."

"Something like that.  Sometimes I forget and don't take it.  But I
try to take it.  Anyhow, I couldn't afford to drink in my position.
The people I represent are more than satisfied with what I've done,
and I'm bringing my sister over from Burlington to keep house for
me, and I want awfully to have Honoria too.  You know that even
when her mother and I weren't getting along well we never let
anything that happened touch Honoria.  I know she's fond of me and
I know I'm able to take care of her and--well, there you are.  How
do you feel about it?"

He knew that now he would have to take a beating.  It would last an
hour or two hours, and it would be difficult, but if he modulated
his inevitable resentment to the chastened attitude of the reformed
sinner, he might win his point in the end.

Keep your temper, he told himself.  You don't want to be justified.
You want Honoria.

Lincoln spoke first:  "We've been talking it over ever since we got
your letter last month.  We're happy to have Honoria here.  She's a
dear little thing, and we're glad to be able to help her, but of
course that isn't the question--"

Marion interrupted suddenly.  "How long are you going to stay
sober, Charlie?" she asked.

"Permanently, I hope."

"How can anybody count on that?"

"You know I never did drink heavily until I gave up business and
came over here with nothing to do.  Then Helen and I began to run
around with--"

"Please leave Helen out of it.  I can't bear to hear you talk about
her like that."

He stared at her grimly; he had never been certain how fond of each
other the sisters were in life.

"My drinking only lasted about a year and a half--from the time we
came over until I--collapsed."

"It was time enough."

"It was time enough," he agreed.

"My duty is entirely to Helen," she said.  "I try to think what she
would have wanted me to do.  Frankly, from the night you did that
terrible thing you haven't really existed for me.  I can't help
that.  She was my sister."

"Yes."

"When she was dying she asked me to look out for Honoria.  If you
hadn't been in a sanitarium then, it might have helped matters."

He had no answer.

"I'll never in my life be able to forget the morning when Helen
knocked at my door, soaked to the skin and shivering, and said
you'd locked her out."

Charlie gripped the sides of the chair.  This was more difficult
than he expected; he wanted to launch out into a long expostulation
and explanation, but he only said:  "The night I locked her out--"
and she interrupted, "I don't feel up to going over that again."

After a moment's silence Lincoln said:  "We're getting off the
subject.  You want Marion to set aside her legal guardianship and
give you Honoria.  I think the main point for her is whether she
has confidence in you or not."

"I don't blame Marion," Charlie said slowly, "but I think she can
have entire confidence in me.  I had a good record up to three
years ago.  Of course, it's within human possibilities I might go
wrong any time.  But if we wait much longer I'll lose Honoria's
childhood and my chance for a home."  He shook his head, "I'll
simply lose her, don't you see?"

"Yes, I see," said Lincoln.

"Why didn't you think of all this before?" Marion asked.

"I suppose I did, from time to time, but Helen and I were getting
along badly.  When I consented to the guardianship, I was flat on
my back in a sanitarium and the market had cleaned me out.  I knew
I'd acted badly, and I thought if it would bring any peace to
Helen, I'd agree to anything.  But now it's different.  I'm
functioning, I'm behaving damn well, so far as--"

"Please don't swear at me," Marion said.

He looked at her, startled.  With each remark the force of her
dislike became more and more apparent.  She had built up all her
fear of life into one wall and faced it toward him.  This trivial
reproof was possibly the result of some trouble with the cook
several hours before.  Charlie became increasingly alarmed at
leaving Honoria in this atmosphere of hostility against himself;
sooner or later it would come out, in a word here, a shake of the
head there, and some of that distrust would be irrevocably
implanted in Honoria.  But he pulled his temper down out of his
face and shut it up inside him; he had won a point, for Lincoln
realized the absurdity of Marion's remark and asked her lightly
since when she had objected to the word "damn."

"Another thing," Charlie said:  "I'm able to give her certain
advantages now.  I'm going to take a French governess to Prague
with me.  I've got a lease on a new apartment--"

He stopped, realizing that he was blundering.  They couldn't be
expected to accept with equanimity the fact that his income was
again twice as large as their own.

"I suppose you can give her more luxuries than we can," said
Marion.  "When you were throwing away money we were living along
watching every ten francs. . . .  I suppose you'll start doing it
again."

"Oh, no," he said.  "I've learned.  I worked hard for ten years,
you know--until I got lucky in the market, like so many people.
Terribly lucky.  It didn't seem any use working any more, so I
quit.  It won't happen again."

There was a long silence.  All of them felt their nerves straining,
and for the first time in a year Charlie wanted a drink.  He was
sure now that Lincoln Peters wanted him to have his child.

Marion shuddered suddenly; part of her saw that Charlie's feet were
planted on the earth now, and her own maternal feeling recognized
the naturalness of his desire; but she had lived for a long time
with a prejudice--a prejudice founded on a curious disbelief in her
sister's happiness, and which, in the shock of one terrible night,
had turned to hatred for him.  It had all happened at a point in
her life where the discouragement of ill health and adverse
circumstances made it necessary for her to believe in tangible
villainy and a tangible villain.

"I can't help what I think!" she cried out suddenly.  "How much you
were responsible for Helen's death, I don't know.  It's something
you'll have to square with your own conscience."

An electric current of agony surged through him; for a moment he
was almost on his feet, an unuttered sound echoing in his throat.
He hung on to himself for a moment, another moment.

"Hold on there," said Lincoln uncomfortably.  "I never thought you
were responsible for that."

"Helen died of heart trouble," Charlie said dully.

"Yes, heart trouble."  Marion spoke as if the phrase had another
meaning for her.

Then, in the flatness that followed her outburst, she saw him
plainly and she knew he had somehow arrived at control over the
situation.  Glancing at her husband, she found no help from him,
and as abruptly as if it were a matter of no importance, she threw
up the sponge.

"Do what you like!" she cried, springing up from her chair.  "She's
your child.  I'm not the person to stand in your way.  I think if
it were my child I'd rather see her--"  She managed to check
herself.  "You two decide it.  I can't stand this.  I'm sick.  I'm
going to bed."

She hurried from the room; after a moment Lincoln said:

"This has been a hard day for her.  You know how strongly she
feels--"  His voice was almost apologetic:  "When a woman gets an
idea in her head."

"Of course."

"It's going to be all right.  I think she sees now that you--can
provide for the child, and so we can't very well stand in your way
or Honoria's way."

"Thank you, Lincoln."

"I'd better go along and see how she is."

"I'm going."

He was still trembling when he reached the street, but a walk down
the Rue Bonaparte to the quais set him up, and as he crossed the
Seine, fresh and new by the quai lamps, he felt exultant.  But back
in his room he couldn't sleep.  The image of Helen haunted him.
Helen whom he had loved so until they had senselessly begun to
abuse each other's love, tear it into shreds.  On that terrible
February night that Marion remembered so vividly, a slow quarrel
had gone on for hours.  There was a scene at the Florida, and then
he attempted to take her home, and then she kissed young Webb at a
table; after that there was what she had hysterically said.  When
he arrived home alone he turned the key in the lock in wild anger.
How could he know she would arrive an hour later alone, that there
would be a snowstorm in which she wandered about in slippers, too
confused to find a taxi?  Then the aftermath, her escaping
pneumonia by a miracle, and all the attendant horror.  They were
"reconciled," but that was the beginning of the end, and Marion,
who had seen with her own eyes and who imagined it to be one of
many scenes from her sister's martyrdom, never forgot.

Going over it again brought Helen nearer, and in the white, soft
light that steals upon half sleep near morning he found himself
talking to her again.  She said that he was perfectly right about
Honoria and that she wanted Honoria to be with him.  She said she
was glad he was being good and doing better.  She said a lot of
other things--very friendly things--but she was in a swing in a
white dress, and swinging faster and faster all the time, so that
at the end he could not hear clearly all that she said.


IV


He woke up feeling happy.  The door of the world was open again.
He made plans, vistas, futures for Honoria and himself, but
suddenly he grew sad, remembering all the plans he and Helen had
made.  She had not planned to die.  The present was the thing--work
to do and someone to love.  But not to love too much, for he knew
the injury that a father can do to a daughter or a mother to a son
by attaching them too closely: afterward, out in the world, the
child would seek in the marriage partner the same blind tenderness
and, failing probably to find it, turn against love and life.

It was another bright, crisp day.  He called Lincoln Peters at the
bank where he worked and asked if he could count on taking Honoria
when he left for Prague.  Lincoln agreed that there was no reason
for delay.  One thing--the legal guardianship.  Marion wanted to
retain that a while longer.  She was upset by the whole matter, and
it would oil things if she felt that the situation was still in her
control for another year.  Charlie agreed, wanting only the
tangible, visible child.

Then the question of a governess.  Charlie sat in a gloomy agency
and talked to a cross Béarnaise and to a buxom Breton peasant,
neither of whom he could have endured.  There were others whom he
would see tomorrow.

He lunched with Lincoln Peters at Griffons, trying to keep down his
exultation.

"There's nothing quite like your own child," Lincoln said.  "But
you understand how Marion feels too."

"She's forgotten how hard I worked for seven years there," Charlie
said.  "She just remembers one night."

"There's another thing."  Lincoln hesitated.  "While you and Helen
were tearing around Europe throwing money away, we were just
getting along.  I didn't touch any of the prosperity because I
never got ahead enough to carry anything but my insurance.  I think
Marion felt there was some kind of injustice in it--you not even
working toward the end, and getting richer and richer."

"It went just as quick as it came," said Charlie.

"Yes, a lot of it stayed in the hands of chasseurs and saxophone
players and maîtres d'hôtel--well, the big party's over now.  I
just said that to explain Marion's feeling about those crazy years.
If you drop in about six o'clock tonight before Marion's too tired,
we'll settle the details on the spot."

Back at his hotel, Charlie found a pneumatique that had been
redirected from the Ritz bar where Charlie had left his address for
the purpose of finding a certain man.


DEAR CHARLIE:  You were so strange when we saw you the other day
that I wondered if I did something to offend you.  If so, I'm not
conscious of it.  In fact, I have thought about you too much for
the last year, and it's always been in the back of my mind that I
might see you if I came over here.  We DID have such good times
that crazy spring, like the night you and I stole the butcher's
tricycle, and the time we tried to call on the president and you
had the old derby rim and the wire cane.  Everybody seems so old
lately, but I don't feel old a bit.  Couldn't we get together some
time today for old time's sake?  I've got a vile hang-over for the
moment, but will be feeling better this afternoon and will look for
you about five in the sweat-shop at the Ritz.

                                       Always devotedly,

                                                   LORRAINE.


His first feeling was one of awe that he had actually, in his
mature years, stolen a tricycle and pedalled Lorraine all over the
Étoile between the small hours and dawn.  In retrospect it was a
nightmare.  Locking out Helen didn't fit in with any other act of
his life, but the tricycle incident did--it was one of many.  How
many weeks or months of dissipation to arrive at that condition of
utter irresponsibility?

He tried to picture how Lorraine had appeared to him then--very
attractive; Helen was unhappy about it, though she said nothing.
Yesterday, in the restaurant, Lorraine had seemed trite, blurred,
worn away.  He emphatically did not want to see her, and he was
glad Alix had not given away his hotel address.  It was a relief to
think, instead, of Honoria, to think of Sundays spent with her and
of saying good morning to her and of knowing she was there in his
house at night, drawing her breath in the darkness.

At five he took a taxi and bought presents for all the Peters--a
piquant cloth doll, a box of Roman soldiers, flowers for Marion,
big linen handkerchiefs for Lincoln.

He saw, when he arrived in the apartment, that Marion had accepted
the inevitable.  She greeted him now as though he were a
recalcitrant member of the family, rather than a menacing outsider.
Honoria had been told she was going; Charlie was glad to see that
her tact made her conceal her excessive happiness.  Only on his lap
did she whisper her delight and the question "When?" before she
slipped away with the other children.

He and Marion were alone for a minute in the room, and on an
impulse he spoke out boldly:

"Family quarrels are bitter things.  They don't go according to any
rules.  They're not like aches or wounds; they're more like splits
in the skin that won't heal because there's not enough material.  I
wish you and I could be on better terms."

"Some things are hard to forget," she answered.  "It's a question
of confidence."  There was no answer to this and presently she
asked, "When do you propose to take her?"

"As soon as I can get a governess.  I hoped the day after
tomorrow."

"That's impossible.  I've got to get her things in shape.  Not
before Saturday."

He yielded.  Coming back into the room, Lincoln offered him a
drink.

"I'll take my daily whisky," he said.

It was warm here, it was a home, people together by a fire.  The
children felt very safe and important; the mother and father were
serious, watchful.  They had things to do for the children more
important than his visit here.  A spoonful of medicine was, after
all, more important than the strained relations between Marion and
himself.  They were not dull people, but they were very much in the
grip of life and circumstances.  He wondered if he couldn't do
something to get Lincoln out of his rut at the bank.

A long peal at the door-bell; the bonne à tout faire passed through
and went down the corridor.  The door opened upon another long
ring, and then voices, and the three in the salon looked up
expectantly; Lincoln moved to bring the corridor within his range
of vision, and Marion rose.  Then the maid came back along the
corridor, closely followed by the voices, which developed under the
light into Duncan Schaeffer and Lorraine Quarrles.

They were gay, they were hilarious, they were roaring with
laughter.  For a moment Charlie was astounded; unable to understand
how they ferreted out the Peters' address.

"Ah-h-h!"  Duncan wagged his finger roguishly at Charlie.  "Ah-h-
h!"

They both slid down another cascade of laughter.  Anxious and at a
loss, Charlie shook hands with them quickly and presented them to
Lincoln and Marion.  Marion nodded, scarcely speaking.  She had
drawn back a step toward the fire; her little girl stood beside
her, and Marion put an arm about her shoulder.

With growing annoyance at the intrusion, Charlie waited for them to
explain themselves.  After some concentration Duncan said:

"We came to invite you out to dinner.  Lorraine and I insist that
all this shishi, cagy business 'bout your address got to stop."

Charlie came closer to them, as if to force them backward down the
corridor.

"Sorry, but I can't.  Tell me where you'll be and I'll phone you in
half an hour."

This made no impression.  Lorraine sat down suddenly on the side of
a chair, and focussing her eyes on Richard, cried, "Oh, what a nice
little boy!  Come here, little boy."  Richard glanced at his
mother, but did not move.  With a perceptible shrug of her
shoulders, Lorraine turned back to Charlie:

"Come and dine.  Sure your cousins won' mine.  See you so sel'om.
Or solemn."

"I can't," said Charlie sharply.  "You two have dinner and I'll
phone you."

Her voice became suddenly unpleasant.  "All right, we'll go.  But I
remember once when you hammered on my door at four A.M.  I was
enough of a good sport to give you a drink.  Come on, Dunc."

Still in slow motion, with blurred, angry faces, with uncertain
feet, they retired along the corridor.

"Good night," Charlie said.

"Good night!" responded Lorraine emphatically.

When he went back into the salon Marion had not moved, only now her
son was standing in the circle of her other arm.  Lincoln was still
swinging Honoria back and forth like a pendulum from side to side.

"What an outrage!" Charlie broke out.  "What an absolute outrage!"
Neither of them answered.  Charlie dropped into an armchair, picked
up his drink, set it down again and said:

"People I haven't seen for two years having the colossal nerve--"

He broke off.  Marion had made the sound "Oh!" in one swift,
furious breath, turned her body from him with a jerk and left the
room.

Lincoln set down Honoria carefully.

"You children go in and start your soup," he said, and when they
obeyed, he said to Charlie:

"Marion's not well and she can't stand shocks.  That kind of people
make her really physically sick."

"I didn't tell them to come here.  They wormed your name out of
somebody.  They deliberately--"

"Well, it's too bad.  It doesn't help matters.  Excuse me a
minute."

Left alone, Charlie sat tense in his chair.  In the next room he
could hear the children eating, talking in monosyllables, already
oblivious to the scene between their elders.  He heard a murmur of
conversation from a farther room and then the ticking bell of a
telephone receiver picked up, and in a panic he moved to the other
side of the room and out of earshot.

In a minute Lincoln came back.  "Look here, Charlie.  I think we'd
better call off dinner for tonight.  Marion's in bad shape."

"Is she angry with me?"

"Sort of," he said, almost roughly.  "She's not strong and--"

"You mean she's changed her mind about Honoria?"

"She's pretty bitter right now.  I don't know.  You phone me at the
bank tomorrow."

"I wish you'd explain to her I never dreamed these people would
come here.  I'm just as sore as you are."

"I couldn't explain anything to her now."

Charlie got up.  He took his coat and hat and started down the
corridor.  Then he opened the door of the dining room and said in a
strange voice, "Good night, children."

Honoria rose and ran around the table to hug him.

"Good night, sweetheart," he said vaguely, and then trying to make
his voice more tender, trying to conciliate something, "Good night,
dear children."


V


Charlie went directly to the Ritz bar with the furious idea of
finding Lorraine and Duncan, but they were not there, and he
realized that in any case there was nothing he could do.  He had
not touched his drink at the Peters', and now he ordered a whisky-
and-soda.  Paul came over to say hello.

"It's a great change," he said sadly.  "We do about half the
business we did.  So many fellows I hear about back in the States
lost everything, maybe not in the first crash, but then in the
second.  Your friend George Hardt lost every cent, I hear.  Are you
back in the States?"

"No, I'm in business in Prague."

"I heard that you lost a lot in the crash."

"I did," and he added grimly, "but I lost everything I wanted in
the boom."

"Selling short."

"Something like that."

Again the memory of those days swept over him like a nightmare--the
people they had met travelling; then people who couldn't add a row
of figures or speak a coherent sentence.  The little man Helen had
consented to dance with at the ship's party, who had insulted her
ten feet from the table; the women and girls carried screaming with
drink or drugs out of public places--

--The men who locked their wives out in the snow, because the snow
of twenty-nine wasn't real snow.  If you didn't want it to be snow,
you just paid some money.

He went to the phone and called the Peters' apartment; Lincoln
answered.

"I called up because this thing is on my mind.  Has Marion said
anything definite?"

"Marion's sick," Lincoln answered shortly.  "I know this thing
isn't altogether your fault, but I can't have her go to pieces
about it.  I'm afraid we'll have to let it slide for six months; I
can't take the chance of working her up to this state again."

"I see."

"I'm sorry, Charlie."

He went back to his table.  His whisky glass was empty, but he
shook his head when Alix looked at it questioningly.  There wasn't
much he could do now except send Honoria some things; he would send
her a lot of things tomorrow.  He thought rather angrily that this
was just money--he had given so many people money. . . .

"No, no more," he said to another waiter.  "What do I owe you?"

He would come back some day; they couldn't make him pay forever.
But he wanted his child, and nothing was much good now, beside that
fact.  He wasn't young any more, with a lot of nice thoughts and
dreams to have by himself.  He was absolutely sure Helen wouldn't
have wanted him to be so alone.




BASIL AND CLEOPATRA


by
 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)
 

Saturday Evening Post (27 April 1929)



Wherever she was, became a beautiful and enchanted place to Basil,
but he did not think of it that way.  He thought the fascination
was inherent in the locality, and long afterward a commonplace
street or the mere name of a city would exude a peculiar glow, a
sustained sound, that struck his soul alert with delight.  In her
presence he was too absorbed to notice his surroundings; so that
her absence never made them empty, but, rather, sent him seeking
for her through haunted rooms and gardens that he had never really
seen before.

This time, as usual, he saw only the expression of her face, the
mouth that gave an attractive interpretation of any emotion she
felt or pretended to feel--oh, invaluable mouth--and the rest of
her, new as a peach and old as sixteen.  He was almost unconscious
that they stood in a railroad station and entirely unconscious that
she had just glanced over his shoulder and fallen in love with
another young man.  Turning to walk with the rest to the car, she
was already acting for the stranger; no less so because her voice
was pitched for Basil and she clung to him, squeezing his arm.

Had Basil noticed this other young man that the train discharged he
would merely have been sorry for him--as he had been sorry for the
wretched people in the villages along the railroad and for his
fellow travelers--they were not entering Yale in a fortnight nor
were they about to spend three days in the same town with Miss
Erminie Gilberte Labouisse Bibble.  There was something dense,
hopeless and a little contemptible about them all.

Basil had come to visit here because Erminie Bibble was visiting
here.

On the sad eve of her departure from his native Western city a
month before, she had said, with all the promise one could ask in
her urgent voice:

"If you know a boy in Mobile, why don't you make him invite you
down when I'll be there?"

He had followed this suggestion.  And now with the soft, unfamiliar
Southern city actually flowing around him, his excitement led him
to believe that Fat Gaspar's car floated off immediately they
entered it.  A voice from the curb came as a surprise:

"Hi, Bessie Belle.  Hi, William.  How you all?"

The newcomer was tall and lean and a year or so older than Basil.
He wore a white linen suit and a panama hat, under which burned
fierce, undefeated Southern eyes.

"Why, Littleboy Le Moyne!" exclaimed Miss Cheever.  "When did you
get home?"

"Jus' now, Bessie Belle.  Saw you lookin' so fine and pretty, had
to come and see closer."

He was introduced to Minnie and Basil.

"Drop you somewhere, Littleboy?" asked Fat--on his native heath,
William.

"Why--"  Le Moyne hesitated.  "You're very kind, but the man ought
to be here with the car."

"Jump in."

Le Moyne swung his bag on top of Basil's and with courteous
formality got in the back seat beside them.  Basil caught Minnie's
eye and she smiled quickly back, as if to say, "This is too bad,
but it'll soon be over."

"Do you happen to come from New Orleans, Miss Bibble?" asked Le
Moyne.

"Sure do."

"'Cause I just came from there and they told me one of their mos'
celebrated heartbreakers was visiting up here, and meanwhile her
suitors were shooting themselves all over the city.  That's the
truth.  I used to help pick 'em up myself sometimes when they got
littering the streets."

"This must be Mobile Bay on the left," Basil thought; "Down
Mobile," and the Dixie moonlight and darky stevedores singing.  The
houses on either side of the street were gently faded behind proud,
protecting vines; there had been crinolines on these balconies, and
guitars by night in these broken gardens.

It was so warm; the voices were so sure they had time to say
everything--even Minnie's voice, answering the banter of the youth
with the odd nickname, seemed slower and lazier--he had scarcely
ever thought of her as a Southern girl before.  They stopped at a
large gate where flickers of a yellow house showed through luscious
trees.  Le Moyne got out.

"I certainly hope you both enjoy your visit here.  If you'll permit
me I'll call around and see if there's anything I can do to add to
your pleasure."  He swooped his panama.  "I bid you good day."

As they started off, Bessie Belle turned around and smiled at
Minnie.

"Didn't I tell you?" she demanded.

"I guessed it in the station, before he came up to the car," said
Minnie.  "Something told me that was him."

"Did you think he was good-looking?"

"He was divine," Minnie said.

"Of course he's always gone with an older crowd."

To Basil, this prolonged discussion seemed a little out of place.
After all, the young man was simply a local Southerner who lived
here; add to that, that he went with an older crowd, and it seemed
that his existence was being unnecessarily insisted upon.

But now Minnie turned to him, said, "Basil," wriggled invitingly
and folded her hands in a humble, expectant way that invariably
caused disturbances in his heart.

"I loved your letters," she said.

"You might have answered them."

"I haven't had a minute, Basil.  I visited in Chicago and then in
Nashville.  I haven't even been home."  She lowered her voice.
"Father and mother are getting a divorce, Basil.  Isn't that
awful?"

He was startled; then, after a moment, he adjusted the idea to her
and she became doubly poignant; because of its romantic connection
with her, the thought of divorce would never shock him again.

"That's why I didn't write.  But I've thought of you so much.
You're the best friend I have, Basil.  You always understand."

This was decidedly not the note upon which they had parted in St.
Paul.  A dreadful rumor that he hadn't intended to mention rose to
his lips.

"Who is this fellow Bailey you met at Lake Forest?" he inquired
lightly.

"Buzz Bailey!"  Her big eyes opened in surprise.  "He's very
attractive and a divine dancer, but we're just friends."  She
frowned.  "I bet Connie Davies has been telling tales in St. Paul.
Honestly, I'm so sick of girls that, just out of jealousy or
nothing better to do, sit around and criticize you if you have a
good time."

He was convinced now that something had occurred in Lake Forest,
but he concealed the momentary pang from Minnie.

"Anyhow, you're a fine one to talk."  She smiled suddenly.  "I
guess everybody knows how fickle you are, Mr. Basil Duke Lee."

Generally such an implication is considered flattering, but the
lightness, almost the indifference, with which she spoke increased
his alarm--and then suddenly the bomb exploded.

"You needn't worry about Buzz Bailey.  At present I'm absolutely
heart-whole and fancy free."

Before he could even comprehend the enormity of what she had said,
they stopped at Bessie Belle Cheever's door and the two girls ran
up the steps, calling back, "We'll see you this afternoon."

Mechanically Basil climbed into the front seat beside his host.

"Going out for freshman football, Basil?" William asked.

"What?  Oh, sure.  If I can get off my two conditions."  There was
no if in his heart; it was the greatest ambition of his life.

"You'll probably make the freshman team easy.  That fellow
Littleboy Le Moyne you just met is going to Princeton this fall.
He played end at V. M. I."

"Where'd he get that crazy name?"

"Why, his family always called him that and everybody picked it
up."  After a moment he added, "He asked them to the country-club
dance with him tonight."

"When did he?" Basil demanded in surprise.

"Right then.  That's what they were talking about.  I meant to ask
them and I was just leading up to it gradually, but he stepped in
before I could get a chance."  He sighed, blaming himself.  "Well,
anyhow, we'll see them there."

"Sure; it doesn't matter," said Basil.  But was it Fat's mistake?
Couldn't Minnie have said right out:  "But Basil came all this way
to see me and I ought to go with him on his first night here."

What had happened?  One month ago, in the dim, thunderous Union
Station at St. Paul, they had gone behind a baggage truck and he
had kissed her, and her eyes had said:  "Again."  Up to the very
end, when she disappeared in a swirl of vapor at the car window,
she had been his--those weren't things you thought; they were
things you knew.  He was bewildered.  It wasn't like Minnie, who,
for all her glittering popularity, was invariably kind.  He tried
to think of something in his letters that might have offended her,
and searched himself for new shortcomings.  Perhaps she didn't like
him the way he was in the morning.  The joyous mood in which he had
arrived was vanishing into air.

She was her familiar self when they played tennis that afternoon;
she admired his strokes and once, when they were close at the net,
she suddenly patted his hand.  But later, as they drank lemonade on
the Cheevers' wide, shady porch, he couldn't seem to be alone with
her even for a minute.  Was it by accident that, coming back from
the courts, she had sat in front with Fat?  Last summer she had
made opportunities to be alone with him--made them out of nothing.
It was in a state that seemed to border on some terrible
realization that he dressed for the country-club dance.

The club lay in a little valley, almost roofed over by willows, and
down through their black silhouettes, in irregular blobs and
patches, dripped the light of a huge harvest moon.  As they parked
the car, Basil's tune of tunes, Chinatown, drifted from the windows
and dissolved into its notes which thronged like elves through the
glade.  His heart quickened, suffocating him; the throbbing
tropical darkness held a promise of such romance as he had dreamed
of; but faced with it, he felt himself too small and impotent to
seize the felicity he desired.  When he danced with Minnie he was
ashamed of inflicting his merely mortal presence on her in this
fairyland whose unfamiliar figures reached towering proportions of
magnificence and beauty.  To make him king here, she would have to
reach forth and draw him close to her with soft words; but she only
said, "Isn't it wonderful, Basil?  Did you ever have a better
time?"

Talking for a moment with Le Moyne in the stag line, Basil was
hesitantly jealous and oddly shy.  He resented the tall form that
stooped down so fiercely over Minnie as they danced, but he found
it impossible to dislike him or not to be amused by the line of
sober-faced banter he kept up with passing girls.  He and William
Gasper were the youngest boys here, as Bessie Belle and Minnie were
the youngest girls, and for the first time in his life he wanted
passionately to be older, less impressionable, less impressed.
Quivering at every scent, sight or tune, he wanted to be blasé and
calm.  Wretchedly he felt the whole world of beauty pour down upon
him like moonlight, pressing on him, making his breath now sighing,
now short, as he wallowed helplessly in a superabundance of youth
for which a hundred adults present would have given years of life.

Next day, meeting her in a world that had shrunk back to reality,
things were more natural, but something was gone and he could not
bring himself to be amusing and gay.  It would be like being brave
after the battle.  He should have been all that the night before.
They went downtown in an unpaired foursome and called at a
photographer's for some pictures of Minnie.  Basil liked one proof
that no one else liked--somehow, it reminded him of her as she had
been in St. Paul--so he ordered two--one for her to keep and one to
send after him to Yale.  All afternoon she was distracted and
vaguely singing, but back at the Cheevers' she sprang up the steps
at the sound of the phone inside.  Ten minutes later she appeared,
sulky and lowering, and Basil heard a quick exchange between the
two girls:

"He can't get out of it."

"--a pity."

"--back Friday."

It could only be Le Moyne who had gone away, and to Minnie it
mattered.  Presently, unable to endure her disappointment, he got
up wretchedly and suggested to William that they go home.  To his
surprise, Minnie's hand on his arm arrested him.

"Don't go, Basil.  It doesn't seem as if I've seen you a minute
since you've been here."

He laughed unhappily.

"As if it mattered to you."

"Basil, don't be silly."  She bit her lip as if she were hurt.
"Let's go out to the swing."

He was suddenly radiant with hope and happiness.  Her tender smile,
which seemed to come from the heart of freshness, soothed him and
he drank down her lies in grateful gulps like cool water.  The last
sunshine touched her cheeks with the unearthly radiance he had seen
there before, as she told him how she hadn't wanted to accept Le
Moyne's invitation, and how surprised and hurt she had been when he
hadn't come near her last night.

"Then do one thing, Minnie," he pleaded:  "Won't you let me kiss
you just once?"

"But not here," she exclaimed, "you silly!"

"Let's go in the summerhouse, for just a minute."

"Basil, I can't.  Bessie Belle and William are on the porch.  Maybe
some other time."

He looked at her distraught, unable to believe or disbelieve in
her, and she changed the subject quickly:

"I'm going to Miss Beecher's school, Basil.  It's only a few hours
from New Haven.  You can come up and see me this fall.  The only
thing is, they say you have to sit in glass parlors.  Isn't that
terrible?"

"Awful," he agreed fervently.

William and Bessie Belle had left the veranda and were out in
front, talking to some people in a car.

"Minnie, come into the summerhouse now--for just a minute.  They're
so far away."

Her face set unwillingly.

"I can't, Basil.  Don't you see I can't?"

"Why not?  I've got to leave tomorrow."

"Oh, no."

"I have to.  I only have four days to get ready for my exams.
Minnie--"

He took her hand.  It rested calmly enough in his, but when he
tried to pull her to her feet she plucked it sharply away.  The
swing moved with the little struggle and Basil put out his foot and
made it stop.  It was terrible to swing when one was at a
disadvantage.

She laid the recovered hand on his knee.

"I've stopped kissing people, Basil.  Really.  I'm too old; I'll be
seventeen next May."

"I'll bet you kissed Le Moyne," he said bitterly.

"Well, you're pretty fresh--"

Basil got out of the swing.

"I think I'll go."

Looking up, she judged him dispassionately, as she never had before--
his sturdy graceful figure; the high, warm color through his
tanned skin; his black, shining hair that she had once thought so
romantic.  She felt, too--as even those who disliked him felt--that
there was something else in his face--a mark, a hint of destiny, a
persistence that was more than will, that was rather a necessity of
pressing its own pattern on the world, of having its way.  That he
would most probably succeed at Yale, that it would be nice to go
there this year as his girl, meant nothing to her.  She had never
needed to be calculating.  Hesitating, she alternatingly drew him
toward her in her mind and let him go.  There were so many men and
they wanted her so much.  If Le Moyne had been here at hand she
wouldn't have hesitated, for nothing must interfere with the
mysterious opening glory of that affair; but he was gone for three
days and she couldn't decide quite yet to let Basil go.

"Stay over till Wednesday and I'll--I'll do what you want," she
said.

"But I can't.  I've got these exams to study for.  I ought to have
left this afternoon."

"Study on the train."

She wriggled, dropped her hands in her lap and smiled at him.
Taking her hand suddenly, he pulled her to her feet and toward the
summerhouse and the cool darkness behind its vines.


II


The following Friday Basil arrived in New Haven and set about
crowding five days' work into two.  He had done no studying on the
train; instead he sat in a trance and concentrated upon Minnie,
wondering what was happening now that Le Moyne was there.  She had
kept her promise to him, but only literally--kissed him once in the
playhouse, once, grudgingly, the second evening; but the day of his
departure there had been a telegram from Le Moyne, and in front of
Bessie Belle she had not even dared to kiss him good-by.  As a sort
of amend she had given him permission to call on the first day
permitted by Miss Beecher's school.

The opening of college found him rooming with Brick Wales and
George Dorsey in a suite of two bedrooms and a study in Wright
Hall.  Until the result of his trigonometry examination was
published he was ineligible to play football, but watching the
freshmen practice on Yale field, he saw that the quarterback
position lay between Cullum, last year's Andover captain, and a man
named Danziger from a New Bedford high school.  There was a rumor
that Cullum would be moved to halfback.  The other quarterbacks did
not appear formidable and Basil felt a great impatience to be out
there with a team in his hands to move over the springy turf.  He
was sure he could at least get in some of the games.

Behind everything, as a light showing through, was the image of
Minnie; he would see her in a week, three days, tomorrow.  On the
eve of the occasion he ran into Fat Gaspar, who was in Sheff, in
the oval by Haughton Hall.  In the first busy weeks they had
scarcely met; now they walked along for a little way together.

"We all came North together," Fat said.  "You ought to have been
along.  We had some excitement.  Minnie got in a jam with Littleboy
Le Moyne."

Basil's blood ran cold.

"It was funny afterward, but she was pretty scared for a while,"
continued Fat.  "She had a compartment with Bessie Belle, but she
and Littleboy wanted to be alone; so in the afternoon Bessie Belle
came and played cards in ours.  Well, after about two hours Bessie
Belle and I went back, and there were Minnie and Littleboy standing
in the vestibule arguing with the conductor; Minnie white as a
sheet.  Seems they locked the door and pulled down the blinds, and
I guess there was a little petting going on.  When he came along
after the tickets and knocked on the door, they thought it was us
kidding them, and wouldn't let him in at first, and when they did,
he was pretty upset.  He asked Littleboy if that was his
compartment, and whether he and Minnie were married that they
locked the door, and Littleboy lost his temper trying to explain
that there was nothing wrong.  He said the conductor had insulted
Minnie and he wanted him to fight.  But that conductor could have
made trouble, and believe me, I had an awful time smoothing it all
over."

With every detail imagined, with every refinement of jealousy
beating in his mind, including even envy for their community of
misfortune as they stood together in the vestibule, Basil went up
to Miss Beecher's next day.  Radiant and glowing, more mysteriously
desirable than ever, wearing her very sins like stars, she came
down to him in her plain white uniform dress, and his heart turned
over at the kindness of her eyes.

"You were wonderful to come up, Basil.  I'm so excited having a
beau so soon.  Everybody's jealous of me."

The glass doors hinged like French windows, shutting them in on all
sides.  It was hot.  Down through three more compartments he could
see another couple--a girl and her brother, Minnie said--and from
time to time they moved and gestured soundlessly, as unreal in
these tiny human conservatories as the vase of paper flowers on the
table.  Basil walked up and down nervously.

"Minnie, I want to be a great man some day and I want to do
everything for you.  I understand you're tired of me now.  I don't
know how it happened, but somebody else came along--it doesn't
matter.  There isn't any hurry.  But I just want you to--oh,
remember me in some different way--try to think of me as you used
to, not as if I was just another one you threw over.  Maybe you'd
better not see me for a while--I mean at the dance this fall.  Wait
till I've accomplished some big scene or deed, you know, and I can
show it to you and say I did that all for you."

It was very futile and young and sad.  Once, carried away by the
tragedy of it all, he was on the verge of tears, but he controlled
himself to that extent.  There was sweat on his forehead.  He sat
across the room from her, and Minnie sat on the couch, looking at
the floor, and said several times:  "Can't we be friends, Basil?  I
always think of you as one of my best friends."

Toward the end she rose patiently.

"Don't you want to see the chapel?"

They walked upstairs and he glanced dismally into a small dark
space, with her living, sweet-smelling presence half a yard from
his shoulder.  He was almost glad when the funereal business was
over and he walked out of the school into the fresh autumn air.

Back in New Haven he found two pieces of mail on his desk.  One was
a notice from the registrar telling him that he had failed his
trigonometry examination and would be ineligible for football.  The
second was a photograph of Minnie--the picture that he had liked
and ordered two of in Mobile.  At first the inscription puzzled
him:  "L. L. from E. G. L. B.  Trains are bad for the heart."  Then
suddenly he realized what had happened, and threw himself on his
bed, shaken with wild laughter.


III


Three weeks later, having requested and passed a special
examination in trigonometry, Basil began to look around him
gloomily to see if there was anything left in life.  Not since his
miserable first year at school had he passed through such a period
of misery; only now did he begin for the first time to be aware of
Yale.  The quality of romantic speculation reawoke, and, listlessly
at first, then with growing determination, he set about merging
himself into this spirit which had fed his dreams so long.

"I want to be chairman of the News or the Record," thought his old
self one October morning, "and I want to get my letter in football,
and I want to be in Skull and Bones."

Whenever the vision of Minnie and Le Moyne on the train occurred to
him, he repeated this phrase like an incantation.  Already he
thought with shame of having stayed over in Mobile, and there began
to be long strings of hours when he scarcely brooded about her at
all.

He had missed half of the freshman football season, and it was with
scant hope that he joined the squad on Yale field.  Dressed in his
black and white St. Regis jersey, amid the motley of forty schools,
he looked enviously at the proud two dozen in Yale blue.  At the
end of four days he was reconciling himself to obscurity for the
rest of the season when the voice of Carson, assistant coach,
singled him suddenly out of a crowd of scrub backs.

"Who was throwing those passes just now?"

"I was, sir."

"I haven't seen you before, have I?"

"I just got eligible."

"Know the signals?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, you take this team down the field--ends, Krutch and Bispam;
tackles--"

A moment later he heard his own voice snapping out on the crisp
air:  "Thirty-two, sixty-five, sixty-seven, twenty-two--"

There was a ripple of laughter.

"Wait a minute!  Where'd you learn to call signals like that?" said
Carson.

"Why, we had a Harvard coach, sir."

"Well, just drop the Haughton emphasis.  You'll get everybody too
excited."

After a few minutes they were called in and told to put on
headgears.

"Where's Waite?" Carson asked.  "Test, eh?  Well, you then--what's
your name?--in the black and white sweater?"

"Lee."

"You call signals.  And let's see you get some life into this
outfit.  Some of you guards and tackles are big enough for the
varsity.  Keep them on their toes, you--what's your name?"

"Lee."

They lined up with possession of the ball on the freshmen's twenty-
yard line.  They were allowed unlimited downs, but when, after a
dozen plays, they were in approximately that same place, the ball
was given to the first team.

"That's that!" thought Basil.  "That finishes me."

But an hour later, as they got out of the bus, Carson spoke to him:

"Did you weigh this afternoon?"

"Yes.  Hundred and fifty-eight."

"Let me give you a tip--you're still playing prep-school football.
You're still satisfied with stopping them.  The idea here is that
if you lay them down hard enough you wear them out.  Can you kick?"

"No, sir."

"Well, it's too bad you didn't get out sooner."

A week later his name was read out as one of those to go to
Andover.  Two quarterbacks ranked ahead of him, Danziger and a
little hard rubber ball of a man, named Appleton, and Basil watched
the game from the sidelines, but when, the following Tuesday,
Danziger splintered his arm in practice, Basil was ordered to
report to training table.

On the eve of the game with the Princeton freshmen, the egress of
the student body to Princeton for the Varsity encounter left the
campus almost deserted.  Deep autumn had set in, with a crackling
wind from the west, and walking back to his room after final skull
practice, Basil felt the old lust for glory sweep over him.  Le
Moyne was playing end on the Princeton freshman and it was probable
that Minnie would be in the stands, but now, as he ran along the
springy grass in front of Osborne, swaying to elude imaginary
tacklers, the fact seemed of less importance than the game.  Like
most Americans, he was seldom able really to grasp the moment, to
say:  "This, for me, is the great equation by which everything else
will be measured; this is the golden time," but for once the
present was sufficient.  He was going to spend two hours in a
country where life ran at the pace he demanded of it.

The day was fair and cool; an unimpassioned crowd, mostly townsmen,
was scattered through the stands.  The Princeton freshmen looked
sturdy and solid in their diagonal stripes, and Basil picked out Le
Moyne, noting coldly that he was exceptionally fast, and bigger
than he had seemed in his clothes.  On an impulse Basil turned and
searched for Minnie in the crowd, but he could not find her.  A
minute later the whistle blew; sitting at the coach's side, he
concentrated all his faculties on the play.

The first half was played between the thirty-yard lines.  The main
principles of Yale's offense seemed to Basil too simple; less
effective than the fragments of the Haughton system he had learned
at school, while the Princeton tactics, still evolved in Sam
White's long shadow, were built around a punter and the hope of a
break.  When the break came, it was Yale's.  At the start of the
second half Princeton fumbled and Appleton sent over a drop kick
from the thirty-yard line.

It was his last act of the day.  He was hurt on the next kick-off
and, to a burst of freshmen cheering, assisted from the game.

With his heart in a riot, Basil sprinted out on the field.  He felt
an overpowering strangeness, and it was someone else in his skin
who called the first signals and sent an unsuccessful play through
the line.  As he forced his eyes to take in the field slowly, they
met Le Moyne's, and Le Moyne grinned at him.  Basil called for a
short pass over the line, throwing it himself for a gain of seven
yards.  He sent Cullum off tackle for three more and a first down.
At the forty, with more latitude, his mind began to function
smoothly and surely.  His short passes worried the Princeton
fullback, and, in consequence, the running gains through the line
were averaging four yards instead of two.

At the Princeton forty he dropped back to kick formation and tried
Le Moyne's end, but Le Moyne went under the interfering halfback
and caught Basil by a foot.  Savagely Basil tugged himself free,
but too late--the halfback bowled him over.  Again Le Moyne's face
grinned at him, and Basil hated it.  He called the same end and,
with Cullum carrying the ball, they rolled over Le Moyne six yards,
to Princeton's thirty-two.  He was slowing down, was he?  Then run
him ragged!  System counseled a pass, but he heard himself calling
the end again.  He ran parallel to the line, saw his interference
melt away and Le Moyne, his jaw set, coming for him.  Instead of
cutting in, Basil turned full about and tried to reverse his field.
When he was trapped he had lost fifteen yards.

A few minutes later the ball changed hands and he ran back to the
safety position thinking:  "They'd yank me if they had anybody to
put in my place."

The Princeton team suddenly woke up.  A long pass gained thirty
yards.  A fast new back dazzled his way through the line for
another first down.  Yale was on the defensive, but even before
they had realized the fact, the disaster had happened.  Basil was
drawn on an apparently developed play; too late he saw the ball
shoot out of scrimmage to a loose end; saw, as he was neatly
blocked, that the Princeton substitutes were jumping around wildly,
waving their blankets.  They had scored.

He got up with his heart black, but his brain cool.  Blunders could
be atoned for--if they only wouldn't take him out.  The whistle
blew for the quarter, and squatting on the turf with the exhausted
team, he made himself believe that he hadn't lost their confidence,
kept his face intent and rigid, refusing no man's eye.  He had made
his errors for today.

On the kick-off he ran the ball back to the thirty-five, and a
steady rolling progress began.  The short passes, a weak spot
inside tackle, Le Moyne's end.  Le Moyne was tired now.  His face
was drawn and dogged as he smashed blindly into the interference;
the ball carrier eluded him--Basil or another.

Thirty more to go--twenty--over Le Moyne again.  Disentangling
himself from the pile, Basil met the Southerner's weary glance and
insulted him in a crisp voice:

"You've quit, Littleboy.  They better take you out."

He started the next play at him and, as Le Moyne charged in
furiously, tossed a pass over his head for the score.  Yale 10,
Princeton 7.  Up and down the field again, with Basil fresher every
minute and another score in sight, and suddenly the game was over.

Trudging off the field, Basil's eye ranged over the stands, but he
could not see her.

"I wonder if she knows I was pretty bad," he thought, and then
bitterly:  "If I don't, he'll tell her."

He could hear him telling her in that soft Southern voice--the
voice that had wooed her so persuasively that afternoon on the
train.  As he emerged from the dressing room an hour later he ran
into Le Moyne coming out of the visitors' quarters next door.  He
looked at Basil with an expression at once uncertain and angry.

"Hello, Lee."  After a momentary hesitation he added:  "Good work."

"Hello, Le Moyne," said Basil, clipping his words.

Le Moyne turned away, turned back again.

"What's the matter?" he demanded.  "Do you want to carry this any
further?"

Basil didn't answer.  The bruised face and the bandaged hand
assuaged his hatred a little, but he couldn't bring himself to
speak.  The game was over, and now Le Moyne would meet Minnie
somewhere, make the defeat negligible in the victory of the night.

"If it's about Minnie, you're wasting your time being sore," Le
Moyne exploded suddenly.  "I asked her to the game, but she didn't
come."

"Didn't she?"  Basil was startled.

"That was it, eh?  I wasn't sure.  I thought you were just trying
to get my goat in there."  His eyes narrowed.  "The young lady
kicked me about a month ago."

"Kicked you?"

"Threw me over.  Got a little weary of me.  She runs through things
quickly."

Basil perceived that his face was miserable.

"Who is it now?" he asked in more civil tone.

"It seems to be a classmate of yours named Jubal--and a mighty sad
bird, if you ask me.  She met him in New York the day before her
school opened, and I hear it's pretty heavy.  She'll be at the Lawn
Club Dance tonight."


IV


Basil had dinner at the Taft with Jobena Dorsey and her brother
George.  The Varsity had won at Princeton and the college was
jubilant and enthusiastic; as they came in, a table of freshmen by
the door gave Basil a hand.

"You're getting very important," Jobena said.

A year ago Basil had thought for a few weeks that he was in love
with Jobena; when they next met he knew immediately that he was
not.

"And why was that?" he asked her now, as they danced.  "Why did it
all go so quick?"

"Do you really want to know?"

"Yes."

"Because I let it go."

"You let it go?" he repeated.  "I like that!"

"I decided you were too young."

"Didn't I have anything to do with it?"

She shook her head.

"That's what Bernard Shaw says," Basil admitted thoughtfully.  "But
I thought it was just about older people.  So you go after the
men."

"Well, I should say not!"  Her body stiffened indignantly in his
arms.  "The men are usually there, and the girl blinks at them or
something.  It's just instinct."

"Can't a man make a girl fall for him?"

"Some men can--the ones who really don't care."

He pondered this awful fact for a moment and stowed it away for
future examination.  On the way to the Lawn Club he brought forth
more questions.

If a girl who had been "crazy about a boy" became suddenly
infatuated with another, what ought the first boy to do?

"Let her go," said Jobena.

"Supposing he wasn't willing to do that.  What ought he to do?"

"There isn't anything to do."

"Well, what's the best thing?"

Laughing, Jobena laid her head on his shoulder.

"Poor Basil," she said, "I'll be Laura Jean Libbey and you tell me
the whole story."

He summarized the affair.  "You see," he concluded, "if she was
just anybody I could get over it, no matter how much I loved her.
But she isn't--she's the most popular, most beautiful girl I've
ever seen.  I mean she's like Messalina and Cleopatra and Salome
and all that."

"Louder," requested George from the front seat.

"She's sort of an immortal woman," continued Basil in a lower
voice.  "You know, like Madame du Barry and all that sort of thing.
She's not just--"

"Not just like me."

"No.  That is, you're sort of like her--all the girls I've cared
about are sort of the same.  Oh, Jobena, you know what I mean."

As the lights of the New Haven Lawn Club loomed up she became
obligingly serious:

"There's nothing to do.  I can see that.  She's more sophisticated
than you.  She staged the whole thing from the beginning, even when
you thought it was you.  I don't know why she got tired, but
evidently she is, and she couldn't create it again, even if she
wanted to, and you couldn't because you're--"

"Go on.  What?"

"You're too much in love.  All that's left for you to do is to show
her you don't care.  Any girl hates to lose an old beau; so she may
even smile at you--but don't go back.  It's all over."

In the dressing room Basil stood thoughtfully brushing his hair.
It was all over.  Jobena's words had taken away his last faint
hope, and after the strain of the afternoon the realization brought
tears to his eyes.  Hurriedly filling the bowl, he washed his face.
Someone came in and slapped him on the back.

"You played a nice game, Lee."

"Thanks, but I was rotten."

"You were great.  That last quarter--"

He went into the dance.  Immediately he saw her, and in the same
breath he was dizzy and confused with excitement.  A little dribble
of stags pursued her wherever she went, and she looked up at each
one of them with the bright-eyed, passionate smile he knew so well.
Presently he located her escort and indignantly discovered it was a
flip, blatant boy from Hill School he had already noticed and set
down as impossible.  What quality lurked behind those watery eyes
that drew her?  How could that raw temperament appreciate that she
was one of the immortal sirens of the world?

Having examined Mr. Jubal desperately and in vain for the answers
to these questions, he cut in and danced all of twenty feet with
her, smiling with cynical melancholy when she said:

"I'm so proud to know you, Basil.  Everybody says you were
wonderful this afternoon."

But the phrase was precious to him and he stood against the wall
repeating it over to himself, separating it into its component
parts and trying to suck out any lurking meaning.  If enough people
praised him it might influence her.  "I'm proud to know you, Basil.
Everybody says you were wonderful this afternoon."

There was a commotion near the door and someone said, "By golly,
they got in after all!"

"Who?" another asked.

"Some Princeton freshmen.  Their football season's over and three
or four of them broke training at the Hofbrau."

And now suddenly the curious specter of a young man burst out of
the commotion, as a back breaks through a line, and neatly straight-
arming a member of the dance committee, rushed unsteadily onto the
floor.  He wore no collar with his dinner coat, his shirt front had
long expelled its studs, his hair and eyes were wild.  For a moment
he glanced around as if blinded by the lights; then his glance fell
on Minnie Bibble and an unmistakable love light came into his face.
Even before he reached her he began to call her name aloud in a
strained, poignant Southern voice.

Basil sprang forward, but others were before him, and Littleboy Le
Moyne, fighting hard, disappeared into the coatroom in a flurry of
legs and arms, many of which were not his own.  Standing in the
doorway.  Basil found his disgust tempered with a monstrous
sympathy; for Le Moyne, each time his head emerged from under the
faucet, spoke desperately of his rejected love.

But when Basil danced with Minnie again, he found her frightened
and angry; so much so that she seemed to appeal to Basil for
support, made him sit down.

"Wasn't he a fool?" she cried feelingly.  "That sort of thing gives
a girl a terrible reputation.  They ought to have put him in jail."

"He didn't know what he was doing.  He played a hard game and he's
all in, that's all."

But her eyes filled with tears.

"Oh, Basil," she pleaded, "am I just perfectly terrible?  I never
want to be mean to anybody; things just happen."

He wanted to put his arm around her and tell her she was the most
romantic person in the world, but he saw in her eyes that she
scarcely perceived him; he was a lay figure--she might have been
talking to another girl.  He remembered what Jobena had said--there
was nothing left except to escape with his pride.

"You've got more sense."  Her soft voice flowed around him like an
enchanted river.  "You know that when two people aren't--aren't
crazy about each other any more, the thing is to be sensible."

"Of course," he said, and forced himself to add lightly: "When a
thing's over, it's over."

"Oh, Basil, you're so satisfactory.  You always understand."  And
now suddenly, for the first time in months, she was actually
thinking of him.  He would be an invaluable person in any girl's
life, she thought, if that brain of his, which was so annoying
sometimes, was really used "to sort of understand."

He was watching Jobena dance, and Minnie followed his eyes.

"You brought a girl, didn't you?  She's awfully pretty."

"Not as pretty as you."

"Basil."

Resolutely he refused to look at her, guessing that she had
wriggled slightly and folded her hands in her lap.  And as he held
on to himself an extraordinary thing happened--the world around,
outside of her, brightened a little.  Presently more freshmen would
approach him to congratulate him on the game, and he would like it--
the words and the tribute in their eyes.  There was a good chance
he would start against Harvard next week.

"Basil!"

His heart made a dizzy tour of his chest.  Around the corner of his
eyes he felt her eyes waiting.  Was she really sorry?  Should he
seize the opportunity to turn to her and say:  "Minnie, tell this
crazy nut to go jump in the river, and come back to me."  He
wavered, but a thought that had helped him this afternoon returned:
He had made all his mistakes for this time.  Deep inside of him the
plea expired slowly.

Jubal the impossible came up with an air of possession, and Basil's
heart went bobbing off around the ballroom in a pink silk dress.
Lost again in a fog of indecision, he walked out on the veranda.
There was a flurry of premature snow in the air and the stars
looked cold.  Staring up at them he saw that they were his stars as
always--symbols of ambition, struggle and glory.  The wind blew
through them, trumpeting that high white note for which he always
listened, and the thin-blown clouds, stripped for battle, passed in
review.  The scene was of an unparalleled brightness and
magnificence, and only the practiced eye of the commander saw that
one star was no longer there.


THE END






BASIL: THE FRESHEST BOY


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


The Saturday Evening Post (28 July 1928)



I


It was a hidden Broadway restaurant in the dead of the night, and a
brilliant and mysterious group of society people, diplomats and
members of the underworld were there.  A few minutes ago the
sparkling wine had been flowing and a girl had been dancing gaily
upon a table, but now the whole crowd were hushed and breathless.
All eyes were fixed upon the masked but well-groomed man in the
dress suit and opera hat who stood nonchalantly in the door.

'Don't move, please,' he said, in a well-bred, cultivated voice
that had, nevertheless, a ring of steel in it.  'This thing in my
hand might--go off.'

His glance roved from table to table--fell upon the malignant man
higher up with his pale saturnine face, upon Heatherly, the suave
secret agent from a foreign power, then rested a little longer, a
little more softly perhaps, upon the table where the girl with dark
hair and dark tragic eyes sat alone.

'Now that my purpose is accomplished, it might interest you to know
who I am.'  There was a gleam of expectation in every eye.  The
breast of the dark-eyed girl heaved faintly and a tiny burst of
subtle French perfume rose into the air.  'I am none other than
that elusive gentleman, Basil Lee, better known as the Shadow.'

Taking off his well-fitting opera hat, he bowed ironically from the
waist.  Then, like a flash, he turned and was gone into the night.



'You get up to New York only once a month,' Lewis Crum was saying,
'and then you have to take a master along.'

Slowly, Basil Lee's glazed eyes turned from the barns and
billboards of the Indiana countryside to the interior of the
Broadway Limited.  The hypnosis of the swift telegraph poles faded
and Lewis Crum's stolid face took shape against the white slipcover
of the opposite bench.

'I'd just duck the master when I got to New York,' said Basil.

'Yes, you would!'

'I bet I would.'

'You try it and you'll see.'

'What do you mean saying I'll see, all the time, Lewis?  What'll I
see?'

His very bright dark-blue eyes were at this moment fixed upon his
companion with boredom and impatience.  The two had nothing in
common except their age, which was fifteen, and the lifelong
friendship of their fathers--which is less than nothing.  Also they
were bound from the same Middle-Western city for Basil's first and
Lewis's second year at the same Eastern school.

But, contrary to all the best traditions, Lewis the veteran was
miserable and Basil the neophyte was happy.  Lewis hated school.
He had grown entirely dependent on the stimulus of a hearty vital
mother, and as he felt her slipping farther and farther away from
him, he plunged deeper into misery and homesickness.  Basil, on the
other hand, had lived with such intensity on so many stories of
boarding-school life that, far from being homesick, he had a glad
feeling of recognition and familiarity.  Indeed, it was with some
sense of doing the appropriate thing, having the traditional rough-
house, that he had thrown Lewis's comb off the train at Milwaukee
last night for no reason at all.

To Lewis, Basil's ignorant enthusiasm was distasteful--his
instinctive attempt to dampen it had contributed to the mutual
irritation.

'I'll tell you what you'll see,' he said ominously.  'They'll catch
you smoking and put you on bounds.'

'No, they won't, because I won't be smoking.  I'll be in training
for football.'

'Football!  Yeah!  Football!'

'Honestly, Lewis, you don't like anything, do you?'

'I don't like football.  I don't like to go out and get a crack in
the eye.'  Lewis spoke aggressively, for his mother had canonized
all his timidities as common sense.  Basil's answer, made with what
he considered kindly intent, was the sort of remark that creates
lifelong enmities.

'You'd probably be a lot more popular in school if you played
football,'--he suggested patronizingly.

Lewis did not consider himself unpopular.  He did not think of it
in that way at all.  He was astounded.

'You wait!' he cried furiously.  'They'll take all that freshness
out of you.'

'Clam yourself,' said Basil, coolly plucking at the creases of his
first long trousers.  'Just clam yourself.'

'I guess everybody knows you were the freshest boy at the Country
Day!'

'Clam yourself,' repeated Basil, but with less assurance.  'Kindly
clam yourself.'

'I guess I know what they had in the school paper about you--'

Basil's own coolness was no longer perceptible.

'If you don't clam yourself,' he said darkly, 'I'm going to throw
your brushes off the train too.'

The enormity of this threat was effective.  Lewis sank back in his
seat, snorting and muttering, but undoubtedly calmer.  His
reference had been to one of the most shameful passages in his
companion's life.  In a periodical issued by the boys of Basil's
late school there had appeared under the heading Personals:


If someone will please poison young Basil, or find some other means
to stop his mouth, the school at large and myself will be much
obliged.


The two boys sat there fuming wordlessly at each other.  Then,
resolutely, Basil tried to re-inter this unfortunate souvenir of
the past.  All that was behind him now.  Perhaps he had been a
little fresh, but he was making a new start.  After a moment, the
memory passed and with it the train and Lewis's dismal presence--
the breath of the East came sweeping over him again with a vast
nostalgia.  A voice called him out of the fabled world; a man stood
beside him with a hand on his sweater-clad shoulder.

'Lee!'

'Yes, sir.'

'It all depends on you now.  Understand?'

'Yes, sir.'

'All right,' the coach said, 'go in and win.'

Basil tore the sweater from his stripling form and dashed out on
the field.  There were two minutes to play and the score was 3 to 0
for the enemy, but at the sight of young Lee, kept out of the game
all year by a malicious plan of Dan Haskins, the school bully, and
Weasel Weems, his toady, a thrill of hope went over the St Regis
stand.

'33-12-16-22!' barked Midget Brown, the diminutive little
quarterback.

It was his signal--

'Oh, gosh!' Basil spoke aloud, forgetting the late unpleasantness.
'I wish we'd get there before tomorrow.'


II


                                      St Regis School, Eastchester,
                                                  November 18, 19--

Dear Mother:

There is not much to say today, but I thought I would write you
about my allowance.  All the boys have a bigger allowance than me,
because there are a lot of little things I have to get, such as
shoe laces, etc.  School is still very nice and am having a fine
time, but football is over and there is not much to do.  I am going
to New York this week to see a show.  I do not know yet what it
will be, but probably the Quacker Girl or little boy Blue as they
are both very good.  Dr Bacon is very nice and there's a good
phycission in the village.  No more now as I have to study Algebra.

                                             Your affectionate Son,
                                                      Basil D. Lee.


As he put the letter in its envelope, a wizened little boy came
into the deserted study hall where he sat and stood staring at him.

'Hello,' said Basil, frowning.

'I been looking for you,' said the little boy, slowly and
judicially.  'I looked all over--up in your room and out in the
gym, and they said you probably might of sneaked off in here.'

'What do you want?' Basil demanded.

'Hold your horses, Bossy.'

Basil jumped to his feet.  The little boy retreated a step.

'Go on, hit me!' he chirped nervously.  'Go on, hit me, cause I'm
just half your size--Bossy.'

Basil winced.  'You call me that again and I'll spank you.'

'No, you won't spank me.  Brick Wales said if you ever touched any
of us--'

'But I never did touch any of you.'

'Didn't you chase a lot of us one day and didn't Brick Wales--'

'Oh, what do you want?' Basil cried in desperation.

'Doctor Bacon wants you.  They sent me after you and somebody said
maybe you sneaked in here.'

Basil dropped his letter in his pocket and walked out--the little
boy and his invective following him through the door.  He traversed
a long corridor, muggy with that odour best described as the smell
of stale caramels that is so peculiar to boys' schools, ascended a
stairs and knocked at an unexceptional but formidable door.

Doctor Bacon was at his desk.  He was a handsome, redheaded
Episcopal clergyman of fifty whose original real interest in boys
was now tempered by the flustered cynicism which is the fate of all
headmasters and settles on them like green mould.  There were
certain preliminaries before Basil was asked to sit down--gold-
rimmed glasses had to be hoisted up from nowhere by a black cord
and fixed on Basil to be sure that he was not an impostor; great
masses of paper on the desk had to be shuffled through, not in
search of anything but as a man nervously shuffles a pack of cards.

'I had a letter from your mother this morning--ah--Basil.'  The use
of his first name had come to startle Basil.  No one else in school
had yet called him anything but Bossy or Lee.  'She feels that your
marks have been poor.  I believe you have been sent here at a
certain amount of--ah--sacrifice and she expects--'

Basil's spirit writhed with shame, not at his poor marks but that
his financial inadequacy should be so bluntly stated.  He knew that
he was one of the poorest boys in a rich boys' school.

Perhaps some dormant sensibility in Doctor Bacon became aware of
his discomfort; he shuffled through the papers once more and began
on a new note.

'However, that was not what I sent for you about this afternoon.
You applied last week for permission to go to New York on Saturday,
to a matinée.  Mr Davis tells me that for almost the first time
since school opened you will be off bounds tomorrow.'

'Yes, sir.'

'That is not a good record.  However, I would allow you to go to
New York if it could be arranged.  Unfortunately, no masters are
available this Saturday.'

Basil's mouth dropped ajar.  'Why, I--why, Doctor Bacon, I know two
parties that are going.  Couldn't I go with one of them?'

Doctor Bacon ran through all his papers very quickly.
'Unfortunately, one is composed of slightly older boys and the
other group made arrangements some weeks ago.'

'How about the party that's going to the Quaker Girl with Mr Dunn?'

'It's that party I speak of.  They feel that the arrangements are
complete and they have purchased seats together.'

Suddenly Basil understood.  At the look in his eye Doctor Bacon
went on hurriedly.

'There's perhaps one thing I can do.  Of course there must be
several boys in the party so that the expenses of the master can be
divided up among all.  If you can find two other boys who would
like to make up a party, and let me have their names by five
o'clock, I'll send Mr Rooney with you.'

'Thank you,' Basil said.

Doctor Bacon hesitated.  Beneath the cynical incrustations of many
years an instinct stirred to look into the unusual case of this boy
and find out what made him the most detested boy in school.  Among
boys and masters there seemed to exist an extraordinary hostility
towards him, and though Doctor Bacon had dealt with many sorts of
schoolboy crimes, he had neither by himself nor with the aid of
trusted sixth-formers been able to lay his hands on its underlying
cause.  It was probably no single thing, but a combination of
things; it was most probably one of those intangible questions of
personality.  Yet he remembered that when he first saw Basil he had
considered him unusually prepossessing.

He sighed.  Sometimes these things worked themselves out.  He
wasn't one to rush in clumsily.  'Let us have a better report to
send home next month, Basil.'

'Yes, sir.'

Basil ran quickly downstairs to the recreation room.  It was
Wednesday and most of the boys had already gone into the village of
Eastchester, whither Basil, who was still on bounds, was forbidden
to follow.  When he looked at those still scattered about the pool
tables and piano, he saw that it was going to be difficult to get
anyone to go with him at all.  For Basil was quite conscious that
he was the most unpopular boy at school.

It had begun almost immediately.  One day, less than a fortnight
after he came, a crowd of the smaller boys, perhaps urged on to it,
gathered suddenly around him and began calling him Bossy.  Within
the next week he had two fights, and both times the crowd was
vehemently and eloquently with the other boy.  Soon after, when he
was merely shoving indiscriminately, like everyone else, to get
into the dining-room, Carver, the captain of the football team,
turned about and, seizing him by the back of the neck, held him and
dressed him down savagely.  He joined a group innocently at the
piano and was told, 'Go on away.  We don't want you around.'

After a month he began to realize the full extent of his
unpopularity.  It shocked him.  One day after a particularly bitter
humiliation he went up to his room and cried.  He tried to keep out
of the way for a while, but it didn't help.  He was accused of
sneaking off here and there, as if bent on a series of nefarious
errands.  Puzzled and wretched, he looked at his face in the glass,
trying to discover there the secret of their dislike--in the
expression of his eyes, his smile.

He saw now that in certain ways he had erred at the outset--he had
boasted, he had been considered yellow at football, he had pointed
out people's mistakes to them, he had showed off his rather
extraordinary fund of general information in class.  But he had
tried to do better and couldn't understand his failure to atone.
It must be too late.  He was queered forever.

He had, indeed, become the scapegoat, the immediate villain, the
sponge which absorbed all malice and irritability abroad--just as
the most frightened person in a party seems to absorb all the
others' fear, seems to be afraid for them all.  His situation was
not helped by the fact, obvious to all, that the supreme self-
confidence with which he had come to St Regis in September was
thoroughly broken.  Boys taunted him with impunity who would not
have dared raise their voices to him several months before.

This trip to New York had come to mean everything to him--surcease
from the misery of his daily life as well as a glimpse into the
long-waited heaven of romance.  Its postponement for week after
week due to his sins--he was constantly caught reading after
lights, for example, driven by his wretchedness into such vicarious
escapes from reality--had deepened his longing until it was a
burning hunger.  It was unbearable that he should not go, and he
told over the short list of those whom he might get to accompany
him.  The possibilities were Fat Gaspar, Treadway, and Bugs Brown.
A quick journey to their rooms showed that they had all availed
themselves of the Wednesday permission to go into Eastchester for
the afternoon.

Basil did not hesitate.  He had until five o'clock and his only
chance was to go after them.  It was not the first time he had
broken bounds, though the last attempt had ended in disaster and an
extension of his confinement.  In his room, he put on a heavy
sweater--an overcoat was a betrayal of intent--replaced his jacket
over it and hid a cap in his back pocket.  Then he went downstairs
and with an elaborate careless whistle struck out across the lawn
for the gymnasium.  Once there, he stood for a while as if looking
in the windows, first the one close to the walk, then one near the
corner of the building.  From here he moved quickly, but not too
quickly, into a grove of lilacs.  Then he dashed around the corner,
down a long stretch of lawn that was blind from all windows and,
parting the strands of a wire fence, crawled through and stood upon
the grounds of a neighbouring estate.  For the moment he was free.
He put on his cap against the chilly November wind, and set out
along the half-mile road to town.

Eastchester was a suburban farming community, with a small shoe
factory.  The institutions which pandered to the factory workers
were the ones patronized by the boys--a movie house, a quick-lunch
wagon on wheels known as the Dog and the Bostonian Candy Kitchen.
Basil tried the Dog first and happened immediately upon a prospect.

This was Bugs Brown, a hysterical boy, subject to fits and
strenuously avoided.  Years later he became a brilliant lawyer, but
at that time he was considered by the boys of St Regis to be a
typical lunatic because of the peculiar series of sounds with which
he assuaged his nervousness all day long.

He consorted with boys younger than himself, who were without the
prejudices of their elders, and was in the company of several when
Basil came in.

'Who-ee!' he cried.  'Ee-ee-ee!'  He put his hand over his mouth
and bounced it quickly, making a wah-wah-wah sound.  'It's Bossy
Lee!  It's Bossy Lee!  It's Boss-Boss-Boss-Boss-Bossy Lee!'

'Wait a minute, Bugs,' said Basil anxiously, half afraid that Bugs
would go finally crazy before he could persuade him to come to
town.  'Say, Bugs, listen.  Don't, Bugs--wait a minute.  Can you
come up to New York Saturday afternoon?'

'Whe-ee-ee!' cried Bugs to Basil's distress.'  Wee-ee-ee!'

'Honestly, Bugs, tell me, can you?  We could go up together if you
could go.'

'I've got to see a doctor,' said Bugs, suddenly calm.  'He wants to
see how crazy I am.'

'Can't you have him see about it some other day?' said Basil
without humour.

'Whee-ee-ee!' cried Bugs.

'All right then,' said Basil hastily.  'Have you seen Fat Gaspar in
town?'

Bugs was lost in shrill noise, but someone had seen Fat: Basil was
directed to the Bostonian Candy Kitchen.

This was a gaudy paradise of cheap sugar.  Its odour, heavy and
sickly and calculated to bring out a sticky sweat upon an adult's
palms, hung suffocatingly over the whole vicinity and met one like
a strong moral dissuasion at the door.  Inside, beneath a pattern
of flies, material as black point lace, a line of boys sat eating
heavy dinners of banana splits, maple nut, and chocolate
marshmallow nut sundaes.  Basil found Fat Gaspar at a table on the
side.

Fat Gaspar was at once Basil's most unlikely and most ambitious
quest.  He was considered a nice fellow--in fact he was so pleasant
that he had been courteous to Basil and had spoken to him politely
all fall.  Basil realized that he was like that to everyone, yet it
was just possible that Fat liked him, as people used to in the
past, and he was driven desperately to take a chance.  But it was
undoubtedly a presumption, and as he approached the table and saw
the stiffened faces which the other two boys turned towards him,
Basil's hope diminished.

'Say, Fat--' he said, and hesitated.  Then he burst forth suddenly.
'I'm on bounds, but I ran off because I had to see you.  Doctor
Bacon told me I could go to New York Saturday if I could get two
other boys to go.  I asked Bugs Brown and he couldn't go, and I
thought I'd ask you.'

He broke off, furiously embarrassed, and waited.  Suddenly the two
boys with Fat burst into a shout of laughter.

'Bugs wasn't crazy enough!'

Fat Gaspar hesitated.  He couldn't go to New York Saturday and
ordinarily he would have refused without offending.  He had nothing
against Basil; nor, indeed, against anybody; but boys have only a
certain resistance to public opinion and he was influenced by the
contemptuous laughter of the others.

'I don't want to go,' he said indifferently.  'Why do you want to
ask ME?'

Then, half in shame, he gave a deprecatory little laugh and bent
over his ice cream.

'I just thought I'd ask you,' said Basil.

Turning quickly away, he went to the counter and in a hollow and
unfamiliar voice ordered a strawberry sundae.  He ate it
mechanically, hearing occasional whispers and snickers from the
table behind.  Still in a daze, he started to walk out without
paying his check, but the clerk called him back and he was
conscious of more derisive laughter.

For a moment he hesitated whether to go back to the table and hit
one of those boys in the face, but he saw nothing to be gained.
They would say the truth--that he had done it because he couldn't
get anybody to go to New York.  Clenching his fists with impotent
rage, he walked from the store.

He came immediately upon his third prospect, Treadway.  Treadway
had entered St Regis late in the year and had been put in to room
with Basil the week before.  The fact that Treadway hadn't
witnessed his humiliations of the autumn encouraged Basil to behave
naturally towards him, and their relations had been, if not
intimate, at least tranquil.

'Hey, Treadway,' he called, still excited from the affair in the
Bostonian, 'can you come up to New York to a show Saturday
afternoon?'

He stopped, realizing that Treadway was in the company of Brick
Wales, a boy he had had a fight with and one of his bitterest
enemies.  Looking from one to the other, Basil saw a look of
impatience in Treadway's face and a faraway expression in Brick
Wales's, and he realized what must have been happening.  Treadway,
making his way into the life of the school, had just been
enlightened as to the status of his room-mate.  Like Fat Gaspar,
rather than acknowledge himself eligible to such an intimate
request, he preferred to cut their friendly relations short.

'Not on your life,' he said briefly.  'So long.'  The two walked
past him into the Candy Kitchen.

Had these slights, so much the bitterer for their lack of passion,
been visited upon Basil in September, they would have been
unbearable.  But since then he had developed a shell of hardness
which, while it did not add to his attractiveness, spared him
certain delicacies of torture.  In misery enough, and despair and
self-pity, he went the other way along the street for a little
distance until he could control the violent contortions of his
face.  Then, taking a roundabout route, he started back to school.

He reached the adjoining estate, intending to go back the way he
had come.  Half-way through a hedge, he heard footsteps approaching
along the sidewalk and stood motionless, fearing the proximity of
masters.  Their voices grew nearer and louder; before he knew it he
was listening with horrified fascination:

'--so, after he tried Bugs Brown, the poor nut asked Fat Gaspar to
go with him and Fat said, "What do you ask me for?"  It serves him
right if he couldn't get anybody at all.'

It was the dismal but triumphant voice of Lewis Crum.


III


Up in his room, Basil found a package lying on his bed.  He knew
its contents and for a long time he had been eagerly expecting it,
but such was his depression that he opened it listlessly.  It was a
series of eight colour reproductions of Harrison Fisher girls 'on
glossy paper, without printing or advertising matter and suitable
for framing'.

The pictures were named Dora, Marguerite, Babette, Lucille,
Gretchen, Rose, Katherine, and Mina.  Two of them--Marguerite and
Rose--Basil looked at, slowly tore up, and dropped in the waste-
basket, as one who disposes of the inferior pups from a litter.
The other six he pinned at intervals around the room.  Then he lay
down on his bed and regarded them.

Dora, Lucille, and Katherine were blonde; Gretchen was medium;
Babette and Mina were dark.  After a few minutes, he found that he
was looking oftenest at Dora and Babette and, to a lesser extent,
at Gretchen, though the latter's Dutch cap seemed unromantic and
precluded the element of mystery.  Babette, a dark little violet-
eyed beauty in a tight-fitting hat, attracted him most; his eyes
came to rest on her at last.

'Babette,' he whispered to himself--'beautiful Babette.'

The sound of the word, so melancholy and suggestive, like 'Vilia'
or 'I'm happy at Maxim's' on the phonograph, softened him and,
turning over on his face, he sobbed into the pillow.  He took hold
of the bed rails over his head and, sobbing and straining, began to
talk to himself brokenly--how he hated them and whom he hated--he
listed a dozen--and what he would do to them when he was great and
powerful.  In previous moments like these he had always rewarded
Fat Gaspar for his kindness, but now he was like the rest.  Basil
set upon him, pummelling him unmercifully, or laughed sneeringly
when he passed him blind and begging on the street.

He controlled himself as he heard Treadway come in, but did not
move or speak.  He listened as the other moved about the room, and
after a while became conscious that there was an unusual opening of
closets and bureau drawers.  Basil turned over, his arm concealing
his tear-stained face.  Treadway had an armful of shirts in his
hand.

'What are you doing?' Basil demanded.

His room-mate looked at him stonily.  'I'm moving in with Wales,'
he said.

'Oh!'

Treadway went on with his packing.  He carried out a suitcase full,
then another, took down some pennants and dragged his trunk into
the hall.  Basil watched him bundle his toilet things into a towel
and take one last survey about the room's new barrenness to see if
there was anything forgotten.

'Good-bye,' he said to Basil, without a ripple of expression on his
face.

'Good-bye.'

Treadway went out.  Basil turned over once more and choked into the
pillow.

'Oh, poor Babette!' he cried huskily.  'Poor little Babette!  Poor
little Babette!'  Babette, svelte and piquante, looked down at him
coquettishly from the wall.


IV


Doctor Bacon, sensing Basil's predicament and perhaps the extremity
of his misery, arranged it that he should go into New York, after
all.  He went in the company of Mr Rooney, the football coach and
history teacher.  At twenty Mr Rooney had hesitated for some time
between joining the police force and having his way paid through a
small New England college; in fact he was a hard specimen and
Doctor Bacon was planning to get rid of him at Christmas.  Mr
Rooney's contempt for Basil was founded on the latter's ambiguous
and unreliable conduct on the football field during the past season--
he had consented to take him to New York for reasons of his own.

Basil sat meekly beside him on the train, glancing past Mr Rooney's
bulky body at the Sound and the fallow fields of Westchester
County.  Mr Rooney finished his newspaper, folded it up and sank
into a moody silence.  He had eaten a large breakfast and the
exigencies of time had not allowed him to work it off with
exercise.  He remembered that Basil was a fresh boy, and it was
time he did something fresh and could be called to account.  This
reproachless silence annoyed him.

'Lee,' he said suddenly, with a thinly assumed air of friendly
interest, 'why don't you get wise to yourself?'

'What, sir?'  Basil was startled from his excited trance of this
morning.

'I said why don't you get wise to yourself?' said Mr Rooney in a
somewhat violent tone.  'Do you want to be the butt of the school
all your time here?'

'No, I don't.'  Basil was chilled.  Couldn't all this be left
behind for just one day?

'You oughtn't to get so fresh all the time.  A couple of times in
history class I could just about have broken your neck.'  Basil
could think of no appropriate answer.  'Then out playing football,'
continued Mr Rooney, '--you didn't have any nerve.  You could play
better than a lot of 'em when you wanted, like that day against the
Pomfret seconds, but you lost your nerve.'

'I shouldn't have tried for the second team,' said Basil.  'I was
too light.  I should have stayed on the third.'

'You were yellow, that was all the trouble.  You ought to get wise
to yourself.  In class, you're always thinking of something else.
If you don't study, you'll never get to college.'

'I'm the youngest boy in the fifth form,' Basil said rashly.

'You think you're pretty bright, don't you?'  He eyed Basil
ferociously.  Then something seemed to occur to him that changed
his attitude and they rode for a while in silence.  When the train
began to run through the thickly clustered communities near New
York, he spoke again in a milder voice and with an air of having
considered the matter for a long time:

'Lee, I'm going to trust you.'

'Yes, sir.'

'You go and get some lunch and then go on to your show.  I've got
some business of my own I got to attend to, and when I've finished
I'll try to get to the show.  If I can't, I'll anyhow meet you
outside.'  Basil's heart leaped up.  'Yes, sir.'

'I don't want you to open your mouth about this at school--I mean,
about me doing some business of my own.'

'No, sir.'

'We'll see if you can keep your mouth shut for once,' he said,
making it fun.  Then he added, on a note of moral sternness, 'And
no drinks, you understand that?'

'Oh, no, sir!'  The idea shocked Basil.  He had never tasted a
drink, nor even contemplated the possibility, save the intangible
and nonalcoholic champagne of his café dreams.

On the advice of Mr Rooney he went for luncheon to the Manhattan
Hotel, near the station, where he ordered a club sandwich, French
fried potatoes, and a chocolate parfait.  Out of the corner of his
eye he watched the nonchalant, debonair, blasé New Yorkers at
neighbouring tables, investing them with a romance by which these
possible fellow citizens of his from the Middle West lost nothing.
School had fallen from him like a burden; it was no more than an
unheeded clamour, faint and far away.  He even delayed opening the
letter from the morning's mail which he found in his pocket,
because it was addressed to him at school.

He wanted another chocolate parfait, but being reluctant to bother
the busy waiter any more, he opened the letter and spread it before
him instead.  It was from his mother:


Dear Basil:

This is written in great haste, as I didn't want to frighten you by
telegraphing.  Grandfather is going abroad to take the waters and
he wants you and me to come too.  The idea is that you'll go to
school at Grenoble or Montreux for the rest of the year and learn
the language and we'll be close by.  That is, if you want to.  I
know how you like St Regis and playing football and baseball, and
of course there would be none of that; but on the other hand, it
would be a nice change, even if it postponed your entering Yale by
an extra year.  So, as usual, I want you to do just as you like.
We will be leaving home almost as soon as you get this and will
come to the Waldorf in New York, where you can come in and see us
for a few days, even if you decide to stay.  Think it over, dear.

                                       With love to my dearest boy,

                                                            Mother.


Basil got up from his chair with a dim idea of walking over to the
Waldorf and having himself locked up safely until his mother came.
Then, impelled to some gesture, he raised his voice and in one of
his first basso notes called boomingly and without reticence for
the waiter.  No more St Regis!  No more St Regis!  He was almost
strangling with happiness.

'Oh, gosh!' he cried to himself.  'Oh, golly!  Oh, gosh!  Oh,
gosh!'  No more Doctor Bacon and Mr Rooney and Brick Wales and Fat
Gaspar.  No more Bugs Brown and on bounds and being called Bossy.
He need no longer hate them, for they were impotent shadows in the
stationary world that he was sliding away from, sliding past,
waving his hand.  'Good-bye!' he pitied them.  'Good-bye!'

It required the din of Forty-second Street to sober his maudlin
joy.  With his hand on his purse to guard against the omnipresent
pickpocket, he moved cautiously towards Broadway.  What a day!  He
would tell Mr Rooney--Why, he needn't ever go back!  Or perhaps it
would be better to go back and let them know what he was going to
do, while they went on and on in the dismal, dreary round of
school.

He found the theatre and entered the lobby with its powdery
feminine atmosphere of a matinée.  As he took out his ticket, his
gaze was caught and held by a sculptured profile a few feet away.
It was that of a well-built blond young man of about twenty with a
strong chin and direct grey eyes.  Basil's brain spun wildly for a
moment and then came to rest upon a name--more than a name--upon a
legend, a sign in the sky.  What a day!  He had never seen the
young man before, but from a thousand pictures he knew beyond the
possibility of a doubt that it was Ted Fay, the Yale football
captain, who had almost single-handed beaten Harvard and Princeton
last fall.  Basil felt a sort of exquisite pain.  The profile
turned away; the crowd revolved; the hero disappeared.  But Basil
would know all through the next hours that Ted Fay was here too.

In the rustling, whispering, sweet-smelling darkness of the theatre
he read the programme.  It was the show of all shows that he wanted
to see, and until the curtain actually rose the programme itself
had a curious sacredness--a prototype of the thing itself.  But
when the curtain rose it became waste paper to be dropped
carelessly to the floor.


Act I.  The Village Green of a Small Town near New York


It was too bright and blinding to comprehend all at once, and it
went so fast that from the very first Basil felt he had missed
things; he would make his mother take him again when she came--next
week--tomorrow.

An hour passed.  It was very sad at this point--a sort of gay
sadness, but sad.  The girl--the man.  What kept them apart even
now?  Oh, those tragic errors, and misconceptions.  So sad.
Couldn't they look into each other's eyes and SEE?

In a blaze of light and sound, of resolution, anticipation and
imminent trouble, the act was over.

He went out.  He looked for Ted Fay and thought he saw him leaning
rather moodily on the plush wall at the rear of the theatre, but he
could not be sure.  He bought cigarettes and lit one, but fancying
at the first puff he heard a blare of music he rushed back inside.


Act 2.  The Foyer of the Hotel Astor


Yes, she was, indeed, like a song--a Beautiful Rose of the Night.
The waltz buoyed her up, brought her with it to a point of aching
beauty and then let her slide back to life across its last bars as
a leaf slants to earth across the air.  The high life of New York!
Who could blame her if she was carried away by the glitter of it
all, vanishing into the bright morning of the amber window borders
or into distant and entrancing music as the door opened and closed
that led to the ballroom?  The toast of the shining town.

Half an hour passed.  Her true love brought her roses like herself
and she threw them scornfully at his feet.  She laughed and turned
to the other, and danced--danced madly, wildly.  Wait!  That
delicate treble among the thin horns, the low curving note from the
great strings.  There it was again, poignant and aching, sweeping
like a great gust of emotion across the stage, catching her again
like a leaf helpless in the wind:


     'Rose--Rose--Rose of the night
     When the spring moon is bright you'll be fair--'


A few minutes later, feeling oddly shaken and exalted, Basil
drifted outside with the crowd.  The first thing upon which his
eyes fell was the almost forgotten and now curiously metamorphosed
spectre of Mr Rooney.

Mr Rooney had, in fact, gone a little to pieces.  He was, to begin
with, wearing a different and much smaller hat than when he left
Basil at noon.  Secondly, his face had lost its somewhat gross
aspect and turned a pure and even delicate white, and he was
wearing his necktie and even portions of his shirt on the outside
of his unaccountably wringing-wet overcoat.  How, in the short
space of four hours, Mr Rooney had got himself in such shape is
explicable only by the pressure of confinement in a boys' school
upon a fiery outdoor spirit.  Mr Rooney was born to toil under the
clear light of heaven and, perhaps half-consciously, he was headed
towards his inevitable destiny.

'Lee,' he said dimly, 'you ought to get wise to y'self.  I'm going
to put you wise y'self.'

To avoid the ominous possibility of being put wise to himself in
the lobby, Basil uneasily changed the subject.

'Aren't you coming to the show?' he asked, flattering Mr Rooney by
implying that he was in any condition to come to the show.  'It's a
wonderful show.'

Mr Rooney took off his hat, displaying wringing-wet matted hair.  A
picture of reality momentarily struggled for development in the
back of his brain.

'We got to get back to school,' he said in a sombre and unconvinced
voice.

'But there's another act,' protested Basil in horror.  'I've got to
stay for the last act.'

Swaying, Mr Rooney looked at Basil dimly realizing that he had put
himself in the hollow of this boy's hand.

'All righ',' he admitted.  'I'm going to get somethin' to eat.
I'll wait for you next door.'

He turned abruptly, reeled a dozen steps, and curved dizzily into a
bar adjoining the theatre.  Considerably shaken, Basil went back
inside.


Act 3.  The Roof Garden of Mr Van Astor's House.

Night


Half an hour passed.  Everything was going to be all right,
after all.  The comedian was at his best now, with the glad
appropriateness of laughter after tears, and there was a promise of
felicity in the bright tropical sky.  One lovely plaintive duet,
and then abruptly the long moment of incomparable beauty was over.

Basil went into the lobby and stood in thought while the crowd
passed out.  His mother's letter and the show had cleared his mind
of bitterness and vindictiveness--he was his old self and he wanted
to do the right thing.  He wondered if it was the right thing to
get Mr Rooney back to school.  He walked towards the saloon, slowed
up as he came to it and, gingerly opening the swinging door, took a
quick peer inside.  He saw only that Mr Rooney was not one of those
drinking at the bar.  He walked down the street a little way, came
back and tried again.  It was as if he thought the doors were teeth
to bite him, for he had the old-fashioned Middle-Western boy's
horror of the saloon.  The third time he was successful.  Mr Rooney
was sound asleep at a table in the back of the room.

Outside again Basil walked up and down, considering.  He would give
Mr Rooney half an hour.  If, at the end of that time, he had not
come out, he would go back to school.  After all, Mr Rooney had
laid for him ever since football season--Basil was simply washing
his hands of the whole affair, as in a day or so he would wash his
hands of school.

He had made several turns up and down, when glancing up an alley
that ran beside the theatre his eye was caught by the sign, Stage
Entrance.  He could watch the actors come forth.

He waited.  Women streamed by him, but those were the days before
Glorification and he took these drab people for wardrobe women or
something.  Then suddenly a girl came out and with her a man, and
Basil turned and ran a few steps up the street as if afraid they
would recognize him--and ran back, breathing as if with a heart
attack--for the girl, a radiant little beauty of nineteen, was Her
and the young man by her side was Ted Fay.

Arm in arm, they walked past him, and irresistibly Basil followed.
As they walked, she leaned towards Ted Fay in a way that gave them
a fascinating air of intimacy.  They crossed Broadway and turned
into the Knickerbocker Hotel, and twenty feet behind them Basil
followed, in time to see them go into a long room set for afternoon
tea.  They sat at a table for two, spoke vaguely to a waiter, and
then, alone at last, bent eagerly towards each other.  Basil saw
that Ted Fay was holding her gloved hand.

The tea room was separated only by a hedge of potted firs from the
main corridor.  Basil went along this to a lounge which was almost
up against their table and sat down.

Her voice was low and faltering, less certain than it had been in
the play, and very sad:  'Of course I do, Ted.'  For a long time,
as their conversation continued, she repeated, 'Of course I do,' or
'But I do, Ted.'  Ted Fay's remarks were too low for Basil to hear.

'--says next month, and he won't be put off any more . . .  I do in
a way, Ted.  It's hard to explain, but he's done everything for
mother and me . . .  There's no use kidding myself.  It was a
foolproof part and any girl he gave it to was made right then and
there . . .  He's been awfully thoughtful.  He's done everything
for me.'

Basil's ears were sharpened by the intensity of his emotion; now he
could hear Ted Fay's voice too:

'And you say you love me.'

'But don't you see I promised to marry him more than a year ago.'

'Tell him the truth--that you love me.  Ask him to let you off.'

'This isn't musical comedy, Ted.'

'That was a mean one,' he said bitterly.

'I'm sorry, dear, Ted darling, but you're driving me crazy going on
this way.  You're making it so hard for me.'

'I'm going to leave New Haven, anyhow.'

'No, you're not.  You're going to stay and play baseball this
spring.  Why, you're an ideal to all those boys!  Why, if you--'

He laughed shortly.  'You're a fine one to talk about ideals.'

'Why not?  I'm living up to my responsibility to Beltzman; you've
got to make up your mind just like I have--that we can't have each
other.'

'Jerry!  Think what you're doing!  All my life, whenever I hear
that waltz--'

Basil got to his feet and hurried down the corridor, through the
lobby and out of the hotel.  He was in a state of wild emotional
confusion.  He did not understand all he had heard, but from his
clandestine glimpse into the privacy of these two, with all the
world that his short experience could conceive of at their feet, he
had gathered that life for everybody was a struggle, sometimes
magnificent from a distance, but always difficult and surprisingly
simple and a little sad.

They would go on.  Ted Fay would go back to Yale, put her picture
in his bureau drawer and knock out home runs with the bases full
this spring--at 8.30 the curtain would go up and She would miss
something warm and young out of her life, something she had had
this afternoon.

It was dark outside and Broadway was a blazing forest fire as Basil
walked slowly along towards the point of brightest light.  He
looked up at the great intersecting planes of radiance with a vague
sense of approval and possession.  He would see it a lot now, lay
his restless heart upon this greater restlessness of a nation--he
would come whenever he could get off from school.

But that was all changed--he was going to Europe.  Suddenly Basil
realized that he wasn't going to Europe.  He could not forgo the
moulding of his own destiny just to alleviate a few months of pain.
The conquest of the successive worlds of school, college and New
York--why, that was his true dream that he had carried from boyhood
into adolescence, and because of the jeers of a few boys he had
been about to abandon it and run ignominiously up a back alley!  He
shivered violently, like a dog coming out of the water, and
simultaneously he was reminded of Mr Rooney.

A few minutes later he walked into the bar, past the quizzical eyes
of the bartender and up to the table where Mr Rooney still sat
asleep.  Basil shook him gently, then firmly.  Mr Rooney stirred
and perceived Basil.

'G'wise to yourself,' he muttered drowsily.  'G'wise to yourself
an' let me alone.'

'I am wise to myself,' said Basil.  'Honest, I am wise to myself,
Mr Rooney.  You got to come with me into the washroom and get
cleaned up, and then you can sleep on the train again, Mr Rooney.
Come on, Mr Rooney, please--'


V


It was a long hard time.  Basil got on bounds again in December and
wasn't free again until March.  An indulgent mother had given him
no habits of work and this was almost beyond the power of anything
but life itself to remedy, but he made numberless new starts and
failed and tried again.

He made friends with a new boy named Maplewood after Christmas, but
they had a silly quarrel; and through the winter term, when a boys'
school is shut in with itself and only partly assuaged from its
natural savagery by indoor sports, Basil was snubbed and slighted a
good deal for his real and imaginary sins, and he was much alone.
But on the other hand, there was Ted Fay, and Rose of the Night on
the phonograph--'All my life whenever I hear that waltz'--and the
remembered lights of New York, and the thought of what he was going
to do in football next autumn and the glamorous image of Yale and
the hope of spring in the air.

Fat Gaspar and a few others were nice to him now.  Once when he and
Fat walked home together by accident from down-town they had a long
talk about actresses--a talk that Basil was wise enough not to
presume upon afterwards.  The smaller boys suddenly decided that
they approved of him, and a master who had hitherto disliked him
put his hand on his shoulder walking to a class one day.  They
would all forget eventually--maybe during the summer.  There would
be new fresh boys in September; he would have a clean start next
year.

One afternoon in February, playing basketball, a great thing
happened.  He and Brick Wales were at forward on the second team
and in the fury of the scrimmage the gymnasium echoed with sharp
slapping contacts and shrill cries.

'Here yar!'

'Bill!  Bill!'

Basil had dribbled the ball down the court and Brick Wales, free,
was crying for it.

'Here yar!  Lee!  Hey!  Lee-y!'

Lee-y!

Basil flushed and made a poor pass.  He had been called by a
nickname.  It was a poor makeshift, but it was something more than
the stark bareness of his surname or a term of derision.  Brick
Wales went on playing, unconscious that he had done anything in
particular or that he had contributed to the events by which
another boy was saved from the army of the bitter, the selfish, the
neurasthenic and the unhappy.  It isn't given to us to know those
rare moments when people are wide open and the lightest touch can
wither or heal.  A moment too late and we can never reach them any
more in this world.  They will not be cured by our most efficacious
drugs or slain with our sharpest swords.

Lee-y! it could scarcely be pronounced.  But Basil took it to bed
with him that night, and thinking of it, holding it to him happily
to the last, fell easily to sleep.







THE BRIDAL PARTY


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (9 August 1930)



There was the usual insincere little note saying:  "I wanted you to
be the first to know."  It was a double shock to Michael,
announcing, as it did, both the engagement and the imminent
marriage; which, moreover, was to be held, not in New York,
decently and far away, but here in Paris under his very nose, if
that could be said to extend over the Protestant Episcopal Church
of the Holy Trinity, Avenue George-Cinq.  The date was two weeks
off, early in June.

At first Michael was afraid and his stomach felt hollow.  When he
left the hotel that morning, the femme de chambre, who was in love
with his fine, sharp profile and his pleasant buoyancy, scented the
hard abstraction that had settled over him.  He walked in a daze to
his bank, he bought a detective story at Smith's on the Rue de
Rivoli, he sympathetically stared for a while at a faded panorama
of the battlefields in a tourist-office window and cursed a Greek
tout who followed him with a half-displayed packet of innocuous
post cards warranted to be very dirty indeed.

But the fear stayed with him, and after a while he recognized it as
the fear that now he would never be happy.  He had met Caroline
Dandy when she was seventeen, possessed her young heart all through
her first season in New York, and then lost her, slowly,
tragically, uselessly, because he had no money and could make no
money; because, with all the energy and good will in the world, he
could not find himself; because, loving him still, Caroline had
lost faith and begun to see him as something pathetic, futile and
shabby, outside the great, shining stream of life toward which she
was inevitably drawn.

Since his only support was that she loved him, he leaned weakly on
that; the support broke, but still he held on to it and was carried
out to sea and washed up on the French coast with its broken pieces
still in his hands.  He carried them around with him in the form of
photographs and packets of correspondence and a liking for a
maudlin popular song called "Among My Souvenirs."  He kept clear of
other girls, as if Caroline would somehow know it and reciprocate
with a faithful heart.  Her note informed him that he had lost her
forever.

It was a fine morning.  In front of the shops in the Rue de
Castiglione, proprietors and patrons were on the sidewalk gazing
upward, for the Graf Zeppelin, shining and glorious, symbol of
escape and destruction--of escape, if necessary, through
destruction--glided in the Paris sky.  He heard a woman say in
French that it would not her astonish if that commenced to let fall
the bombs.  Then he heard another voice, full of husky laughter,
and the void in his stomach froze.  Jerking about, he was face to
face with Caroline Dandy and her fiancé.

"Why, Michael!  Why, we were wondering where you were.  I asked at
the Guaranty Trust, and Morgan and Company, and finally sent a note
to the National City--"

Why didn't they back away?  Why didn't they back right up, walking
backward down the Rue de Castiglione, across the Rue de Rivoli,
through the Tuileries Gardens, still walking backward as fast as
they could till they grew vague and faded out across the river?

"This is Hamilton Rutherford, my fiancé."

"We've met before."

"At Pat's, wasn't it?"

"And last spring in the Ritz Bar."

"Michael, where have you been keeping yourself?"

"Around here."  This agony.  Previews of Hamilton Rutherford
flashed before his eyes--a quick series of pictures, sentences.  He
remembered hearing that he had bought a seat in 1920 for a hundred
and twenty-five thousand of borrowed money, and just before the
break sold it for more than half a million.  Not handsome like
Michael, but vitally attractive, confident, authoritative, just the
right height over Caroline there--Michael had always been too short
for Caroline when they danced.

Rutherford was saying:  "No, I'd like it very much if you'd come to
the bachelor dinner.  I'm taking the Ritz Bar from nine o'clock on.
Then right after the wedding there'll be a reception and breakfast
at the Hotel George-Cinq."

"And, Michael, George Packman is giving a party day after tomorrow
at Chez Victor, and I want you to be sure and come.  And also to
tea Friday at Jebby West's; she'd want to have you if she knew
where you were.  What's your hotel, so we can send you an
invitation?  You see, the reason we decided to have it over here is
because mother has been sick in a nursing home here and the whole
clan is in Paris.  Then Hamilton's mother's being here too--"

The entire clan; they had always hated him, except her mother;
always discouraged his courtship.  What a little counter he was in
this game of families and money!  Under his hat his brow sweated
with the humiliation of the fact that for all his misery he was
worth just exactly so many invitations.  Frantically he began to
mumble something about going away.

Then it happened--Caroline saw deep into him, and Michael knew that
she saw.  She saw through to his profound woundedness, and
something quivered inside her, died out along the curve of her
mouth and in her eyes.  He had moved her.  All the unforgettable
impulses of first love had surged up once more; their hearts had in
some way touched across two feet of Paris sunlight.  She took her
fiancé's arm suddenly, as if to steady herself with the feel of it.

They parted.  Michael walked quickly for a minute; then he stopped,
pretending to look in a window, and saw them farther up the street,
walking fast into the Place Vendôme, people with much to do.

He had things to do also--he had to get his laundry.

"Nothing will ever be the same again," he said to himself.  "She
will never be happy in her marriage and I will never be happy at
all any more."

The two vivid years of his love for Caroline moved back around him
like years in Einstein's physics.  Intolerable memories arose--of
rides in the Long Island moonlight; of a happy time at Lake Placid
with her cheeks so cold there, but warm just underneath the
surface; of a despairing afternoon in a little café on Forty-eighth
Street in the last sad months when their marriage had come to seem
impossible.

"Come in," he said aloud.

The concierge with a telegram; brusque because Mr. Curly's clothes
were a little shabby.  Mr. Curly gave few tips; Mr. Curly was
obviously a petit client.

Michael read the telegram.

"An answer?" the concierge asked.

"No," said Michael, and then, on an impulse:  "Look."

"Too bad--too bad," said the concierge.  "Your grandfather is
dead."

"Not too bad," said Michael.  "It means that I come into a quarter
of a million dollars."

Too late by a single month; after the first flush of the news his
misery was deeper than ever.  Lying awake in bed that night, he
listened endlessly to the long caravan of a circus moving through
the street from one Paris fair to another.

When the last van had rumbled out of hearing and the corners of the
furniture were pastel blue with the dawn, he was still thinking of
the look in Caroline's eyes that morning--the look that seemed to
say:  "Oh, why couldn't you have done something about it?  Why
couldn't you have been stronger, made me marry you?  Don't you see
how sad I am?"

Michael's fists clenched.

"Well, I won't give up till the last moment," he whispered.  "I've
had all the bad luck so far, and maybe it's turned at last.  One
takes what one can get, up to the limit of one's strength, and if I
can't have her, at least she'll go into this marriage with some of
me in her heart."


II


Accordingly he went to the party at Chez Victor two days later,
upstairs and into the little salon off the bar where the party was
to assemble for cocktails.  He was early; the only other occupant
was a tall lean man of fifty.  They spoke.

"You waiting for George Packman's party?"

"Yes.  My name's Michael Curly."

"My name's--"

Michael failed to catch the name.  They ordered a drink, and
Michael supposed that the bride and groom were having a gay time.

"Too much so," the other agreed, frowning.  "I don't see how they
stand it.  We all crossed on the boat together; five days of that
crazy life and then two weeks of Paris.  You"--he hesitated,
smiling faintly--"you'll excuse me for saying that your generation
drinks too much."

"Not Caroline."

"No, not Caroline.  She seems to take only a cocktail and a glass
of champagne, and then she's had enough, thank God.  But Hamilton
drinks too much and all this crowd of young people drink too much.
Do you live in Paris?"

"For the moment," said Michael.

"I don't like Paris.  My wife--that is to say, my ex-wife,
Hamilton's mother--lives in Paris."

"You're Hamilton Rutherford's father?"

"I have that honor.  And I'm not denying that I'm proud of what
he's done; it was just a general comment."

"Of course."

Michael glanced up nervously as four people came in.  He felt
suddenly that his dinner coat was old and shiny; he had ordered a
new one that morning.  The people who had come in were rich and at
home in their richness with one another--a dark, lovely girl with a
hysterical little laugh whom he had met before; two confident men
whose jokes referred invariably to last night's scandal and
tonight's potentialities, as if they had important rôles in a play
that extended indefinitely into the past and the future.  When
Caroline arrived, Michael had scarcely a moment of her, but it was
enough to note that, like all the others, she was strained and
tired.  She was pale beneath her rouge; there were shadows under
her eyes.  With a mixture of relief and wounded vanity, he found
himself placed far from her and at another table; he needed a
moment to adjust himself to his surroundings.  This was not like
the immature set in which he and Caroline had moved; the men were
more than thirty and had an air of sharing the best of this world's
good.  Next to him was Jebby West, whom he knew; and, on the other
side, a jovial man who immediately began to talk to Michael about a
stunt for the bachelor dinner:  They were going to hire a French
girl to appear with an actual baby in her arms, crying:  "Hamilton,
you can't desert me now!"  The idea seemed stale and unamusing to
Michael, but its originator shook with anticipatory laughter.

Farther up the table there was talk of the market--another drop
today, the most appreciable since the crash; people were kidding
Rutherford about it:  "Too bad, old man.  You better not get
married, after all."

Michael asked the man on his left, "Has he lost a lot?"

"Nobody knows.  He's heavily involved, but he's one of the smartest
young men in Wall Street.  Anyhow, nobody ever tells you the
truth."

It was a champagne dinner from the start, and toward the end it
reached a pleasant level of conviviality, but Michael saw that all
these people were too weary to be exhilarated by any ordinary
stimulant; for weeks they had drunk cocktails before meals like
Americans, wines and brandies like Frenchmen, beer like Germans,
whisky-and-soda like the English, and as they were no longer in the
twenties, this preposterous mélange, that was like some gigantic
cocktail in a nightmare, served only to make them temporarily less
conscious of the mistakes of the night before.  Which is to say
that it was not really a gay party; what gayety existed was
displayed in the few who drank nothing at all.

But Michael was not tired, and the champagne stimulated him and
made his misery less acute.  He had been away from New York for
more than eight months and most of the dance music was unfamiliar
to him, but at the first bars of the "Painted Doll," to which he
and Caroline had moved through so much happiness and despair the
previous summer, he crossed to Caroline's table and asked her to
dance.

She was lovely in a dress of thin ethereal blue, and the proximity
of her crackly yellow hair, of her cool and tender gray eyes,
turned his body clumsy and rigid; he stumbled with their first step
on the floor.  For a moment it seemed that there was nothing to
say; he wanted to tell her about his inheritance, but the idea
seemed abrupt, unprepared for.

"Michael, it's so nice to be dancing with you again."

He smiled grimly.

"I'm so happy you came," she continued.  "I was afraid maybe you'd
be silly and stay away.  Now we can be just good friends and
natural together.  Michael, I want you and Hamilton to like each
other."

The engagement was making her stupid; he had never heard her make
such a series of obvious remarks before.

"I could kill him without a qualm," he said pleasantly, "but he
looks like a good man.  He's fine.  What I want to know is, what
happens to people like me who aren't able to forget?"

As he said this he could not prevent his mouth from dropping
suddenly, and glancing up, Caroline saw, and her heart quivered
violently, as it had the other morning.

"Do you mind so much, Michael?"

"Yes."

For a second as he said this, in a voice that seemed to have come
up from his shoes, they were not dancing; they were simply clinging
together.  Then she leaned away from him and twisted her mouth into
a lovely smile.

"I didn't know what to do at first, Michael.  I told Hamilton about
you--that I'd cared for you an awful lot--but it didn't worry him,
and he was right.  Because I'm over you now--yes, I am.  And you'll
wake up some sunny morning and be over me just like that."

He shook his head stubbornly.

"Oh, yes.  We weren't for each other.  I'm pretty flighty, and I
need somebody like Hamilton to decide things.  It was that more
than the question of--of--"

"Of money."  Again he was on the point of telling her what had
happened, but again something told him it was not the time.

"Then how do you account for what happened when we met the other
day," he demanded helplessly--"what happened just now?  When we
just pour toward each other like we used to--as if we were one
person, as if the same blood was flowing through both of us?"

"Oh, don't," she begged him.  "You mustn't talk like that;
everything's decided now.  I love Hamilton with all my heart.  It's
just that I remember certain things in the past and I feel sorry
for you--for us--for the way we were."

Over her shoulder, Michael saw a man come toward them to cut in.
In a panic he danced her away, but inevitably the man came on.

"I've got to see you alone, if only for a minute," Michael said
quickly.  "When can I?"

"I'll be at Jebby West's tea tomorrow," she whispered as a hand
fell politely upon Michael's shoulder.

But he did not talk to her at Jebby West's tea.  Rutherford stood
next to her, and each brought the other into all conversations.
They left early.  The next morning the wedding cards arrived in the
first mail.

Then Michael, grown desperate with pacing up and down his room,
determined on a bold stroke; he wrote to Hamilton Rutherford,
asking him for a rendezvous the following afternoon.  In a short
telephone communication Rutherford agreed, but for a day later than
Michael had asked.  And the wedding was only six days away.

They were to meet in the bar of the Hotel Jena.  Michael knew what
he would say:  "See here, Rutherford, do you realize the
responsibility you're taking in going through with this marriage?
Do you realize the harvest of trouble and regret you're sowing in
persuading a girl into something contrary to the instincts of her
heart?"  He would explain that the barrier between Caroline and
himself had been an artificial one and was now removed, and demand
that the matter be put up to Caroline frankly before it was too
late.

Rutherford would be angry, conceivably there would be a scene, but
Michael felt that he was fighting for his life now.

He found Rutherford in conversation with an older man, whom Michael
had met at several of the wedding parties.

"I saw what happened to most of my friends," Rutherford was saying,
"and I decided it wasn't going to happen to me.  It isn't so
difficult; if you take a girl with common sense, and tell her
what's what, and do your stuff damn well, and play decently square
with her, it's a marriage.  If you stand for any nonsense at the
beginning, it's one of these arrangements--within five years the
man gets out, or else the girl gobbles him up and you have the
usual mess."

"Right!" agreed his companion enthusiastically.  "Hamilton, boy,
you're right."

Michael's blood boiled slowly.

"Doesn't it strike you," he inquired coldly, "that your attitude
went out of fashion about a hundred years ago?"

"No, it didn't," said Rutherford pleasantly, but impatiently.  "I'm
as modern as anybody.  I'd get married in an aeroplane next
Saturday if it'd please my girl."

"I don't mean that way of being modern.  You can't take a sensitive
woman--"

"Sensitive?  Women aren't so darn sensitive.  It's fellows like you
who are sensitive; it's fellows like you they exploit--all your
devotion and kindness and all that.  They read a couple of books
and see a few pictures because they haven't got anything else to
do, and then they say they're finer in grain than you are, and to
prove it they take the bit in their teeth and tear off for a fare-
you-well--just about as sensitive as a fire horse."

"Caroline happens to be sensitive," said Michael in a clipped
voice.

At this point the other man got up to go; when the dispute about
the check had been settled and they were alone, Rutherford leaned
back to Michael as if a question had been asked him.

"Caroline's more than sensitive," he said.  "She's got sense."

His combative eyes, meeting Michael's, flickered with a gray light.
"This all sounds pretty crude to you, Mr. Curly, but it seems to me
that the average man nowadays just asks to be made a monkey of by
some woman who doesn't even get any fun out of reducing him to that
level.  There are darn few men who possess their wives any more,
but I am going to be one of them."

To Michael it seemed time to bring the talk back to the actual
situation:  "Do you realize the responsibility you're taking?"

"I certainly do," interrupted Rutherford.  "I'm not afraid of
responsibility.  I'll make the decisions--fairly, I hope, but
anyhow they'll be final."

"What if you didn't start right?" said Michael impetuously.  "What
if your marriage isn't founded on mutual love?"

"I think I see what you mean," Rutherford said, still pleasant.
"And since you've brought it up, let me say that if you and
Caroline had married, it wouldn't have lasted three years.  Do you
know what your affair was founded on?  On sorrow.  You got sorry
for each other.  Sorrow's a lot of fun for most women and for some
men, but it seems to me that a marriage ought to be based on hope."
He looked at his watch and stood up.

"I've got to meet Caroline.  Remember, you're coming to the
bachelor dinner day after tomorrow."

Michael felt the moment slipping away.  "Then Caroline's personal
feelings don't count with you?" he demanded fiercely.

"Caroline's tired and upset.  But she has what she wants, and
that's the main thing."

"Are you referring to yourself?" demanded Michael incredulously.

"Yes."

"May I ask how long she's wanted you?"

"About two years."  Before Michael could answer, he was gone.

During the next two days Michael floated in an abyss of
helplessness.  The idea haunted him that he had left something
undone that would sever this knot drawn tighter under his eyes.  He
phoned Caroline, but she insisted that it was physically impossible
for her to see him until the day before the wedding, for which day
she granted him a tentative rendezvous.  Then he went to the
bachelor dinner, partly in fear of an evening alone at his hotel,
partly from a feeling that by his presence at that function he was
somehow nearer to Caroline, keeping her in sight.

The Ritz Bar had been prepared for the occasion by French and
American banners and by a great canvas covering one wall, against
which the guests were invited to concentrate their proclivities in
breaking glasses.

At the first cocktail, taken at the bar, there were many slight
spillings from many trembling hands, but later, with the champagne,
there was a rising tide of laughter and occasional bursts of song.

Michael was surprised to find what a difference his new dinner
coat, his new silk hat, his new, proud linen made in his estimate
of himself; he felt less resentment toward all these people for
being so rich and assured.  For the first time since he had left
college he felt rich and assured himself; he felt that he was part
of all this, and even entered into the scheme of Johnson, the
practical joker, for the appearance of the woman betrayed, now
waiting tranquilly in the room across the hall.

"We don't want to go too heavy," Johnson said, "because I imagine
Ham's had a pretty anxious day already.  Did you see Fullman Oil's
sixteen points off this morning?"

"Will that matter to him?" Michael asked, trying to keep the
interest out of his voice.

"Naturally.  He's in heavily; he's always in everything heavily.
So far he's had luck; anyhow, up to a month ago."

The glasses were filled and emptied faster now, and men were
shouting at one another across the narrow table.  Against the bar a
group of ushers was being photographed, and the flash light surged
through the room in a stifling cloud.

"Now's the time," Johnson said.  "You're to stand by the door,
remember, and we're both to try and keep her from coming in--just
till we get everybody's attention."

He went on out into the corridor, and Michael waited obediently by
the door.  Several minutes passed.  Then Johnson reappeared with a
curious expression on his face.

"There's something funny about this."

"Isn't the girl there?"

"She's there all right, but there's another woman there, too; and
it's nobody we engaged either.  She wants to see Hamilton
Rutherford, and she looks as if she had something on her mind."

They went out into the hall.  Planted firmly in a chair near the
door sat an American girl a little the worse for liquor, but with a
determined expression on her face.  She looked up at them with a
jerk of her head.

"Well, j'tell him?" she demanded.  "The name is Marjorie Collins,
and he'll know it.  I've come a long way, and I want to see him now
and quick, or there's going to be more trouble than you ever saw."
She rose unsteadily to her feet.

"You go in and tell Ham," whispered Johnson to Michael.  "Maybe
he'd better get out.  I'll keep her here."

Back at the table, Michael leaned close to Rutherford's ear and,
with a certain grimness, whispered:

"A girl outside named Marjorie Collins says she wants to see you.
She looks as if she wanted to make trouble."

Hamilton Rutherford blinked and his mouth fell ajar; then slowly
the lips came together in a straight line and he said in a crisp
voice:

"Please keep her there.  And send the head barman to me right
away."

Michael spoke to the barman, and then, without returning to the
table, asked quietly for his coat and hat.  Out in the hall again,
he passed Johnson and the girl without speaking and went out into
the Rue Cambon.  Calling a cab, he gave the address of Caroline's
hotel.

His place was beside her now.  Not to bring bad news, but simply to
be with her when her house of cards came falling around her head.

Rutherford had implied that he was soft--well, he was hard enough
not to give up the girl he loved without taking advantage of every
chance within the pale of honor.  Should she turn away from
Rutherford, she would find him there.

She was in; she was surprised when he called, but she was still
dressed and would be down immediately.  Presently she appeared in a
dinner gown, holding two blue telegrams in her hand.  They sat down
in armchairs in the deserted lobby.

"But, Michael, is the dinner over?"

"I wanted to see you, so I came away."

"I'm glad."  Her voice was friendly, but matter-of-fact.  "Because
I'd just phoned your hotel that I had fittings and rehearsals all
day tomorrow.  Now we can have our talk after all."

"You're tired," he guessed.  "Perhaps I shouldn't have come."

"No.  I was waiting up for Hamilton.  Telegrams that may be
important.  He said he might go on somewhere, and that may mean any
hour, so I'm glad I have someone to talk to."

Michael winced at the impersonality in the last phrase.

"Don't you care when he gets home?"

"Naturally," she said, laughing, "but I haven't got much say about
it, have I?"

"Why not?"

"I couldn't start by telling him what he could and couldn't do."

"Why not?"

"He wouldn't stand for it."

"He seems to want merely a housekeeper," said Michael ironically.

"Tell me about your plans, Michael," she asked quickly.

"My plans?  I can't see any future after the day after tomorrow.
The only real plan I ever had was to love you."

Their eyes brushed past each other's, and the look he knew so well
was staring out at him from hers.  Words flowed quickly from his
heart:

"Let me tell you just once more how well I've loved you, never
wavering for a moment, never thinking of another girl.  And now
when I think of all the years ahead without you, without any hope,
I don't want to live, Caroline darling.  I used to dream about our
home, our children, about holding you in my arms and touching your
face and hands and hair that used to belong to me, and now I just
can't wake up."

Caroline was crying softly.  "Poor Michael--poor Michael."  Her
hand reached out and her fingers brushed the lapel of his dinner
coat.  "I was so sorry for you the other night.  You looked so
thin, and as if you needed a new suit and somebody to take care of
you."  She sniffled and looked more closely at his coat.  "Why,
you've got a new suit!  And a new silk hat!  Why, Michael, how
swell!"  She laughed, suddenly cheerful through her tears.  "You
must have come into money, Michael; I never saw you so well turned
out."

For a moment, at her reaction, he hated his new clothes.

"I have come into money," he said.  "My grandfather left me about a
quarter of a million dollars."

"Why, Michael," she cried, "how perfectly swell!  I can't tell you
how glad I am.  I've always thought you were the sort of person who
ought to have money."

"Yes, just too late to make a difference."

The revolving door from the street groaned around and Hamilton
Rutherford came into the lobby.  His face was flushed, his eyes
were restless and impatient.

"Hello, darling; hello, Mr. Curly."  He bent and kissed Caroline.
"I broke away for a minute to find out if I had any telegrams.  I
see you've got them there."  Taking them from her, he remarked to
Curly, "That was an odd business there in the bar, wasn't it?
Especially as I understand some of you had a joke fixed up in the
same line."  He opened one of the telegrams, closed it and turned
to Caroline with the divided expression of a man carrying two
things in his head at once.

"A girl I haven't seen for two years turned up," he said.  "It
seemed to be some clumsy form of blackmail, for I haven't and never
have had any sort of obligation toward her whatever."

"What happened?"

"The head barman had a Sûreté Générale man there in ten minutes and
it was settled in the hall.  The French blackmail laws make ours
look like a sweet wish, and I gather they threw a scare into her
that she'll remember.  But it seems wiser to tell you."

"Are you implying that I mentioned the matter?" said Michael
stiffly.

"No," Rutherford said slowly.  "No, you were just going to be on
hand.  And since you're here, I'll tell you some news that will
interest you even more."

He handed Michael one telegram and opened the other.

"This is in code," Michael said.

"So is this.  But I've got to know all the words pretty well this
last week.  The two of them together mean that I'm due to start
life all over."

Michael saw Caroline's face grow a shade paler, but she sat quiet
as a mouse.

"It was a mistake and I stuck to it too long," continued
Rutherford.  "So you see I don't have all the luck, Mr. Curly.  By
the way, they tell me you've come into money."

"Yes," said Michael.

"There we are, then."  Rutherford turned to Caroline.  "You
understand, darling, that I'm not joking or exaggerating.  I've
lost almost every cent I had and I'm starting life over."

Two pairs of eyes were regarding her--Rutherford's noncommittal and
unrequiring, Michael's hungry, tragic, pleading.  In a minute she
had raised herself from the chair and with a little cry thrown
herself into Hamilton Rutherford's arms.

"Oh, darling," she cried, "what does it matter!  It's better; I
like it better, honestly I do!  I want to start that way; I want
to!  Oh, please don't worry or be sad even for a minute!"

"All right, baby," said Rutherford.  His hand stroked her hair
gently for a moment; then he took his arm from around her.

"I promised to join the party for an hour," he said.  "So I'll say
good night, and I want you to go to bed soon and get a good sleep.
Good night, Mr. Curly.  I'm sorry to have let you in for all these
financial matters."

But Michael had already picked up his hat and cane.  "I'll go along
with you," he said.


III


It was such a fine morning.  Michael's cutaway hadn't been
delivered, so he felt rather uncomfortable passing before the
cameras and moving-picture machines in front of the little church
on the Avenue George-Cinq.

It was such a clean, new church that it seemed unforgivable not to
be dressed properly, and Michael, white and shaky after a sleepless
night, decided to stand in the rear.  From there he looked at the
back of Hamilton Rutherford, and the lacy, filmy back of Caroline,
and the fat back of George Packman, which looked unsteady, as if it
wanted to lean against the bride and groom.

The ceremony went on for a long time under the gay flags and
pennons overhead, under the thick beams of June sunlight slanting
down through the tall windows upon the well-dressed people.

As the procession, headed by the bride and groom, started down the
aisle, Michael realized with alarm he was just where everyone would
dispense with their parade stiffness, become informal and speak to
him.

So it turned out.  Rutherford and Caroline spoke first to him;
Rutherford grim with the strain of being married, and Caroline
lovelier than he had ever seen her, floating all softly down
through the friends and relatives of her youth, down through the
past and forward to the future by the sunlit door.

Michael managed to murmur, "Beautiful, simply beautiful," and then
other people passed and spoke to him--old Mrs. Dandy, straight from
her sickbed and looking remarkably well, or carrying it off like
the very fine old lady she was; and Rutherford's father and mother,
ten years divorced, but walking side by side and looking made for
each other and proud.  Then all Caroline's sisters and their
husbands and her little nephews in Eton suits, and then a long
parade, all speaking to Michael because he was still standing
paralyzed just at that point where the procession broke.

He wondered what would happen now.  Cards had been issued for a
reception at the George-Cinq; an expensive enough place, heaven
knew.  Would Rutherford try to go through with that on top of those
disastrous telegrams?  Evidently, for the procession outside was
streaming up there through the June morning, three by three and
four by four.  On the corner the long dresses of girls, five
abreast, fluttered many-colored in the wind.  Girls had become
gossamer again, perambulatory flora; such lovely fluttering dresses
in the bright noon wind.

Michael needed a drink; he couldn't face that reception line
without a drink.  Diving into a side doorway of the hotel, he asked
for the bar, whither a chasseur led him through half a kilometer of
new American-looking passages.

But--how did it happen?--the bar was full.  There were ten--fifteen
men and two--four girls, all from the wedding, all needing a drink.
There were cocktails and champagne in the bar; Rutherford's
cocktails and champagne, as it turned out, for he had engaged the
whole bar and the ballroom and the two great reception rooms and
all the stairways leading up and down, and windows looking out over
the whole square block of Paris.  By and by Michael went and joined
the long, slow drift of the receiving line.  Through a flowery mist
of "Such a lovely wedding," "My dear, you were simply lovely,"
"You're a lucky man, Rutherford" he passed down the line.  When
Michael came to Caroline, she took a single step forward and kissed
him on the lips, but he felt no contact in the kiss; it was unreal
and he floated on away from it.  Old Mrs. Dandy, who had always
liked him, held his hand for a minute and thanked him for the
flowers he had sent when he heard she was ill.

"I'm so sorry not to have written; you know, we old ladies are
grateful for--"  The flowers, the fact that she had not written,
the wedding--Michael saw that they all had the same relative
importance to her now; she had married off five other children and
seen two of the marriages go to pieces, and this scene, so
poignant, so confusing to Michael, appeared to her simply a
familiar charade in which she had played her part before.

A buffet luncheon with champagne was already being served at small
tables and there was an orchestra playing in the empty ballroom.
Michael sat down with Jebby West; he was still a little embarrassed
at not wearing a morning coat, but he perceived now that he was not
alone in the omission and felt better.  "Wasn't Caroline divine?"
Jebby West said.  "So entirely self-possessed.  I asked her this
morning if she wasn't a little nervous at stepping off like this.
And she said, 'Why should I be?  I've been after him for two years,
and now I'm just happy, that's all.'"

"It must be true," said Michael gloomily.

"What?"

"What you just said."

He had been stabbed, but, rather to his distress, he did not feel
the wound.

He asked Jebby to dance.  Out on the floor, Rutherford's father and
mother were dancing together.

"It makes me a little sad, that," she said.  "Those two hadn't met
for years; both of them were married again and she divorced again.
She went to the station to meet him when he came over for
Caroline's wedding, and invited him to stay at her house in the
Avenue du Bois with a whole lot of other people, perfectly proper,
but he was afraid his wife would hear about it and not like it, so
he went to a hotel.  Don't you think that's sort of sad?"

An hour or so later Michael realized suddenly that it was
afternoon.  In one corner of the ballroom an arrangement of screens
like a moving-picture stage had been set up and photographers were
taking official pictures of the bridal party.  The bridal party,
still as death and pale as wax under the bright lights, appeared,
to the dancers circling the modulated semidarkness of the ballroom,
like those jovial or sinister groups that one comes upon in The Old
Mill at an amusement park.

After the bridal party had been photographed, there was a group of
the ushers; then the bridesmaids, the families, the children.
Later, Caroline, active and excited, having long since abandoned
the repose implicit in her flowing dress and great bouquet, came
and plucked Michael off the floor.

"Now we'll have them take one of just old friends."  Her voice
implied that this was best, most intimate of all.  "Come here,
Jebby, George--not you, Hamilton; this is just my friends--Sally--"

A little after that, what remained of formality disappeared and the
hours flowed easily down the profuse stream of champagne.  In the
modern fashion, Hamilton Rutherford sat at the table with his arm
about an old girl of his and assured his guests, which included not
a few bewildered but enthusiastic Europeans, that the party was not
nearly at an end; it was to reassemble at Zelli's after midnight.
Michael saw Mrs. Dandy, not quite over her illness, rise to go and
become caught in polite group after group, and he spoke of it to
one of her daughters, who thereupon forcibly abducted her mother
and called her car.  Michael felt very considerate and proud of
himself after having done this, and drank much more champagne.

"It's amazing," George Packman was telling him enthusiastically.
"This show will cost Ham about five thousand dollars, and I
understand they'll be just about his last.  But did he countermand
a bottle of champagne or a flower?  Not he!  He happens to have it--
that young man.  Do you know that T. G. Vance offered him a salary
of fifty thousand dollars a year ten minutes before the wedding
this morning?  In another year he'll be back with the millionaires."

The conversation was interrupted by a plan to carry Rutherford out
on communal shoulders--a plan which six of them put into effect,
and then stood in the four-o'clock sunshine waving good-by to the
bride and groom.  But there must have been a mistake somewhere, for
five minutes later Michael saw both bride and groom descending the
stairway to the reception, each with a glass of champagne held
defiantly on high.

"This is our way of doing things," he thought.  "Generous and fresh
and free; a sort of Virginia-plantation hospitality, but at a
different pace now, nervous as a ticker tape."

Standing unself-consciously in the middle of the room to see which
was the American ambassador, he realized with a start that he
hadn't really thought of Caroline for hours.  He looked about him
with a sort of alarm, and then he saw her across the room, very
bright and young, and radiantly happy.  He saw Rutherford near her,
looking at her as if he could never look long enough, and as
Michael watched them they seemed to recede as he had wished them to
do that day in the Rue de Castiglione--recede and fade off into
joys and griefs of their own, into the years that would take the
toll of Rutherford's fine pride and Caroline's young, moving
beauty; fade far away, so that now he could scarcely see them, as
if they were shrouded in something as misty as her white, billowing
dress.

Michael was cured.  The ceremonial function, with its pomp and its
revelry, had stood for a sort of initiation into a life where even
his regret could not follow them.  All the bitterness melted out of
him suddenly and the world reconstituted itself out of the youth
and happiness that was all around him, profligate as the spring
sunshine.  He was trying to remember which one of the bridesmaids
he had made a date to dine with tonight as he walked forward to bid
Hamilton and Caroline Rutherford good-by.





THE BOWL


by
 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)
 

Saturday Evening Post (21 January 1928)



There was a man in my class at Princeton who never went to football
games.  He spent his Saturday afternoons delving for minutiae about
Greek athletics and the somewhat fixed battles between Christians
and wild beasts under the Antonines.  Lately--several years out of
college--he has discovered football players and is making etchings
of them in the manner of the late George Bellows.  But he was once
unresponsive to the very spectacle at his door, and I suspect the
originality of his judgments on what is beautiful, what is
remarkable and what is fun.

I reveled in football, as audience, amateur statistician and foiled
participant--for I had played in prep school, and once there was a
headline in the school newspaper:  "Deering and Mullins Star
Against Taft in Stiff Game Saturday."  When I came in to lunch
after the battle the school stood up and clapped and the visiting
coach shook hands with me and prophesied--incorrectly--that I was
going to be heard from.  The episode is laid away in the most
pleasant lavender of my past.  That year I grew very tall and thin,
and when at Princeton the following fall I looked anxiously over
the freshman candidates and saw the polite disregard with which
they looked back at me, I realized that that particular dream was
over.  Keene said he might make me into a very fair pole vaulter--
and he did--but it was a poor substitute; and my terrible
disappointment that I wasn't going to be a great football player
was probably the foundation of my friendship with Dolly Harlan.  I
want to begin this story about Dolly with a little rehashing of the
Yale game up at New Haven, sophomore year.

Dolly was started at halfback; this was his first big game.  I
roomed with him and I had scented something peculiar about his
state of mind, so I didn't let him out of the corner of my eye
during the whole first half.  With field glasses I could see the
expression on his face; it was strained and incredulous, as it had
been the day of his father's death, and it remained so, long after
any nervousness had had time to wear off.  I thought he was sick
and wondered why Keene didn't see and take him out; it wasn't until
later that I learned what was the matter.

It was the Yale Bowl.  The size of it or the enclosed shape of it
or the height of the sides had begun to get on Dolly's nerves when
the team practiced there the day before.  In that practice he
dropped one or two punts, for almost the first time in his life,
and he began thinking it was because of the Bowl.

There is a new disease called agoraphobia--afraid of crowds--and
another called siderodromophobia--afraid of railroad traveling--and
my friend Doctor Glock, the psychoanalyst, would probably account
easily for Dolly's state of mind.  But here's what Dolly told me
afterward:

"Yale would punt and I'd look up.  The minute I looked up, the
sides of that damn pan would seem to go shooting up too.  Then when
the ball started to come down, the sides began leaning forward and
bending over me until I could see all the people on the top seats
screaming at me and shaking their fists.  At the last minute I
couldn't see the ball at all, but only the Bowl; every time it was
just luck that I was under it and every time I juggled it in my
hands."

To go back to the game.  I was in the cheering section with a good
seat on the forty-yard line--good, that is, except when a very
vague graduate, who had lost his friends and his hat, stood up in
front of me at intervals and faltered, "Stob Ted Coy!" under the
impression that we were watching a game played a dozen years
before.  When he realized finally that he was funny he began
performing for the gallery and aroused a chorus of whistles and
boos until he was dragged unwillingly under the stand.

It was a good game--what is known in college publications as a
historic game.  A picture of the team that played it now hangs in
every barber shop in Princeton, with Captain Gottlieb in the middle
wearing a white sweater, to show that they won a championship.
Yale had had a poor season, but they had the breaks in the first
quarter, which ended 3 to 0 in their favor.

Between quarters I watched Dolly.  He walked around panting and
sucking a water bottle and still wearing that strained stunned
expression.  Afterward he told me he was saying over and over to
himself:  "I'll speak to Roper.  I'll tell him between halves.
I'll tell him I can't go through this any more."  Several times
already he had felt an almost irresistible impulse to shrug his
shoulders and trot off the field, for it was not only this
unexpected complex about the Bowl; the truth was that Dolly
fiercely and bitterly hated the game.

He hated the long, dull period of training, the element of personal
conflict, the demand on his time, the monotony of the routine and
the nervous apprehension of disaster just before the end.
Sometimes he imagined that all the others detested it as much as he
did, and fought down their aversion as he did and carried it around
inside them like a cancer that they were afraid to recognize.
Sometimes he imagined that a man here and there was about to tear
off the mask and say, "Dolly, do you hate this lousy business as
much as I do?"

His feeling had begun back at St. Regis' School and he had come up
to Princeton with the idea that he was through with football
forever.  But upper classmen from St. Regis kept stopping him on
the campus and asking him how much he weighed, and he was nominated
for vice president of our class on the strength of his athletic
reputation--and it was autumn, with achievement in the air.  He
wandered down to freshman practice one afternoon, feeling oddly
lost and dissatisfied, and smelled the turf and smelled the
thrilling season.  In half an hour he was lacing on a pair of
borrowed shoes and two weeks later he was captain of the freshman
team.

Once committed, he saw that he had made a mistake; he even
considered leaving college.  For, with his decision to play, Dolly
assumed a moral responsibility, personal to him, besides.  To lose
or to let down, or to be let down, was simply intolerable to him.
It offended his Scotch sense of waste.  Why sweat blood for an hour
with only defeat at the end?

Perhaps the worst of it was that he wasn't really a star player.
No team in the country could have spared using him, but he could do
no spectacular thing superlatively well, neither run, pass nor
kick.  He was five-feet-eleven and weighed a little more than a
hundred and sixty; he was a first-rate defensive man, sure in
interference, a fair line plunger and a fair punter.  He never
fumbled and he was never inadequate; his presence, his constant
cold sure aggression, had a strong effect on other men.  Morally,
he captained any team he played on and that was why Roper had spent
so much time trying to get length in his kicks all season--he
wanted him in the game.

In the second quarter Yale began to crack.  It was a mediocre team
composed of flashy material, but uncoordinated because of injuries
and impending changes in the Yale coaching system.  The
quarterback, Josh Logan, had been a wonder at Exeter--I could
testify to that--where games can be won by the sheer confidence and
spirit of a single man.  But college teams are too highly organized
to respond so simply and boyishly, and they recover less easily
from fumbles and errors of judgment behind the line.

So, with nothing to spare, with much grunting and straining,
Princeton moved steadily down the field.  On the Yale twenty-yard
line things suddenly happened.  A Princeton pass was intercepted;
the Yale man, excited by his own opportunity, dropped the ball and
it bobbed leisurely in the general direction of the Yale goal.
Jack Devlin and Dolly Harlan of Princeton and somebody--I forget
who--from Yale were all about the same distance from it.  What
Dolly did in that split second was all instinct; it presented no
problem to him.  He was a natural athlete and in a crisis his
nervous system thought for him.  He might have raced the two others
for the ball; instead, he took out the Yale man with savage
precision while Devlin scooped up the ball and ran ten yards for a
touchdown.

This was when the sports writers still saw games through the eyes
of Ralph Henry Barbour.  The press box was right behind me, and as
Princeton lined up to kick goal I heard the radio man ask:

"Who's Number 22?"

"Harlan."

"Harlan is going to kick goal.  Devlin, who made the touchdown,
comes from Lawrenceville School.  He is twenty years old.  The ball
went true between the bars."

Between the halves, as Dolly sat shaking with fatigue in the locker
room, Little, the back-field coach, came and sat beside him.

"When the ends are right on you, don't be afraid to make a fair
catch," Little said.  "That big Havemeyer is liable to jar the ball
right out of your hands."

Now was the time to say it:  "I wish you'd tell Bill--"  But the
words twisted themselves into a trivial question about the wind.
His feeling would have to be explained, gone into, and there wasn't
time.  His own self seemed less important in this room, redolent
with the tired breath, the ultimate effort, the exhaustion of ten
other men.  He was shamed by a harsh sudden quarrel that broke out
between an end and tackle; he resented the former players in the
room--especially the graduate captain of two years before, who was
a little tight and over-vehement about the referee's favoritism.
It seemed terrible to add one more jot to all this strain and
annoyance.  But he might have come out with it all the same if
Little hadn't kept saying in a low voice:  "What a take-out, Dolly!
What a beautiful take-out!" and if Little's hand hadn't rested
there, patting his shoulder.


II


In the third quarter Joe Dougherty kicked an easy field goal from
the twenty-yard line and we felt safe, until toward twilight a
series of desperate forward passes brought Yale close to a score.
But Josh Logan had exhausted his personality in sheer bravado and
he was outguessed by the defense at the last.  As the substitutes
came running in, Princeton began a last march down the field.  Then
abruptly it was over and the crowd poured from the stands, and
Gottlieb, grabbing the ball, leaped up in the air.  For a while
everything was confused and crazy and happy; I saw some freshmen
try to carry Dolly, but they were shy and he got away.

We all felt a great personal elation.  We hadn't beaten Yale for
three years and now everything was going to be all right.  It meant
a good winter at college, something pleasant and slick to think
back upon in the damp cold days after Christmas, when a bleak
futility settles over a university town.  Down on the field, an
improvised and uproarious team ran through plays with a derby,
until the snake dance rolled over them and blotted them out.
Outside the Bowl, I saw two abysmally gloomy and disgusted Yale men
get into a waiting taxi and in a tone of final abnegation tell the
driver "New York."  You couldn't find Yale men; in the manner of
the vanquished, they had absolutely melted away.

I begin Dolly's story with my memories of this game because that
evening the girl walked into it.  She was a friend of Josephine
Pickman's and the four of us were going to drive up to the Midnight
Frolic in New York.  When I suggested to him that he'd be too tired
he laughed dryly--he'd have gone anywhere that night to get the
feel and rhythm of football out of his head.  He walked into the
hall of Josephine's house at half-past six, looking as if he'd
spent the day in the barber shop save for a small and fetching
strip of court plaster over one eye.  He was one of the handsomest
men I ever knew, anyhow; he appeared tall and slender in street
clothes, his hair was dark, his eyes big and sensitive and dark,
his nose aquiline and, like all his features, somehow romantic.  It
didn't occur to me then, but I suppose he was pretty vain--not
conceited, but vain--for he always dressed in brown or soft light
gray, with black ties, and people don't match themselves so
successfully by accident.

He was smiling a little to himself as he came in.  He shook my hand
buoyantly and said, "Why, what a surprise to meet you here, Mr.
Deering," in a kidding way.  Then he saw the two girls through the
long hall, one dark and shining, like himself, and one with gold
hair that was foaming and frothing in the firelight, and said in
the happiest voice I've ever heard, "Which one is mine?"

"Either you want, I guess."

"Seriously, which is Pickman?"

"She's light."

"Then the other one belongs to me.  Isn't that the idea?"

"I think I'd better warn them about the state you're in."

Miss Thorne, small, flushed and lovely, stood beside the fire.
Dolly went right up to her.

"You're mine," he said; "you belong to me."

She looked at him coolly, making up her mind; suddenly she liked
him and smiled.  But Dolly wasn't satisfied.  He wanted to do
something incredibly silly or startling to express his untold
jubilation that he was free.

"I love you," he said.  He took her hand, his brown velvet eyes
regarding her tenderly, unseeingly, convincingly.  "I love you."

For a moment the corners of her lips fell as if in dismay that she
had met someone stronger, more confident, more challenging than
herself.  Then, as she drew herself together visibly, he dropped
her hand and the little scene in which he had expended the tension
of the afternoon was over.

It was a bright cold November night and the rush of air past the
open car brought a vague excitement, a sense that we were hurrying
at top speed toward a brilliant destiny.  The roads were packed
with cars that came to long inexplicable halts while police,
blinded by the lights, walked up and down the line giving obscure
commands.  Before we had been gone an hour New York began to be a
distant hazy glow against the sky.

Miss Thorne, Josephine told me, was from Washington, and had just
come down from a visit in Boston.

"For the game?" I said.

"No; she didn't go to the game."

"That's too bad.  If you'd let me know I could have picked up a
seat--"

"She wouldn't have gone.  Vienna never goes to games."

I remembered now that she hadn't even murmured the conventional
congratulations to Dolly.

"She hates football.  Her brother was killed in a prep-school game
last year.  I wouldn't have brought her tonight, but when we got
home from the game I saw she'd been sitting there holding a book
open at the same page all afternoon.  You see, he was this
wonderful kid and her family saw it happen and naturally never got
over it."

"But does she mind being with Dolly?"

"Of course not.  She just ignores football.  If anyone mentions it
she simply changes the subject."

I was glad that it was Dolly and not, say, Jack Devlin who was
sitting back there with her.  And I felt rather sorry for Dolly.
However strongly he felt about the game, he must have waited for
some acknowledgment that his effort had existed.

He was probably giving her credit for a subtle consideration, yet,
as the images of the afternoon flashed into his mind he might have
welcomed a compliment to which he could respond "What nonsense!"
Neglected entirely, the images would become insistent and
obtrusive.

I turned around and was somewhat startled to find that Miss Thorne
was in Dolly's arms; I turned quickly back and decided to let them
take care of themselves.

As we waited for a traffic light on upper Broadway, I saw a
sporting extra headlined with the score of the game.  The green
sheet was more real than the afternoon itself--succinct, condensed
and clear:


                PRINCETON CONQUERS YALE 10-3
              SEVENTY THOUSAND WATCH TIGER TRIM
                           BULLDOG

                DEVLIN SCORES ON YALE FUMBLE


There it was--not like the afternoon, muddled, uncertain, patchy
and scrappy to the end, but nicely mounted now in the setting of
the past:


                   PRINCETON, 10; YALE, 3


Achievement was a curious thing, I thought.  Dolly was largely
responsible for that.  I wondered if all things that screamed in
the headlines were simply arbitrary accents.  As if people should
ask, "What does it look like?"

"It looks most like a cat."

"Well, then, let's call it a cat."

My mind, brightened by the lights and the cheerful tumult, suddenly
grasped the fact that all achievement was a placing of emphasis--a
molding of the confusion of life into form.

Josephine stopped in front of the New Amsterdam Theater, where her
chauffeur met us and took the car.  We were early, but a small buzz
of excitement went up from the undergraduates waiting in the lobby--
"There's Dolly Harlan"--and as we moved toward the elevator
several acquaintances came up to shake his hand.  Apparently
oblivious to these ceremonies, Miss Thorne caught my eye and
smiled.  I looked at her with curiosity; Josephine had imparted the
rather surprising information that she was just sixteen years old.
I suppose my return smile was rather patronizing, but instantly I
realized that the fact could not be imposed on.  In spite of all
the warmth and delicacy of her face, the figure that somehow
reminded me of an exquisite, romanticized little ballerina, there
was a quality in her that was as hard as steel.  She had been
brought up in Rome, Vienna and Madrid, with flashes of Washington;
her father was one of those charming American diplomats who, with
fine obstinacy, try to re-create the Old World in their children by
making their education rather more royal than that of princes.
Miss Thorne was sophisticated.  In spite of all the abandon of
American young people, sophistication is still a Continental
monopoly.

We walked in upon a number in which a dozen chorus girls in orange
and black were racing wooden horses against another dozen dressed
in Yale blue.  When the lights went on, Dolly was recognized and
some Princeton students set up a clatter of approval with the
little wooden hammers given out for applause; he moved his chair
unostentatiously into a shadow.

Almost immediately a flushed and very miserable young man appeared
beside our table.  In better form he would have been extremely
prepossessing; indeed, he flashed a charming and dazzling smile at
Dolly, as if requesting his permission to speak to Miss Thorne.

Then he said, "I thought you weren't coming to New York tonight."

"Hello, Carl."  She looked up at him coolly.

"Hello, Vienna.  That's just it; 'Hello Vienna--Hello Carl.'  But
why?  I thought you weren't coming to New York tonight."

Miss Thorne made no move to introduce the man, but we were
conscious of his somewhat raised voice.

"I thought you promised me you weren't coming."

"I didn't expect to, child.  I just left Boston this morning."

"And who did you meet in Boston--the fascinating Tunti?" he
demanded.

"I didn't meet anyone, child."

"Oh, yes, you did!  You met the fascinating Tunti and you discussed
living on the Riviera."  She didn't answer.  "Why are you so
dishonest, Vienna?" he went on.  "Why did you tell me on the phone--"

"I am not going to be lectured," she said, her tone changing
suddenly.  "I told you if you took another drink I was through with
you.  I'm a person of my word and I'd be enormously happy if you
went away."

"Vienna!" he cried in a sinking, trembling voice.

At this point I got up and danced with Josephine.  When we came
back there were people at the table--the men to whom we were to
hand over Josephine and Miss Thorne, for I had allowed for Dolly
being tired, and several others.  One of them was Al Ratoni, the
composer, who, it appeared, had been entertained at the embassy in
Madrid.  Dolly Harlan had drawn his chair aside and was watching
the dancers.  Just as the lights went down for a new number a man
came up out of the darkness and leaning over Miss Thorne whispered
in her ear.  She started and made a motion to rise, but he put his
hand on her shoulder and forced her down.  They began to talk
together in low excited voices.

The tables were packed close at the old Frolic.  There was a man
rejoining the party next to us and I couldn't help hearing what he
said:

"A young fellow just tried to kill himself down in the wash room.
He shot himself through the shoulder, but they got the pistol away
before--"

A minute later his voice again:  "Carl Sanderson, they said."

When the number was over I looked around.  Vienna Thorne was
staring very rigidly at Miss Lillian Lorraine, who was rising
toward the ceiling as an enormous telephone doll.  The man who had
leaned over Vienna was gone and the others were obliviously unaware
that anything had happened.  I turned to Dolly and suggested that
he and I had better go, and after a glance at Vienna in which
reluctance, weariness and then resignation were mingled, he
consented.  On the way to the hotel I told Dolly what had happened.

"Just some souse," he remarked after a moment's fatigued
consideration.  "He probably tried to miss himself and get a little
sympathy.  I suppose those are the sort of things a really
attractive girl is up against all the time."

This wasn't my attitude.  I could see that mussed white shirt front
with very young blood pumping over it, but I didn't argue, and
after a while Dolly said, "I suppose that sounds brutal, but it
seems a little soft and weak, doesn't it?  Perhaps that's just the
way I feel tonight."

When Dolly undressed I saw that he was a mass of bruises, but he
assured me that none of them would keep him awake.  Then I told him
why Miss Thorne hadn't mentioned the game and he woke up suddenly;
the familiar glitter came back into his eyes.

"So that was it!  I wondered.  I thought maybe you'd told her not
to say anything about it."

Later, when the lights had been out half an hour, he suddenly said
"I see" in a loud clear voice.  I don't know whether he was awake
or asleep.


III


I've put down as well as I can everything I can remember about the
first meeting between Dolly and Miss Vienna Thorne.  Reading it
over, it sounds casual and insignificant, but the evening lay in
the shadow of the game and all that happened seemed like that.
Vienna went back to Europe almost immediately and for fifteen
months passed out of Dolly's life.

It was a good year--it still rings true in my memory as a good
year.  Sophomore year is the most dramatic at Princeton, just as
junior year is at Yale.  It's not only the elections to the
upperclass clubs but also everyone's destiny begins to work itself
out.  You can tell pretty well who's going to come through, not
only by their immediate success but by the way they survive
failure.  Life was very full for me.  I made the board of the
Princetonian, and our house burned down out in Dayton, and I had a
silly half-hour fist fight in the gymnasium with a man who later
became one of my closest friends, and in March Dolly and I joined
the upperclass club we'd always wanted to be in.  I fell in love,
too, but it would be an irrelevancy to tell about that here.

April came and the first real Princeton weather, the lazy green-and-
gold afternoons and the bright thrilling nights haunted with the
hour of senior singing.  I was happy, and Dolly would have been
happy except for the approach of another football season.  He was
playing baseball, which excused him from spring practice, but the
bands were beginning to play faintly in the distance.  They rose to
concert pitch during the summer, when he had to answer the
question, "Are you going back early for football?" a dozen times a
day.  On the fifteenth of September he was down in the dust and
heat of late-summer Princeton, crawling over the ground on all
fours, trotting through the old routine and turning himself into
just the sort of specimen that I'd have given ten years of my life
to be.

From first to last, he hated it, and never let down for a minute.
He went into the Yale game that fall weighing a hundred and fifty-
three pounds, though that wasn't the weight printed in the paper,
and he and Joe McDonald were the only men who played all through
that disastrous game.  He could have been captain by lifting his
finger--but that involves some stuff that I know confidentially and
can't tell.  His only horror was that by some chance he'd have to
accept it.  Two seasons!  He didn't even talk about it now.  He
left the room or the club when the conversation veered around to
football.  He stopped announcing to me that he "wasn't going
through that business any more."  This time it took the Christmas
holidays to drive that unhappy look from his eyes.

Then at the New Year Miss Vienna Thorne came home from Madrid and
in February a man named Case brought her down to the Senior Prom.


IV


She was even prettier than she had been before, softer, externally
at least, and a tremendous success.  People passing her on the
street jerked their heads quickly to look at her--a frightened
look, as if they realized that they had almost missed something.
She was temporarily tired of European men, she told me, letting me
gather that there had been some sort of unfortunate love affair.
She was coming out in Washington next fall.

Vienna and Dolly.  She disappeared with him for two hours the night
of the club dances, and Harold Case was in despair.  When they
walked in again at midnight I thought they were the handsomest pair
I saw.  They were both shining with that peculiar luminosity that
dark people sometimes have.  Harold Case took one look at them and
went proudly home.

Vienna came back a week later, solely to see Dolly.  Late that
evening I had occasion to go up to the deserted club for a book and
they called me from the rear terrace, which opens out to the
ghostly stadium and to an unpeopled sweep of night.  It was an hour
of thaw, with spring voices in the warm wind, and wherever there
was light enough you could see drops glistening and falling.  You
could feel the cold melting out of the stars and the bare trees and
shrubbery toward Stony Brook turning lush in the darkness.

They were sitting together on a wicker bench, full of themselves
and romantic and happy.

"We had to tell someone about it," they said.

"Now can I go?"

"No, Jeff," they insisted; "stay here and envy us.  We're in the
stage where we want someone to envy us.  Do you think we're a good
match?"

What could I say?

"Dolly's going to finish at Princeton next year," Vienna went on,
"but we're going to announce it after the season in Washington in
the autumn."

I was vaguely relieved to find that it was going to be a long
engagement.

"I approve of you, Jeff," Vienna said.

"I want Dolly to have more friends like you.  You're stimulating
for him--you have ideas.  I told Dolly he could probably find
others like you if he looked around his class."

Dolly and I both felt a little uncomfortable.

"She doesn't want me to be a Babbitt," he said lightly.

"Dolly's perfect," asserted Vienna.  "He's the most beautiful thing
that ever lived, and you'll find I'm very good for him, Jeff.
Already I've helped him make up his mind about one important
thing."  I guessed what was coming.  "He's going to speak a little
piece if they bother him about playing football next autumn, aren't
you, child?"

"Oh, they won't bother me," said Dolly uncomfortably.  "It isn't
like that--"

"Well, they'll try to bully you into it, morally."

"Oh, no," he objected.  "It isn't like that.  Don't let's talk
about it now, Vienna.  It's such a swell night."

Such a swell night!  When I think of my own love passages at
Princeton, I always summon up that night of Dolly's, as if it had
been I and not he who sat there with youth and hope and beauty in
his arms.

Dolly's mother took a place on Ram's Point, Long Island, for the
summer, and late in August I went East to visit him.  Vienna had
been there a week when I arrived, and my impressions were: first,
that he was very much in love; and, second, that it was Vienna's
party.  All sorts of curious people used to drop in to see Vienna.
I wouldn't mind them now--I'm more sophisticated--but then they
seemed rather a blot on the summer.  They were all slightly famous
in one way or another, and it was up to you to find out how.  There
was a lot of talk, and especially there was much discussion of
Vienna's personality.  Whenever I was alone with any of the other
guests we discussed Vienna's sparkling personality.  They thought I
was dull, and most of them thought Dolly was dull.  He was better
in his line than any of them were in theirs, but his was the only
specialty that wasn't mentioned.  Still, I felt vaguely that I was
being improved and I boasted about knowing most of those people in
the ensuing year, and was annoyed when people failed to recognize
their names.

The day before I left, Dolly turned his ankle playing tennis, and
afterward he joked about it to me rather somberly.

"If I'd only broken it things would be so much easier.  Just a
quarter of an inch more bend and one of the bones would have
snapped.  By the way, look here."

He tossed me a letter.  It was a request that he report at
Princeton for practice on September fifteenth and that meanwhile he
begin getting himself in good condition.

"You're not going to play this fall?"

He shook his head.

"No.  I'm not a child any more.  I've played for two years and I
want this year free.  If I went through it again it'd be a piece of
moral cowardice."

"I'm not arguing, but--would you have taken this stand if it hadn't
been for Vienna?"

"Of course I would.  If I let myself be bullied into it I'd never
be able to look myself in the face again."

Two weeks later I got the following letter:


DEAR JEFF:

When you read this you'll be somewhat surprised.  I have, actually,
this time, broken my ankle playing tennis.  I can't even walk with
crutches at present; it's on a chair in front of me swollen up and
wrapped up as big as a house as I write.  No one, not even Vienna,
knows about our conversation on the same subject last summer and so
let us both absolutely forget it.  One thing, though--an ankle is a
darn hard thing to break, though I never knew it before.

I feel happier than I have for years--no early-season practice, no
sweat and suffer, a little discomfort and inconvenience, but free.
I feel as if I've outwitted a whole lot of people, and it's
nobody's business but that of your

                         Machiavellian (sic) friend,

                                                          DOLLY.

P.S.  You might as well tear up this letter.


It didn't sound like Dolly at all.


V


Once down at Princeton I asked Frank Kane--who sells sporting goods
on Nassau Street and can tell you offhand the name of the scrub
quarterback in 1901--what was the matter with Bob Tatnall's team
senior year.

"Injuries and tough luck," he said.  "They wouldn't sweat after the
hard games.  Take Joe McDonald, for instance, All-American tackle
the year before; he was slow and stale, and he knew it and didn't
care.  It's a wonder Bill got that outfit through the season at
all."

I sat in the stands with Dolly and watched them beat Lehigh 3-0 and
tie Bucknell by a fluke.  The next week we were trimmed 14-0 by
Notre Dame.  On the day of the Notre Dame game Dolly was in
Washington with Vienna, but he was awfully curious about it when he
came back next day.  He had all the sporting pages of all the
papers and he sat reading them and shaking his head.  Then he
stuffed them suddenly into the waste-paper basket.

"This college is football crazy," he announced.  "Do you know that
English teams don't even train for sports?"

I didn't enjoy Dolly so much in those days.  It was curious to see
him with nothing to do.  For the first time in his life he hung
around--around the room, around the club, around casual groups--he
who had always been going somewhere with dynamic indolence.  His
passage along a walk had once created groups--groups of classmates
who wanted to walk with him, of underclassmen who followed with
their eyes a moving shrine.  He became democratic, he mixed around,
and it was somehow not appropriate.  He explained that he wanted to
know more men in his class.

But people want their idols a little above them, and Dolly had been
a sort of private and special idol.  He began to hate to be alone,
and that, of course, was most apparent to me.  If I got up to go
out and he didn't happen to be writing a letter to Vienna, he'd ask
"Where are you going?" in a rather alarmed way and make an excuse
to limp along with me.

"Are you glad you did it, Dolly?" I asked him suddenly one day.

He looked at me with reproach behind the defiance in his eyes.

"Of course I'm glad."

"I wish you were in that back field, all the same."

"It wouldn't matter a bit.  This year's game's in the Bowl.  I'd
probably be dropping kicks for them."

The week of the Navy game he suddenly began going to all the
practices.  He worried; that terrible sense of responsibility was
at work.  Once he had hated the mention of football; now he thought
and talked of nothing else.  The night before the Navy game I woke
up several times to find the lights burning brightly in his room.

We lost 7 to 3 on Navy's last-minute forward pass over Devlin's
head.  After the first half Dolly left the stands and sat down with
the players on the field.  When he joined me afterward his face was
smudgy and dirty as if he had been crying.

The game was in Baltimore that year.  Dolly and I were going to
spend the night in Washington with Vienna, who was giving a dance.
We rode over there in an atmosphere of sullen gloom and it was all
I could do to keep him from snapping out at two naval officers who
were holding an exultant post mortem in the seat behind.

The dance was what Vienna called her second coming-out party.  She
was having only the people she liked this time, and these turned
out to be chiefly importations from New York.  The musicians, the
playwrights, the vague supernumeraries of the arts, who had dropped
in at Dolly's house on Ram's Point, were here in force.  But Dolly,
relieved of his obligations as host, made no clumsy attempt to talk
their language that night.  He stood moodily against the wall with
some of that old air of superiority that had first made me want to
know him.  Afterward, on my way to bed, I passed Vienna's sitting
room and she called me to come in.  She and Dolly, both a little
white, were sitting across the room from each other and there was
tensity in the air.

"Sit down, Jeff," said Vienna wearily.  "I want you to witness the
collapse of a man into a schoolboy."  I sat down reluctantly.
"Dolly's changed his mind," she said.  "He prefers football to me."

"That's not it," said Dolly stubbornly.

"I don't see the point," I objected.  "Dolly can't possibly play."

"But he thinks he can.  Jeff, just in case you imagine I'm being
pig-headed about it, I want to tell you a story.  Three years ago,
when we first came back to the United States, father put my young
brother in school.  One afternoon we all went out to see him play
football.  Just after the game started he was hurt, but father
said, 'It's all right.  He'll be up in a minute.  It happens all
the time.'  But, Jeff, he never got up.  He lay there, and finally
they carried him off the field and put a blanket over him.  Just as
we got to him he died."

She looked from one to the other of us and began to sob
convulsively.  Dolly went over, frowning, and put his arm around
her shoulder.

"Oh, Dolly," she cried, "won't you do this for me--just this one
little thing for me?"

He shook his head miserably.  "I tried, but I can't," he said.

"It's my stuff, don't you understand, Vienna?  People have got to
do their stuff."

Vienna had risen and was powdering her tears at a mirror; now she
flashed around angrily.

"Then I've been laboring under a misapprehension when I supposed
you felt about it much as I did."

"Let's not go over all that.  I'm tired of talking, Vienna; I'm
tired of my own voice.  It seems to me that no one I know does
anything but talk any more."

"Thanks.  I suppose that's meant for me."

"It seems to me your friends talk a great deal.  I've never heard
so much jabber as I've listened to tonight.  Is the idea of
actually doing anything repulsive to you, Vienna?"

"It depends upon whether it's worth doing."

"Well, this is worth doing--to me."

"I know your trouble, Dolly," she said bitterly.  "You're weak and
you want to be admired.  This year you haven't had a lot of little
boys following you around as if you were Jack Dempsey, and it
almost breaks your heart.  You want to get out in front of them all
and make a show of yourself and hear the applause."

He laughed shortly.  "If that's your idea of how a football player
feels--"

"Have you made up your mind to play?" she interrupted.

"If I'm any use to them--yes."

"Then I think we're both wasting our time."

Her expression was ruthless, but Dolly refused to see that she was
in earnest.  When I got away he was still trying to make her "be
rational," and next day on the train he said that Vienna had been
"a little nervous."  He was deeply in love with her, and he didn't
dare think of losing her; but he was still in the grip of the
sudden emotion that had decided him to play, and his confusion and
exhaustion of mind made him believe vainly that everything was
going to be all right.  But I had seen that look on Vienna's face
the night she talked with Mr. Carl Sanderson at the Frolic two
years before.

Dolly didn't get off the train at Princeton Junction, but continued
on to New York.  He went to two orthopedic specialists and one of
them arranged a bandage braced with a whole little fence of
whalebones that he was to wear day and night.  The probabilities
were that it would snap at the first brisk encounter, but he could
run on it and stand on it when he kicked.  He was out on University
Field in uniform the following afternoon.

His appearance was a small sensation.  I was sitting in the stands
watching practice with Harold Case and young Daisy Cary.  She was
just beginning to be famous then, and I don't know whether she or
Dolly attracted the most attention.  In those times it was still
rather daring to bring down a moving-picture actress; if that same
young lady went to Princeton today she would probably be met at the
station with a band.

Dolly limped around and everyone said, "He's limping!"  He got
under a punt and everyone said, "He did that pretty well!"  The
first team were laid off after the hard Navy game and everyone
watched Dolly all afternoon.  After practice I caught his eye and
he came over and shook hands.  Daisy asked him if he'd like to be
in a football picture she was going to make.  It was only
conversation, but he looked at me with a dry smile.

When he came back to the room his ankle was swollen up as big as a
stove pipe, and next day he and Keene fixed up an arrangement by
which the bandage would be loosened and tightened to fit its
varying size.  We called it the balloon.  The bone was nearly
healed, but the little bruised sinews were stretched out of place
again every day.  He watched the Swarthmore game from the sidelines
and the following Monday he was in scrimmage with the second team
against the scrubs.

In the afternoons sometimes he wrote to Vienna.  His theory was
that they were still engaged, but he tried not to worry about it,
and I think the very pain that kept him awake at night was good for
that.  When the season was over he would go and see.

We played Harvard and lost 7 to 3.  Jack Devlin's collar bone was
broken and he was out for the season, which made it almost sure
that Dolly would play.  Amid the rumors and fears of mid-November
the news aroused a spark of hope in an otherwise morbid
undergraduate body--hope all out of proportion to Dolly's
condition.  He came back to the room the Thursday before the game
with his face drawn and tired.

"They're going to start me," he said, "and I'm going to be back for
punts.  If they only knew--"

"Couldn't you tell Bill how you feel about that?"

He shook his head and I had a sudden suspicion that he was
punishing himself for his "accident" last August.  He lay silently
on the couch while I packed his suitcase for the team train.

The actual day of the game was, as usual, like a dream--unreal with
its crowds of friends and relatives and the inessential trappings
of a gigantic show.  The eleven little men who ran out on the field
at last were like bewitched figures in another world, strange and
infinitely romantic, blurred by a throbbing mist of people and
sound.  One aches with them intolerably, trembles with their
excitement, but they have no traffic with us now, they are beyond
help, consecrated and unreachable--vaguely holy.

The field is rich and green, the preliminaries are over and the
teams trickle out into position.  Head guards are put on; each man
claps his hands and breaks into a lonely little dance.  People are
still talking around you, arranging themselves, but you have fallen
silent and your eye wanders from man to man.  There's Jack
Whitehead, a senior, at end; Joe McDonald, large and reassuring, at
tackle; Toole, a sophomore, at guard; Red Hopman, center; someone
you can't identify at the other guard--Bunker probably--he turns
and you see his number--Bunker; Bean Gile, looking unnaturally
dignified and significant at the other tackle; Poore, another
sophomore at end.  Back of them is Wash Sampson at quarter--imagine
how he feels!  But he runs here and there on light feet, speaking
to this man and that, trying to communicate his alertness and his
confidence of success.  Dolly Harlan stands motionless, his hands
on his hips, watching the Yale kicker tee up the ball; near him is
Captain Bob Tatnall--

There's the whistle!  The line of the Yale team sways ponderously
forward from its balance and a split second afterward comes the
sound of the ball.  The field streams with running figures and the
whole Bowl strains forward as if thrown by the current of an
electric chair.

Suppose we fumbled right away.

Tatnall catches it, goes back ten yards, is surrounded and blotted
out of sight.  Spears goes through center for three.  A short pass,
Sampson to Tatnall, is completed, but for no gain.  Harlan punts to
Devereaux, who is downed in his tracks on the Yale forty-yard line.

Now we'll see what they've got.

It developed immediately that they had a great deal.  Using an
effective crisscross and a short pass over center, they carried the
ball fifty-four yards to the Princeton six-yard line, where they
lost it on a fumble, recovered by Red Hopman.  After a trade of
punts, they began another push, this time to the fifteen-yard line,
where, after four hair-raising forward passes, two of them batted
down by Dolly, we got the ball on downs.  But Yale was still fresh
and strong, and with a third onslaught the weaker Princeton line
began to give way.  Just after the second quarter began Devereaux
took the ball over for a touchdown and the half ended with Yale in
possession of the ball on our ten-yard line.  Score, Yale, 7;
Princeton, 0.

We hadn't a chance.  The team was playing above itself, better than
it had played all year, but it wasn't enough.  Save that it was the
Yale game, when anything could happen, anything HAD happened, the
atmosphere of gloom would have been deeper than it was, and in the
cheering section you could cut it with a knife.

Early in the game Dolly Harlan had fumbled Devereaux's high punt,
but recovered without gain; toward the end of the half another kick
slipped through his fingers, but he scooped it up, and slipping
past the end, went back twelve yards.  Between halves he told Roper
he couldn't seem to get under the ball, but they kept him there.
His own kicks were carrying well and he was essential in the only
back-field combination that could hope to score.

After the first play of the game he limped slightly, moving around
as little as possible to conceal the fact.  But I knew enough about
football to see that he was in every play, starting at that rather
slow pace of his and finishing with a quick side lunge that almost
always took out his man.  Not a single Yale forward pass was
finished in his territory, but toward the end of the third quarter
he dropped another kick--backed around in a confused little circle
under it, lost it and recovered on the five-yard line just in time
to avert a certain score.  That made the third time, and I saw Ed
Kimball throw off his blanket and begin to warm up on the
sidelines.

Just at that point our luck began to change.  From a kick
formation, with Dolly set to punt from behind our goal, Howard
Bement, who had gone in for Wash Sampson at quarter, took the ball
through the center of the line, got by the secondary defense and
ran twenty-six yards before he was pulled down.  Captain Tasker, of
Yale, had gone out with a twisted knee, and Princeton began to pile
plays through his substitute, between Bean Gile and Hopman, with
George Spears and sometimes Bob Tatnall carrying the ball.  We went
up to the Yale forty-yard line, lost the ball on a fumble and
recovered it on another as the third quarter ended.  A wild ripple
of enthusiasm ran through the Princeton stands.  For the first time
we had the ball in their territory with first down and the
possibility of tying the score.  You could hear the tenseness
growing all around you in the intermission; it was reflected in the
excited movements of the cheer leaders and the uncontrollable
patches of sound that leaped out of the crowd, catching up voices
here and there and swelling to an undisciplined roar.

I saw Kimball dash out on the field and report to the referee and I
thought Dolly was through at last, and was glad, but it was Bob
Tatnall who came out, sobbing, and brought the Princeton side
cheering to its feet.

With the first play pandemonium broke loose and continued to the
end of the game.  At intervals it would swoon away to a plaintive
humming; then it would rise to the intensity of wind and rain and
thunder, and beat across the twilight from one side of the Bowl to
the other like the agony of lost souls swinging across a gap in
space.

The teams lined up on Yale's forty-one yard line and Spears
immediately dashed off tackle for six yards.  Again he carried the
ball--he was a wild unpopular Southerner with inspired moments--
going through the same hole for five more and a first down.  Dolly
made two on a cross buck and Spears was held at center.  It was
third down, with the ball on Yale's twenty-nine-yard line and eight
to go.

There was some confusion immediately behind me, some pushing and
some voices; a man was sick or had fainted--I never discovered
which.  Then my view was blocked out for a minute by rising bodies
and then everything went definitely crazy.  Substitutes were
jumping around down on the field, waving their blankets, the air
was full of hats, cushions, coats and a deafening roar.  Dolly
Harlan, who had scarcely carried the ball a dozen times in his
Princeton career, had picked a long pass from Kimball out of the
air and, dragging a tackler, struggled five yards to the Yale goal.


VI


Some time later the game was over.  There was a bad moment when
Yale began another attack, but there was no scoring and Bob
Tatnall's eleven had redeemed a mediocre season by tying a better
Yale team.  For us there was the feel of victory about it, the
exaltation if not the jubilance, and the Yale faces issuing from
out the Bowl wore the look of defeat.  It would be a good year,
after all--a good fight at the last, a tradition for next year's
team.  Our class--those of us who cared--would go out from
Princeton without the taste of final defeat.  The symbol stood--
such as it was; the banners blew proudly in the wind.  All that is
childish?  Find us something to fill the niche of victory.

I waited for Dolly outside the dressing rooms until almost everyone
had come out; then, as he still lingered, I went in.  Someone had
given him a little brandy, and since he never drank much, it was
swimming in his head.

"Have a chair, Jeff."  He smiled, broadly and happily.  "Rubber!
Tony!  Get the distinguished guest a chair.  He's an intellectual
and he wants to interview one of the bone-headed athletes.  Tony,
this is Mr. Deering.  They've got everything in this funny Bowl but
armchairs.  I love this Bowl.  I'm going to build here."

He fell silent, thinking about all things happily.  He was content.
I persuaded him to dress--there were people waiting for us.  Then
he insisted on walking out upon the field, dark now, and feeling
the crumbled turf with his shoe.

He picked up a divot from a cleat and let it drop, laughed, looked
distracted for a minute, and turned away.

With Tad Davis, Daisy Cary and another girl, we drove to New York.
He sat beside Daisy and was silly, charming and attractive.  For
the first time since I'd known him he talked about the game
naturally, even with a touch of vanity.

"For two years I was pretty good and I was always mentioned at the
bottom of the column as being among those who played.  This year I
dropped three punts and slowed up every play till Bob Tatnall kept
yelling at me, 'I don't see why they won't take you out!'  But a
pass not even aimed at me fell in my arms and I'll be in the
headlines tomorrow."

He laughed.  Somebody touched his foot; he winced and turned white.

"How did you hurt it?" Daisy asked.  "In football?"

"I hurt it last summer," he said shortly.

"It must have been terrible to play on it."

"It was."

"I suppose you had to."

"That's the way sometimes."

They understood each other.  They were both workers; sick or well,
there were things that Daisy also had to do.  She spoke of how,
with a vile cold, she had had to fall into an open-air lagoon out
in Hollywood the winter before.

"Six times--with a fever of a hundred and two.  But the production
was costing ten thousand dollars a day."

"Couldn't they use a double?"

"They did whenever they could--I only fell in when it had to be
done."

She was eighteen and I compared her background of courage and
independence and achievement, of politeness based upon the
realities of cooperation, with that of most society girls I had
known.  There was no way in which she wasn't inestimably their
superior--if she had looked for a moment my way--but it was Dolly's
shining velvet eyes that signaled to her own.

"Can't you go out with me tonight?" I heard her ask him.

He was sorry, but he had to refuse.  Vienna was in New York; she
was going to see him.  I didn't know, and Dolly didn't know,
whether there was to be a reconciliation or a good-by.

When she dropped Dolly and me at the Ritz there was real regret,
that lingering form of it, in both their eyes.

"There's a marvelous girl," Dolly said.  I agreed.  "I'm going up
to see Vienna.  Will you get a room for us at the Madison?"

So I left him.  What happened between him and Vienna I don't know;
he has never spoken about it to this day.  But what happened later
in the evening was brought to my attention by several surprised and
even indignant witnesses to the event.

Dolly walked into the Ambassador Hotel about ten o'clock and went
to the desk to ask for Miss Cary's room.  There was a crowd around
the desk, among them some Yale or Princeton undergraduates from the
game.  Several of them had been celebrating and evidently one of
them knew Daisy and had tried to get her room by phone.  Dolly was
abstracted and he must have made his way through them in a somewhat
brusque way and asked to be connected with Miss Cary.

One young man stepped back, looked at him unpleasantly and said,
"You seem to be in an awful hurry.  Just who are you?"

There was one of those slight silent pauses and the people near the
desk all turned to look.  Something happened inside Dolly; he felt
as if life had arranged his role to make possible this particular
question--a question that now he had no choice but to answer.
Still, there was silence.  The small crowd waited.

"Why, I'm Dolly Harlan," he said deliberately.  "What do you think
of that?"

It was quite outrageous.  There was a pause and then a sudden
little flurry and chorus:  "Dolly Harlan!  What?  What did he say?"

The clerk had heard the name; he gave it as the phone was answered
from Miss Cary's room.

"Mr. Harlan's to go right up, please."

Dolly turned away, alone with his achievement, taking it for once
to his breast.  He found suddenly that he would not have it long so
intimately; the memory would outlive the triumph and even the
triumph would outlive the glow in his heart that was best of all.
Tall and straight, an image of victory and pride, he moved across
the lobby, oblivious alike to the fate ahead of him or the small
chatter behind.


THE END






THE CAPTURED SHADOW


by
 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)
 

Saturday Evening Post (29 December 1928)



Basil Duke Lee shut the front door behind him and turned on the
dining-room light.  His mother's voice drifted sleepily downstairs:

"Basil, is that you?"

"No, mother, it's a burglar."

"It seems to me twelve o'clock is pretty late for a fifteen-year-
old boy."

"We went to Smith's and had a soda."

Whenever a new responsibility devolved upon Basil he was "a boy
almost sixteen," but when a privilege was in question, he was "a
fifteen-year-old boy."

There were footsteps above, and Mrs. Lee, in kimono, descended to
the first landing.

"Did you and Riply enjoy the play?"

"Yes, very much."

"What was it about?"

"Oh, it was just about this man.  Just an ordinary play."

"Didn't it have a name?"

"'Are You a Mason?'"

"Oh."  She hesitated, covetously watching his alert and eager face,
holding him there.  "Aren't you coming to bed?"

"I'm going to get something to eat."

"Something more?"

For a moment he didn't answer.  He stood in front of a glassed-in
bookcase in the living room, examining its contents with an equally
glazed eye.

"We're going to get up a play," he said suddenly.  "I'm going to
write it."

"Well--that'll be very nice.  Please come to bed soon.  You were up
late last night, too, and you've got dark circles under your eyes."

From the bookcase Basil presently extracted "Van Bibber and
Others," from which he read while he ate a large plate of straw
softened with half a pint of cream.  Back in the living room he sat
for a few minutes at the piano, digesting, and meanwhile staring at
the colored cover of a song from "The Midnight Sons."  It showed
three men in evening clothes and opera hats sauntering jovially
along Broadway against the blazing background of Times Square.

Basil would have denied incredulously the suggestion that that was
currently his favorite work of art.  But it was.

He went upstairs.  From a drawer of his desk he took out a
composition book and opened it.


                       BASIL DUKE LEE

                      ST. REGIS SCHOOL
                     EASTCHESTER, CONN.
                      FIFTH FORM FRENCH


and on the next page, under Irregular Verbs:


                           Present
                 je connais      nous con
                 tu connais
                 il connait


He turned over another page.


                    MR. WASHINGTON SQUARE

                     A Musical Comedy by
                       BASIL DUKE LEE
                   Music by Victor Herbert


                            ACT I


[The porch of the Millionaires' Club, near New York.  Opening
Chorus, LEILIA and DEBUTANTES:


     We sing not soft, we sing not loud
       For no one ever heard an opening chorus.
     We are a very merry crowd
       But no one ever heard an opening chorus.
     We're just a crowd of debutantes
       As merry as can be
     And nothing that there is could ever bore us
       We're the wittiest ones, the prettiest ones.
     In all society
       But no one ever heard an opening chorus.


LEILIA (stepping forward):  Well, girls, has Mr. Washington Square
been around here today?


Basil turned over a page.  There was no answer to Leilia's
question.  Instead in capitals was a brand-new heading:


                      HIC!  HIC!  HIC!

                A Hilarious Farce in One Act

                             by
                       BASIL DUKE LEE


                            SCENE

[A fashionable apartment near Broadway, New York City.  It is
almost midnight.  As the curtain goes up there is a knocking at the
door and a few minutes later it opens to admit a handsome man in a
full evening dress and a companion.  He has evidently been
imbibing, for his words are thick, his nose is red, and he can
hardly stand up.  He turns up the light and comes down center.


STUYVESANT:  Hic!  Hic!  Hic!

O'HARA (his companion):  Begorra, you been sayin' nothing else all
this evening.


Basil turned over a page and then another, reading hurriedly, but
not without interest.


PROFESSOR PUMPKIN:  Now, if you are an educated man, as you claim,
perhaps you can tell me the Latin word for "this."

STUYVESANT:  Hic!  Hic!  Hic!

PROFESSOR PUMPKIN:  Correct.  Very good indeed.  I--


At this point Hic! Hic! Hic! came to an end in midsentence.  On the
following page, in just as determined a hand as if the last two
works had not faltered by the way, was the heavily underlined
beginning of another:


                     THE CAPTURED SHADOW

             A Melodramatic Farce in Three Acts

                             by
                       BASIL DUKE LEE


                            SCENE

[All three acts take place in the library of the VAN BAKERS' house
in New York.  It is well furnished with a red lamp on one side and
some crossed spears and helmets and so on and a divan and a general
air of an oriental den.

When the curtain rises MISS SAUNDERS, LEILIA VAN BAKER and ESTELLA
CARRAGE are sitting at a table.  MISS SAUNDERS is an old maid about
forty very kittenish.  LEILIA is pretty with dark hair.  ESTELLA
has light hair.  They are a striking combination.


"The Captured Shadow" filled the rest of the book and ran over into
several loose sheets at the end.  When it broke off Basil sat for a
while in thought.  This had been a season of "crook comedies" in
New York, and the feel, the swing, the exact and vivid image of the
two he had seen, were in the foreground of his mind.  At the time
they had been enormously suggestive, opening out into a world much
larger and more brilliant than themselves that existed outside
their windows and beyond their doors, and it was this suggested
world rather than any conscious desire to imitate "Officer 666,"
that had inspired the effort before him.  Presently he printed Act
II at the head of a new tablet and began to write.

An hour passed.  Several times he had recourse to a collection of
joke books and to an old Treasury of Wit and Humor which embalmed
the faded Victorian cracks of Bishop Wilberforce and Sydney Smith.
At the moment when, in his story, a door moved slowly open, he
heard a heavy creak upon the stairs.  He jumped to his feet, aghast
and trembling, but nothing stirred; only a white moth bounced
against the screen, a clock struck the half-hour far across the
city, a bird whacked its wings in a tree outside.

Voyaging to the bathroom at half-past four, he saw with a shock
that morning was already blue at the window.  He had stayed up all
night.  He remembered that people who stayed up all night went
crazy, and transfixed in the hall, he tried agonizingly to listen
to himself, to feel whether or not he was going crazy.  The things
around him seemed preternaturally unreal, and rushing frantically
back into his bedroom, he began tearing off his clothes, racing
after the vanishing night.  Undressed, he threw a final regretful
glance at his pile of manuscript--he had the whole next scene in
his head.  As a compromise with incipient madness he got into bed
and wrote for an hour more.

Late next morning he was startled awake by one of the ruthless
Scandinavian sisters who, in theory, were the Lees' servants.
"Eleven o'clock!" she shouted.  "Five after!"

"Let me alone," Basil mumbled.  "What do you come and wake me up
for?"

"Somebody downstairs."  He opened his eyes.  "You ate all the cream
last night," Hilda continued.  "Your mother didn't have any for her
coffee."

"All the cream!" he cried.  "Why, I saw some more."

"It was sour."

"That's terrible," he exclaimed, sitting up.  "Terrible!"

For a moment she enjoyed his dismay.  Then she said, "Riply
Buckner's downstairs," and went out, closing the door.

"Send him up!" he called after her.  "Hilda, why don't you ever
listen for a minute?  Did I get any mail?"

There was no answer.  A moment later Riply came in.

"My gosh, are you still in bed?"

"I wrote on the play all night.  I almost finished Act Two."  He
pointed to his desk.

"That's what I want to talk to you about," said Riply.  "Mother
thinks we ought to get Miss Halliburton."

"What for?"

"Just to sort of be there."

Though Miss Halliburton was a pleasant person who combined the
occupations of French teacher and bridge teacher, unofficial
chaperon and children's friend, Basil felt that her superintendence
would give the project an unprofessional ring.

"She wouldn't interfere," went on Riply, obviously quoting his
mother.  "I'll be the business manager and you'll direct the play,
just like we said, but it would be good to have her there for
prompter and to keep order at rehearsals.  The girls' mothers'll
like it."

"All right," Basil agreed reluctantly.  "Now look, let's see who
we'll have in the cast.  First, there's the leading man--this
gentleman burglar that's called The Shadow.  Only it turns out at
the end that he's really a young man about town doing it on a bet,
and not really a burglar at all."

"That's you."

"No, that's you."

"Come on!  You're the best actor," protested Riply.

"No, I'm going to take a smaller part, so I can coach."

"Well, haven't I got to be business manager?"

Selecting the actresses, presumably all eager, proved to be a
difficult matter.  They settled finally on Imogene Bissel for
leading lady; Margaret Torrence for her friend, and Connie Davies
for "Miss Saunders, an old maid very kittenish."

On Riply's suggestion that several other girls wouldn't be pleased
at being left out, Basil introduced a maid and a cook, "who could
just sort of look in from the kitchen."  He rejected firmly Riply's
further proposal that there should be two or three maids, "a sort
of sewing woman," and a trained nurse.  In a house so clogged with
femininity even the most umbrageous of gentleman burglars would
have difficulty in moving about.

"I'll tell you two people we won't have," Basil said meditatively--
"that's Joe Gorman and Hubert Blair."

"I wouldn't be in it if we had Hubert Blair," asserted Riply.

"Neither would I."

Hubert Blair's almost miraculous successes with girls had caused
Basil and Riply much jealous pain.

They began calling up the prospective cast and immediately the
enterprise received its first blow.  Imogene Bissel was going to
Rochester, Minnesota, to have her appendix removed, and wouldn't be
back for three weeks.

They considered.

"How about Margaret Torrence?"

Basil shook his head.  He had vision of Leilia Van Baker as someone
rarer and more spirited than Margaret Torrence.  Not that Leilia
had much being, even to Basil--less than the Harrison Fisher girls
pinned around his wall at school.  But she was not Margaret
Torrence.  She was no one you could inevitably see by calling up
half an hour before on the phone.

He discarded candidate after candidate.  Finally a face began to
flash before his eyes, as if in another connection, but so
insistently that at length he spoke the name.

"Evelyn Beebe."

"Who?"

Though Evelyn Beebe was only sixteen, her precocious charms had
elevated her to an older crowd and to Basil she seemed of the very
generation of his heroine, Leilia Van Baker.  It was a little like
asking Sarah Bernhardt for her services, but once her name had
occurred to him, other possibilities seemed pale.

At noon they rang the Beebes' door-bell, stricken by a paralysis of
embarrassment when Evelyn opened the door herself and, with
politeness that concealed a certain surprise, asked them in.

Suddenly, through the portière of the living room, Basil saw and
recognized a young man in golf knickerbockers.

"I guess we better not come in," he said quickly.

"We'll come some other time," Riply added.

Together they started precipitately for the door, but she barred
their way.

"Don't be silly," she insisted.  "It's just Andy Lockheart."

Just Andy Lockheart--winner of the Western Golf Championship at
eighteen, captain of his freshman baseball team, handsome,
successful at everything he tried, a living symbol of the splendid,
glamorous world of Yale.  For a year Basil had walked like him and
tried unsuccessfully to play the piano by ear as Andy Lockheart was
able to do.

Through sheer ineptitude at escaping, they were edged into the
room.  Their plan suddenly seemed presumptuous and absurd.

Perceiving their condition Evelyn tried to soothe them with
pleasant banter.

"Well it's about time you came to see me," she told Basil.  "Here
I've been sitting at home every night waiting for you--ever since
the Davies dance.  Why haven't you been here before?"

He stared at her blankly, unable even to smile, and muttered:
"Yes, you have."

"I have though.  Sit down and tell me why you've been neglecting
me!  I suppose you've both been rushing the beautiful Imogene
Bissel."

"Why, I understand--" said Basil.  "Why, I heard from somewhere
that she's gone up to have some kind of an appendicitis--that is--"
He ran down to a pitch of inaudibility as Andy Lockheart at the
piano began playing a succession of thoughtful chords, which
resolved itself into the maxixe, an eccentric stepchild of the
tango.  Kicking back a rug and lifting her skirts a little, Evelyn
fluently tapped out a circle with her heels around the floor.

They sat inanimate as cushions on the sofa watching her.  She was
almost beautiful, with rather large features and bright fresh color
behind which her heart seemed to be trembling a little with
laughter.  Her voice and her lithe body were always mimicking,
ceaselessly caricaturing every sound and movement near by, until
even those who disliked her admitted that "Evelyn could always make
you laugh."  She finished her dance now with a false stumble and an
awed expression as she clutched at the piano, and Basil and Riply
chuckled.  Seeing their embarrassment lighten, she came and sat
down beside them, and they laughed again when she said:  "Excuse my
lack of self-control."

"Do you want to be the leading lady in a play we're going to give?"
demanded Basil with sudden desperation.  "We're going to have it at
the Martindale School, for the benefit of the Baby Welfare."

"Basil, this is so sudden."

Andy Lockheart turned around from the piano.

"What're you going to give--a minstrel show?"

"No, it's a crook play named The Captured Shadow.  Miss Halliburton
is going to coach it."  He suddenly realized the convenience of
that name to shelter himself behind.

"Why don't you give something like 'The Private Secretary'?"
interrupted Andy.  "There's a good play for you.  We gave it my
last year at school."

"Oh, no, it's all settled," said Basil quickly.  "We're going to
put on this play that I wrote."

"You wrote it yourself?" exclaimed Evelyn.

"Yes."

"My-y gosh!" said Andy.  He began to play again.

"Look, Evelyn," said Basil.  "It's only for three weeks, and you'd
be the leading lady."

She laughed.  "Oh, no.  I couldn't.  Why don't you get Imogene?"

"She's sick, I tell you.  Listen--"

"Or Margaret Torrence?"

"I don't want anybody but you."

The directness of this appeal touched her and momentarily she
hesitated.  But the hero of the Western Golf Championship turned
around from the piano with a teasing smile and she shook her head.

"I can't do it, Basil.  I may have to go East with the family."

Reluctantly Basil and Riply got up.

"Gosh, I wish you'd be in it, Evelyn."

"I wish I could."

Basil lingered, thinking fast, wanting her more than ever; indeed,
without her, it scarcely seemed worth while to go on with the play.
Suddenly a desperate expedient took shape on his lips:

"You certainly would be wonderful.  You see, the leading man is
going to be Hubert Blair."

Breathlessly he watched her, saw her hesitate.

"Good-by," he said.

She came with them to the door and then out on the veranda,
frowning a little.

"How long did you say the rehearsals would take?" she asked
thoughtfully.


II


On an August evening three days later Basil read the play to the
cast on Miss Halliburton's porch.  He was nervous and at first
there were interruptions of "Louder" and "Not so fast."  Just as
his audience was beginning to be amused by the repartee of the two
comic crooks--repartee that had seen service with Weber and Fields--
he was interrupted by the late arrival of Hubert Blair.

Hubert was fifteen, a somewhat shallow boy save for two or three
felicities which he possessed to an extraordinary degree.  But one
excellence suggests the presence of others, and young ladies never
failed to respond to his most casual fancy, enduring his fickleness
of heart and never convinced that his fundamental indifference
might not be overcome.  They were dazzled by his flashing self-
confidence, by his cherubic ingenuousness, which concealed a shrewd
talent for getting around people, and by his extraordinary physical
grace.  Long-legged, beautifully proportioned, he had that
tumbler's balance usually characteristic only of men "built near
the ground."  He was in constant motion that was a delight to
watch, and Evelyn Beebe was not the only older girl who had found
in him a mysterious promise and watched him for a long time with
something more than curiosity.

He stood in the doorway now with an expression of bogus reverence
on his round pert face.

"Excuse me," he said.  "Is this the First Methodist Episcopal
Church?"  Everybody laughed--even Basil.  "I didn't know.  I
thought maybe I was in the right church, but in the wrong pew."

They laughed again, somewhat discouraged.  Basil waited until
Hubert had seated himself beside Evelyn Beebe.  Then he began to
read once more, while the others, fascinated, watched Hubert's
efforts to balance a chair on its hind legs.  This squeaky
experiment continued as an undertone to the reading.  Not until
Basil's desperate "Now, here's where you come in, Hube," did
attention swing back to the play.

Basil read for more than an hour.  When, at the end, he closed the
composition book and looked up shyly, there was a burst of
spontaneous applause.  He had followed his models closely, and for
all its grotesqueries, the result was actually interesting--it was
a play.  Afterward he lingered, talking to Miss Halliburton, and he
walked home glowing with excitement and rehearsing a little by
himself into the August night.

The first week of rehearsal was a matter of Basil climbing back and
forth from auditorium to stage, crying, "No!  Look here, Connie;
you come in more like this."  Then things began to happen.  Mrs.
Van Schellinger came to rehearsal one day, and lingering afterward,
announced that she couldn't let Gladys be in "a play about
criminals."  Her theory was that this element could be removed; for
instance, the two comic crooks could be changed to "two funny
farmers."

Basil listened with horror.  When she had gone he assured Miss
Halliburton that he would change nothing.  Luckily Gladys played
the cook, an interpolated part that could be summarily struck out,
but her absence was felt in another way.  She was tranquil and
tractable, "the most carefully brought-up girl in town," and at her
withdrawal rowdiness appeared during rehearsals.  Those who had
only such lines as "I'll ask Mrs. Van Baker, sir," in Act I and
"No, ma'am," in Act III showed a certain tendency to grow restless
in between.  So now it was:

"Please keep that dog quiet or else send him home!" or:

"Where's that maid?  Wake up, Margaret, for heaven's sake!" or:

"What is there to laugh at that's so darn funny?"

More and more the chief problem was the tactful management of
Hubert Blair.  Apart from his unwillingness to learn his lines, he
was a satisfactory hero, but off the stage he became a nuisance.
He gave an endless private performance for Evelyn Beebe, which took
such forms as chasing her amorously around the hall or of flipping
peanuts over his shoulder to land mysteriously on the stage.
Called to order, he would mutter, "Aw, shut up yourself," just loud
enough for Basil to guess, but not to hear.

But Evelyn Beebe was all that Basil had expected.  Once on the
stage, she compelled a breathless attention, and Basil recognized
this by adding to her part.  He envied the half-sentimental fun
that she and Hubert derived from their scenes together and he felt
a vague, impersonal jealousy that almost every night after
rehearsal they drove around together in Hubert's car.

One afternoon when matters had progressed a fortnight, Hubert came
in an hour late, loafed through the first act and then informed
Miss Halliburton that he was going home.

"What for?" Basil demanded.

"I've got some things I got to do."

"Are they important?"

"What business is that of yours?"

"Of course it's my business," said Basil heatedly, whereupon Miss
Halliburton interfered.

"There's no use of anybody getting angry.  What Basil means,
Hubert, is that if it's just some small thing--why, we're all
giving up our pleasures to make this play a success."

Hubert listened with obvious boredom.

"I've got to drive downtown and get father."

He looked coolly at Basil, as if challenging him to deny the
adequacy of this explanation.

"Then why did you come an hour late?" demanded Basil.

"Because I had to do something for mother."

A group had gathered and he glanced around triumphantly.  It was
one of those sacred excuses, and only Basil saw that it was
disingenuous.

"Oh, tripe!" he said.

"Maybe you think so--Bossy."

Basil took a step toward him, his eyes blazing.

"What'd you say?"

"I said 'Bossy.'  Isn't that what they call you at school?"

It was true.  It had followed him home.  Even as he went white with
rage a vast impotence surged over him at the realization that the
past was always lurking near.  The faces of school were around him,
sneering and watching.  Hubert laughed.

"Get out!" said Basil in a strained voice.  "Go on!  Get right
out!"

Hubert laughed again, but as Basil took a step toward him he
retreated.

"I don't want to be in your play anyhow.  I never did."

"Then go on out of this hall."

"Now, Basil!"  Miss Halliburton hovered breathlessly beside them.
Hubert laughed again and looked about for his cap.

"I wouldn't be in your crazy old show," he said.  He turned slowly
and jauntily, and sauntered out the door.

Riply Buckner read Hubert's part that afternoon, but there was a
cloud upon the rehearsal.  Miss Beebe's performance lacked its
customary verve and the others clustered and whispered, falling
silent when Basil came near.  After the rehearsal, Miss
Halliburton, Riply and Basil held a conference.  Upon Basil flatly
refusing to take the leading part, it was decided to enlist a
certain Mayall De Bec, known slightly to Riply, who had made a name
for himself in theatricals at the Central High School.

But next day a blow fell that was irreparable.  Evelyn, flushed and
uncomfortable, told Basil and Miss Halliburton that her family's
plans had changed--they were going East next week and she couldn't
be in the play after all.  Basil understood.  Only Hubert had held
her this long.

"Good-by," he said gloomily.

His manifest despair shamed her and she tried to justify herself.

"Really, I can't help it.  Oh, Basil, I'm so sorry!"

"Couldn't you stay over a week with me after your family goes?"
Miss Halliburton asked innocently.

"Not possibly.  Father wants us all to go together.  That's the
only reason.  If it wasn't for that I'd stay."

"All right," Basil said.  "Good-by."

"Basil, you're not mad, are you?"  A gust of repentance swept over
her.  "I'll do anything to help.  I'll come to rehearsals this week
until you get someone else, and then I'll try to help her all I
can.  But father says we've got to go."

In vain Riply tried to raise Basil's morale after the rehearsal
that afternoon, making suggestions which he waved contemptuously
away.  Margaret Torrence?  Connie Davies?  They could hardly play
the parts they had.  It seemed to Basil as if the undertaking was
falling to pieces before his eyes.

It was still early when he got home.  He sat dispiritedly by his
bedroom window, watching the little Barnfield boy playing a
lonesome game by himself in the yard next door.

His mother came in at five, and immediately sensed his depression.

"Teddy Barnfield has the mumps," she said, in an effort to distract
him.  "That's why he's playing there all alone."

"Has he?" he responded listlessly.

"It isn't at all dangerous, but it's very contagious.  You had it
when you were seven."

"H'm."

She hesitated.

"Are you worrying about your play?  Has anything gone wrong?"

"No, mother.  I just want to be alone."

After a while he got up and started after a malted milk at the soda
fountain around the corner.  It was half in his mind to see Mr.
Beebe and ask him if he couldn't postpone his trip East.  If he
could only be sure that that was Evelyn's real reason.

The sight of Evelyn's nine-year-old brother coming along the street
broke in on his thoughts.

"Hello, Ham.  I hear you're going away."

Ham nodded.

"Going next week.  To the seashore."

Basil looked at him speculatively, as if, through his proximity to
Evelyn, he held the key to the power of moving her.

"Where are you going now?" he asked.

"I'm going to play with Teddy Barnfield."

"What!" Basil exclaimed.  "Why, didn't you know--"  He stopped.  A
wild, criminal idea broke over him; his mother's words floated
through his mind:  "It isn't at all dangerous, but it's very
contagious."  If little Ham Beebe got the mumps, and Evelyn
COULDN'T go away--

He came to a decision quickly and coolly.

"Teddy's playing in his back yard," he said.  "If you want to see
him without going through his house, why don't you go down this
street and turn up the alley?"

"All right.  Thanks," said Ham trustingly.

Basil stood for a minute looking after him until he turned the
corner into the alley, fully aware that it was the worst thing he
had ever done in his life.


III


A week later Mrs. Lee had an early supper--all Basil's favorite
things: chipped beef, french-fried potatoes, sliced peaches and
cream, and devil's food.

Every few minutes Basil said, "Gosh!  I wonder what time it is,"
and went out in the hall to look at the clock.  "Does that clock
work right?" he demanded with sudden suspicion.  It was the first
time the matter had ever interested him.

"Perfectly all right.  If you eat so fast you'll have indigestion
and then you won't be able to act well."

"What do you think of the program?" he asked for the third time.
"Riply Buckner, Jr., presents Basil Duke Lee's comedy, 'The
Captured Shadow.'"

"I think it's very nice."

"He doesn't really present it."

"It sounds very well though."

"I wonder what time it is?" he inquired.

"You just said it was ten minutes after six."

"Well, I guess I better be starting."

"Eat your peaches, Basil.  If you don't eat you won't be able to
act."

"I don't have to act," he said patiently.  "All I am is a small
part, and it wouldn't matter--"  It was too much trouble to
explain.

"Please don't smile at me when I come on, mother," he requested.
"Just act as if I was anybody else."

"Can't I even say how-do-you-do?"

"What?"  Humor was lost on him.  He said good-by.  Trying very hard
to digest not his food but his heart, which had somehow slipped
down into his stomach, he started off for the Martindale School.

As its yellow windows loomed out of the night his excitement became
insupportable; it bore no resemblance to the building he had been
entering so casually for three weeks.  His footsteps echoed
symbolically and portentously in its deserted hall; upstairs there
was only the janitor setting out the chairs in rows, and Basil
wandered about the vacant stage until someone came in.

It was Mayall De Bec, the tall, clever, not very likeable youth
they had imported from Lower Crest Avenue to be the leading man.
Mayall, far from being nervous, tried to engage Basil in casual
conversation.  He wanted to know if Basil thought Evelyn Beebe
would mind if he went to see her sometime when the show was over.
Basil supposed not.  Mayall said he had a friend whose father owned
a brewery who owned a twelve-cylinder car.

Basil said, "Gee!"

At quarter to seven the participants arrived in groups--Riply
Buckner with the six boys he had gathered to serve as ticket takers
and ushers; Miss Halliburton, trying to seem very calm and
reliable; Evelyn Beebe, who came in as if she were yielding herself
up to something and whose glance at Basil seemed to say:  "Well, it
looks as if I'm really going through with it after all."

Mayall De Bec was to make up the boys and Miss Halliburton the
girls.  Basil soon came to the conclusion that Miss Halliburton
knew nothing about make-up, but he judged it diplomatic, in that
lady's overwrought condition, to say nothing, but to take each girl
to Mayall for corrections when Miss Halliburton had done.

An exclamation from Bill Kampf, standing at a crack in the curtain,
brought Basil to his side.  A tall bald-headed man in spectacles
had come in and was shown to a seat in the middle of the house,
where he examined the program.  He was the public.  Behind those
waiting eyes, suddenly so mysterious and incalculable, was the
secret of the play's failure or success.  He finished the program,
took off his glasses and looked around.  Two old ladies and two
little boys came in, followed immediately by a dozen more.

"Hey, Riply," Basil called softly.  "Tell them to put the children
down in front."

Riply, struggling into his policeman's uniform, looked up, and the
long black mustache on his upper lip quivered indignantly.

"I thought of that long ago."

The hall, filling rapidly, was now alive with the buzz of
conversation.  The children in front were jumping up and down in
their seats, and everyone was talking and calling back and forth
save the several dozen cooks and housemaids who sat in stiff and
quiet pairs about the room.

Then, suddenly, everything was ready.  It was incredible.  "Stop!
Stop!" Basil wanted to say.  "It can't be ready.  There must be
something--there always has been something," but the darkened
auditorium and the piano and violin from Geyer's Orchestra playing
"Meet Me in the Shadows" belied his words.  Miss Saunders, Leilia
Van Baker and Leilia's friend, Estella Carrage, were already seated
on the stage, and Miss Halliburton stood in the wings with the
prompt book.  Suddenly the music ended and the chatter in front
died away.

"Oh, gosh!" Basil thought.  "Oh, my gosh!"

The curtain rose.  A clear voice floated up from somewhere.  Could
it be from that unfamiliar group on the stage?


I will, Miss Saunders.  I tell you I will!

But, Miss Leilia, I don't consider the newspapers proper for young
ladies nowadays.

I don't care.  I want to read about this wonderful gentleman
burglar they call The Shadow.


It was actually going on.  Almost before he realized it, a ripple
of laughter passed over the audience as Evelyn gave her imitation
of Miss Saunders behind her back.

"Get ready, Basil," breathed Miss Halliburton.

Basil and Bill Kampf, the crooks, each took an elbow of Victor Van
Baker, the dissolute son of the house, and made ready to aid him
through the front door.

It was strangely natural to be out on the stage with all those eyes
looking up encouragingly.  His mother's face floated past him,
other faces that he recognized and remembered.

Bill Kampf stumbled on a line and Basil picked him up quickly and
went on.


MISS SAUNDERS:  So you are alderman from the Sixth Ward?

RABBIT SIMMONS:  Yes, ma'am.

MISS SAUNDERS (shaking her head kittenishly):  Just what is an
alderman?

CHINAMAN RUDD:  An alderman is halfway between a politician and a
pirate.


This was one of Basil's lines that he was particularly proud of--
but there was not a sound from the audience, not a smile.  A moment
later Bill Kampf absent-mindedly wiped his forehead with his
handkerchief and then stared at it, startled by the red stains of
make-up on it--and the audience roared.  The theater was like that.


MISS SAUNDERS:  Then you believe in spirits, Mr. Rudd.

CHINAMAN RUDD:  Yes, ma'am, I certainly do believe in spirits.
Have you got any?


The first big scene came.  On the darkened stage a window rose
slowly and Mayall De Bec, "in a full evening dress," climbed over
the sill.  He was tiptoeing cautiously from one side of the stage
to the other, when Leilia Van Baker came in.  For a moment she was
frightened, but he assured her that he was a friend of her brother
Victor.  They talked.  She told him naïvely yet feelingly of her
admiration for The Shadow, of whose exploits she had read.  She
hoped, though, that The Shadow would not come here tonight, as the
family jewels were all in that safe at the right.

The stranger was hungry.  He had been late for his dinner and so
had not been able to get any that night.  Would he have some
crackers and milk?  That would be fine.  Scarcely had she left the
room when he was on his knees by the safe, fumbling at the catch,
undeterred by the unpromising word "Cake" stencilled on the safe's
front.  It swung open, but he heard footsteps outside and closed it
just as Leilia came back with the crackers and milk.

They lingered, obviously attracted to each other.  Miss Saunders
came in, very kittenish, and was introduced.  Again Evelyn mimicked
her behind her back and the audience roared.  Other members of the
household appeared and were introduced to the stranger.

What's this?  A banging at the door, and Mulligan, a policeman,
rushes in.


We have just received word from the Central Office that the
notorious Shadow has been seen climbing in the window!  No one can
leave this house tonight!


The curtain fell.  The first rows of the audience--the younger
brothers and sisters of the cast--were extravagant in their
enthusiasm.  The actors took a bow.

A moment later Basil found himself alone with Evelyn Beebe on the
stage.  A weary doll in her make-up she was leaning against a
table.

"Heigh-ho, Basil," she said.

She had not quite forgiven him for holding her to her promise after
her little brother's mumps had postponed their trip East, and Basil
had tactfully avoided her, but now they met in the genial glow of
excitement and success.

"You were wonderful," he said--"Wonderful!"

He lingered a moment.  He could never please her, for she wanted
someone like herself, someone who could reach her through her
senses, like Hubert Blair.  Her intuition told her that Basil was
of a certain vague consequence; beyond that his incessant attempts
to make people think and feel, bothered and wearied her.  But
suddenly, in the glow of the evening, they leaned forward and
kissed peacefully, and from that moment, because they had no common
ground even to quarrel on, they were friends for life.

When the curtain rose upon the second act Basil slipped down a
flight of stairs and up to another to the back of the hall, where
he stood watching in the darkness.  He laughed silently when the
audience laughed, enjoying it as if it were a play he had never
seen before.

There was a second and a third act scene that were very similar.
In each of them The Shadow, alone on the stage, was interrupted by
Miss Saunders.  Mayall De Bec, having had but ten days of
rehearsal, was inclined to confuse the two, but Basil was totally
unprepared for what happened.  Upon Connie's entrance Mayall spoke
his third-act line and involuntarily Connie answered in kind.

Others coming on the stage were swept up in the nervousness and
confusion, and suddenly they were playing the third act in the
middle of the second.  It happened so quickly that for a moment
Basil had only a vague sense that something was wrong.  Then he
dashed down one stairs and up another and into the wings, crying:

"Let down the curtain!  Let down the curtain!"

The boys who stood there aghast sprang to the rope.  In a minute
Basil, breathless, was facing the audience.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he said, "there's been changes in the cast
and what just happened was a mistake.  If you'll excuse us we'd
like to do that scene over."

He stepped back in the wings to a flutter of laughter and applause.

"All right, Mayall!" he called excitedly.  "On the stage alone.
Your line is:  'I just want to see that the jewels are all right,'
and Connie's is:  'Go ahead, don't mind me.'  All right!  Curtain
up!"

In a moment things righted themselves.  Someone brought water for
Miss Halliburton, who was in a state of collapse, and as the act
ended they all took a curtain call once more.  Twenty minutes later
it was over.  The hero clasped Leilia Van Baker to his breast,
confessing that he was The Shadow, "and a captured Shadow at that";
the curtain went up and down, up and down; Miss Halliburton was
dragged unwillingly on the stage and the ushers came up the aisles
laden with flowers.  Then everything became informal and the actors
mingled happily with the audience, laughing and important,
congratulated from all sides.  An old man whom Basil didn't know
came up to him and shook his hand, saying, "You're a young man
that's going to be heard from some day," and a reporter from the
paper asked him if he was really only fifteen.  It might all have
been very bad and demoralizing for Basil, but it was already behind
him.  Even as the crowd melted away and the last few people spoke
to him and went out, he felt a great vacancy come into his heart.
It was over, it was done and gone--all that work, and interest and
absorption.  It was a hollowness like fear.

"Good night, Miss Halliburton.  Good night, Evelyn."

"Good night, Basil.  Congratulations, Basil.  Good night."

"Where's my coat?  Good night, Basil."

"Leave your costumes on the stage, please.  They've got to go back
tomorrow."

He was almost the last to leave, mounting to the stage for a moment
and looking around the deserted hall.  His mother was waiting and
they strolled home together through the first cool night of the
year.

"Well, I thought it went very well indeed.  Were you satisfied?"
He didn't answer for a moment.  "Weren't you satisfied with the way
it went?"

"Yes."  He turned his head away.

"What's the matter?"

"Nothing," and then, "Nobody really cares, do they?"

"About what?"

"About anything."

"Everybody cares about different things.  I care about you, for
instance."

Instinctively he ducked away from a hand extended caressingly
toward him:  "Oh, don't.  I don't mean like that."

"You're just overwrought, dear."

"I am not overwrought.  I just feel sort of sad."

"You shouldn't feel sad.  Why, people told me after the play--"

"Oh, that's all over.  Don't talk about that--don't ever talk to me
about that any more."

"Then what are you sad about?"

"Oh, about a little boy."

"What little boy?"

"Oh, little Ham--you wouldn't understand."

"When we get home I want you to take a real hot bath and quiet your
nerves."

"All right."

But when he got home he fell immediately into deep sleep on the
sofa.  She hesitated.  Then covering him with a blanket and a
comforter, she pushed a pillow under his protesting head and went
upstairs.

She knelt for a long time beside her bed.

"God, help him! help him," she prayed, "because he needs help that
I can't give him any more."


THE END





CRAZY SUNDAY


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


American Mercury (October 1932)



It was Sunday--not a day, but rather a gap between two other days.
Behind, for all of them, lay sets and sequences, the long waits
under the crane that swung the microphone, the hundred miles a day
by automobiles to and fro across a county, the struggles of rival
ingenuities in the conference rooms, the ceaseless compromise, the
clash and strain of many personalities fighting for their lives.
And now Sunday, with individual life starting up again, with a glow
kindling in eyes that had been glazed with monotony the afternoon
before.  Slowly as the hours waned they came awake like
"Puppenfeen" in a toy shop: an intense colloquy in a corner, lovers
disappearing to neck in a hall.  And the feeling of "Hurry, it's
not too late, but for God's sake hurry before the blessed forty
hours of leisure are over."

Joel Coles was writing continuity.  He was twenty-eight and not yet
broken by Hollywood.  He had had what were considered nice
assignments since his arrival six months before and he submitted
his scenes and sequences with enthusiasm.  He referred to himself
modestly as a hack but really did not think of it that way.  His
mother had been a successful actress; Joel had spent his childhood
between London and New York trying to separate the real from the
unreal, or at least to keep one guess ahead.  He was a handsome man
with the pleasant cow-brown eyes that in 1913 had gazed out at
Broadway audiences from his mother's face.

When the invitation came it made him sure that he was getting
somewhere.  Ordinarily he did not go out on Sundays but stayed
sober and took work home with him.  Recently they had given him a
Eugene O'Neill play destined for a very important lady indeed.
Everything he had done so far had pleased Miles Calman, and Miles
Calman was the only director on the lot who did not work under a
supervisor and was responsible to the money men alone.  Everything
was clicking into place in Joel's career.  ("This is Mr. Calman's
secretary.  Will you come to tea from four to six Sunday--he lives
in Beverly Hills, number--.")

Joel was flattered.  It would be a party out of the top-drawer.  It
was a tribute to himself as a young man of promise.  The Marion
Davies' crowd, the high-hats, the big currency numbers, perhaps
even Dietrich and Garbo and the Marquise, people who were not seen
everywhere, would probably be at Calman's.

"I won't take anything to drink," he assured himself.  Calman was
audibly tired of rummies, and thought it was a pity the industry
could not get along without them.

Joel agreed that writers drank too much--he did himself, but he
wouldn't this afternoon.  He wished Miles would be within hearing
when the cocktails were passed to hear his succinct, unobtrusive,
"No, thank you."

Miles Calman's house was built for great emotional moments--there
was an air of listening, as if the far silences of its vistas hid
an audience, but this afternoon it was thronged, as though people
had been bidden rather than asked.  Joel noted with pride that only
two other writers from the studio were in the crowd, an ennobled
limey and, somewhat to his surprise, Nat Keogh, who had evoked
Calman's impatient comment on drunks.

Stella Calman (Stella Walker, of course) did not move on to her
other guests after she spoke to Joel.  She lingered--she looked at
him with the sort of beautiful look that demands some sort of
acknowledgment and Joe drew quickly on the dramatic adequacy
inherited from his mother:

"Well, you look about sixteen!  Where's your kiddy car?"

She was visibly pleased; she lingered.  He felt that he should say
something more, something confident and easy--he had first met her
when she was struggling for bits in New York.  At the moment a tray
slid up and Stella put a cocktail glass into his hand.

"Everybody's afraid, aren't they?" he said, looking at it absently.
"Everybody watches for everybody else's blunders, or tries to make
sure they're with people that'll do them credit.  Of course that's
not true in your house," he covered himself hastily.  "I just meant
generally in Hollywood."

Stella agreed.  She presented several people to Joel as if he were
very important.  Reassuring himself that Miles was at the other
side of the room, Joel drank the cocktail.

"So you have a baby?" he said.  "That's the time to look out.
After a pretty woman has had her first child, she's very
vulnerable, because she wants to be reassured about her own charm.
She's got to have some new man's unqualified devotion to prove to
herself she hasn't lost anything."

"I never get anybody's unqualified devotion," Stella said rather
resentfully.

"They're afraid of your husband."

"You think that's it?"  She wrinkled her brow over the idea; then
the conversation was interrupted at the exact moment Joel would
have chosen.

Her attentions had given him confidence.  Not for him to join safe
groups, to slink to refuge under the wings of such acquaintances as
he saw about the room.  He walked to the window and looked out
toward the Pacific, colorless under its sluggish sunset.  It was
good here--the American Riviera and all that, if there were ever
time to enjoy it.  The handsome, well-dressed people in the room,
the lovely girls, and the--well, the lovely girls.  You couldn't
have everything.

He saw Stella's fresh boyish face, with the tired eyelid that
always drooped a little over one eye, moving about among her guests
and he wanted to sit with her and talk a long time as if she were a
girl instead of a name; he followed her to see if she paid anyone
as much attention as she had paid him.  He took another cocktail--
not because he needed confidence but because she had given him so
much of it.  Then he sat down beside the director's mother.

"Your son's gotten to be a legend, Mrs. Calman--Oracle and a Man of
Destiny and all that.  Personally, I'm against him but I'm in a
minority.  What do you think of him?  Are you impressed?  Are you
surprised how far he's gone?"

"No, I'm not surprised," she said calmly.  "We always expected a
lot from Miles."

"Well now, that's unusual," remarked Joel.  "I always think all
mothers are like Napoleon's mother.  My mother didn't want me to
have anything to do with the entertainment business.  She wanted me
to go to West Point and be safe."

"We always had every confidence in Miles." . . .

He stood by the built-in bar of the dining room with the good-
humored, heavy-drinking, highly paid Nat Keogh.

"--I made a hundred grand during the year and lost forty grand
gambling, so now I've hired a manager."

"You mean an agent," suggested Joel.

"No, I've got that too.  I mean a manager.  I make over everything
to my wife and then he and my wife get together and hand me out the
money.  I pay him five thousand a year to hand me out my money."

"You mean your agent."

"No, I mean my manager, and I'm not the only one--a lot of other
irresponsible people have him."

"Well, if you're irresponsible why are you responsible enough to
hire a manager?"

"I'm just irresponsible about gambling.  Look here--"

A singer performed; Joel and Nat went forward with the others to
listen.


II


The singing reached Joel vaguely; he felt happy and friendly toward
all the people gathered there, people of bravery and industry,
superior to a bourgeoisie that outdid them in ignorance and loose
living, risen to a position of the highest prominence in a nation
that for a decade had wanted only to be entertained.  He liked them--
he loved them.  Great waves of good feeling flowed through him.

As the singer finished his number and there was a drift toward the
hostess to say good-by, Joel had an idea.  He would give them
"Building It Up," his own composition.  It was his only parlor
trick, it had amused several parties and it might please Stella
Walker.  Possessed by the hunch, his blood throbbing with the
scarlet corpuscles of exhibitionism, he sought her.

"Of course," she cried.  "Please!  Do you need anything?"

"Someone has to be the secretary that I'm supposed to be dictating
to."

"I'll be her."

As the word spread the guests in the hall, already putting on their
coats to leave, drifted back and Joel faced the eyes of many
strangers.  He had a dim foreboding, realizing that the man who had
just performed was a famous radio entertainer.  Then someone said
"Sh!" and he was alone with Stella, the center of a sinister Indian-
like half-circle.  Stella smiled up at him expectantly--he began.

His burlesque was based upon the cultural limitations of Mr. Dave
Silverstein, an independent producer; Silverstein was presumed to
be dictating a letter outlining a treatment of a story he had
bought.

"--a story of divorce, the younger generators and the Foreign
Legion," he heard his voice saying, with the intonations of Mr.
Silverstein.  "But we got to build it up, see?"

A sharp pang of doubt struck through him.  The faces surrounding
him in the gently molded light were intent and curious, but there
was no ghost of a smile anywhere; directly in front the Great Lover
of the screen glared at him with an eye as keen as the eye of a
potato.  Only Stella Walker looked up at him with a radiant, never
faltering smile.

"If we make him a Menjou type, then we get a sort of Michael Arlen
only with a Honolulu atmosphere."

Still not a ripple in front, but in the rear a rustling, a
perceptible shift toward the left, toward the front door.

"--then she says she feels this sex appil for him and he burns out
and says 'Oh go on destroy yourself'--"

At some point he heard Nat Keogh snicker and here and there were a
few encouraging faces, but as he finished he had the sickening
realization that he had made a fool of himself in view of an
important section of the picture world, upon whose favor depended
his career.

For a moment he existed in the midst of a confused silence, broken
by a general trek for the door.  He felt the undercurrent of
derision that rolled through the gossip; then--all this was in the
space of ten seconds--the Great Lover, his eye hard and empty as
the eye of a needle, shouted "Boo!  Boo!" voicing in an overtone
what he felt was the mood of the crowd.  It was the resentment of
the professional toward the amateur, of the community toward the
stranger, the thumbs-down of the clan.

Only Stella Walker was still standing near and thanking him as if
he had been an unparalleled success, as if it hadn't occurred to
her that anyone hadn't liked it.  As Nat Keogh helped him into his
overcoat, a great wave of self-disgust swept over him and he clung
desperately to his rule of never betraying an inferior emotion
until he no longer felt it.

"I was a flop," he said lightly, to Stella.  "Never mind, it's a
good number when appreciated.  Thanks for your coöperation."

The smile did not leave her face--he bowed rather drunkenly and Nat
drew him toward the door. . . .

The arrival of his breakfast awakened him into a broken and ruined
world.  Yesterday he was himself, a point of fire against an
industry, today he felt that he was pitted under an enormous
disadvantage, against those faces, against individual contempt and
collective sneer.  Worse than that, to Miles Calman he was become
one of those rummies, stripped of dignity, whom Calman regretted he
was compelled to use.  To Stella Walker, on whom he had forced a
martyrdom to preserve the courtesy of her house--her opinion he did
not dare to guess.  His gastric juices ceased to flow and he set
his poached eggs back on the telephone table.  He wrote:


DEAR MILES:  You can imagine my profound self-disgust.  I confess
to a taint of exhibitionism, but at six o'clock in the afternoon,
in broad daylight!  Good God!  My apologies to your wife.

                                        Yours ever,

                                                 JOEL COLES.


Joel emerged from his office on the lot only to slink like a
malefactor to the tobacco store.  So suspicious was his manner that
one of the studio police asked to see his admission card.  He had
decided to eat lunch outside when Nat Keogh, confident and
cheerful, overtook him.

"What do you mean you're in permanent retirement?  What if that
Three Piece Suit did boo you?

"Why, listen," he continued, drawing Joel into the studio
restaurant.  "The night of one of his premiers at Grauman's, Joe
Squires kicked his tail while he was bowing to the crowd.  The ham
said Joe'd hear from him later but when Joe called him up at eight
o'clock next day and said, 'I thought I was going to hear from
you,' he hung up the phone."

The preposterous story cheered Joel, and he found a gloomy
consolation in staring at the group at the next table, the sad,
lovely Siamese twins, the mean dwarfs, the proud giant from the
circus picture.  But looking beyond at the yellow-stained faces of
pretty women, their eyes all melancholy and startling with mascara,
their ball gowns garish in full day, he saw a group who had been at
Calman's and winced.

"Never again," he exclaimed aloud, "absolutely my last social
appearance in Hollywood!"

The following morning a telegram was waiting for him at his office:


You were one of the most agreeable people at our party.  Expect you
at my sister June's buffet supper next Sunday.

                                         STELLA WALKER CALMAN.


The blood rushed fast through his veins for a feverish minute.
Incredulously he read the telegram over.

"Well, that's the sweetest thing I ever heard of in my life!"


III


Crazy Sunday again.  Joel slept until eleven, then he read a
newspaper to catch up with the past week.  He lunched in his room
on trout, avocado salad and a pint of California wine.  Dressing
for the tea, he selected a pin-check suit, a blue shirt, a burnt
orange tie.  There were dark circles of fatigue under his eyes.  In
his second-hand car he drove to the Riviera apartments.  As he was
introducing himself to Stella's sister, Miles and Stella arrived in
riding clothes--they had been quarrelling fiercely most of the
afternoon on all the dirt roads back of Beverly Hills.

Miles Calman, tall, nervous, with a desperate humor and the
unhappiest eyes Joel ever saw, was an artist from the top of his
curiously shaped head to his niggerish feet.  Upon these last he
stood firmly--he had never made a cheap picture though he had
sometimes paid heavily for the luxury of making experimental flops.
In spite of his excellent company, one could not be with him long
without realizing that he was not a well man.

From the moment of their entrance Joel's day bound itself up
inextricably with theirs.  As he joined the group around them
Stella turned away from it with an impatient little tongue click--
and Miles Calman said to the man who happened to be next to him:

"Go easy on Eva Goebel.  There's hell to pay about her at home."
Miles turned to Joel, "I'm sorry I missed you at the office
yesterday.  I spent the afternoon at the analyst's."

"You being psychoanalyzed?"

"I have been for months.  First I went for claustrophobia, now I'm
trying to get my whole life cleared up.  They say it'll take over a
year."

"There's nothing the matter with your life," Joel assured him.

"Oh, no?  Well, Stella seems to think so.  Ask anybody--they can
all tell you about it," he said bitterly.

A girl perched herself on the arm of Miles' chair; Joel crossed to
Stella, who stood disconsolately by the fire.

"Thank you for your telegram," he said.  "It was darn sweet.  I
can't imagine anybody as good-looking as you are being so good-
humored."

She was a little lovelier than he had ever seen her and perhaps the
unstinted admiration in his eyes prompted her to unload on him--it
did not take long, for she was obviously at the emotional bursting
point.

"--and Miles has been carrying on this thing for two years, and I
never knew.  Why, she was one of my best friends, always in the
house.  Finally when people began to come to me, Miles had to admit
it."

She sat down vehemently on the arm of Joel's chair.  Her riding
breeches were the color of the chair and Joel saw that the mass of
her hair was made up of some strands of red gold and some of pale
gold, so that it could not be dyed, and that she had on no make-up.
She was that good-looking--

Still quivering with the shock of her discovery, Stella found
unbearable the spectacle of a new girl hovering over Miles; she led
Joel into a bedroom, and seated at either end of a big bed they
went on talking.  People on their way to the washroom glanced in
and made wisecracks, but Stella, emptying out her story, paid no
attention.  After a while Miles stuck his head in the door and
said, "There's no use trying to explain something to Joel in half
an hour that I don't understand myself and the psychoanalyst says
will take a whole year to understand."

She talked on as if Miles were not there.  She loved Miles, she
said--under considerable difficulties she had always been faithful
to him.

"The psychoanalyst told Miles that he had a mother complex.  In his
first marriage he transferred his mother complex to his wife, you
see--and then his sex turned to me.  But when we married the thing
repeated itself--he transferred his mother complex to me and all
his libido turned toward this other woman."

Joel knew that this probably wasn't gibberish--yet it sounded like
gibberish.  He knew Eva Goebel; she was a motherly person, older
and probably wiser than Stella, who was a golden child.

Miles now suggested impatiently that Joel come back with them since
Stella had so much to say, so they drove out to the mansion in
Beverly Hills.  Under the high ceilings the situation seemed more
dignified and tragic.  It was an eerie bright night with the dark
very clear outside of all the windows and Stella all rose-gold
raging and crying around the room.  Joel did not quite believe in
picture actresses' grief.  They have other preoccupations--they are
beautiful rose-gold figures blown full of life by writers and
directors, and after hours they sit around and talk in whispers and
giggle innuendoes, and the ends of many adventures flow through
them.

Sometimes he pretended to listen and instead thought how well she
was got up--sleek breeches with a matched set of legs in them, an
Italian-colored sweater with a little high neck, and a short brown
chamois coat.  He couldn't decide whether she was an imitation of
an English lady or an English lady was an imitation of her.  She
hovered somewhere between the realest of realities and the most
blatant of impersonations.

"Miles is so jealous of me that he questions everything I do," she
cried scornfully.  "When I was in New York I wrote him that I'd
been to the theater with Eddie Baker.  Miles was so jealous he
phoned me ten times in one day."

"I was wild," Miles snuffled sharply, a habit he had in times of
stress.  "The analyst couldn't get any results for a week."

Stella shook her head despairingly.  "Did you expect me just to sit
in the hotel for three weeks?"

"I don't expect anything.  I admit that I'm jealous.  I try not to
be.  I worked on that with Dr. Bridgebane, but it didn't do any
good.  I was jealous of Joel this afternoon when you sat on the arm
of his chair."

"You were?"  She started up.  "You were!  Wasn't there somebody on
the arm of your chair?  And did you speak to me for two hours?"

"You were telling your troubles to Joel in the bedroom."

"When I think that that woman"--she seemed to believe that to omit
Eva Goebel's name would be to lessen her reality--"used to come
here--"

"All right--all right," said Miles wearily.  "I've admitted
everything and I feel as bad about it as you do."  Turning to Joel
he began talking about pictures, while Stella moved restlessly
along the far walls, her hands in her breeches pockets.

"They've treated Miles terribly," she said, coming suddenly back
into the conversation as if they'd never discussed her personal
affairs.  "Dear, tell him about old Beltzer trying to change your
picture."

As she stood hovering protectively over Miles, her eyes flashing
with indignation in his behalf, Joel realized that he was in love
with her.  Stifled with excitement he got up to say good night.

With Monday the week resumed its workaday rhythm, in sharp contrast
to the theoretical discussions, the gossip and scandal of Sunday;
there was the endless detail of script revision--"Instead of a
lousy dissolve, we can leave her voice on the sound track and cut
to a medium shot of the taxi from Bell's angle or we can simply
pull the camera back to include the station, hold it a minute and
then pan to the row of taxis"--by Monday afternoon Joel had again
forgotten that people whose business was to provide entertainment
were ever privileged to be entertained.  In the evening he phoned
Miles' house.  He asked for Miles but Stella came to the phone.

"Do things seem better?"

"Not particularly.  What are you doing next Saturday evening?"

"Nothing."

"The Perrys are giving a dinner and theater party and Miles won't
be here--he's flying to South Bend to see the Notre Dame-California
game.  I thought you might go with me in his place."

After a long moment Joel said, "Why--surely.  If there's a
conference I can't make dinner but I can get to the theater."

"Then I'll say we can come."

Joel walked his office.  In view of the strained relations of the
Calmans, would Miles be pleased, or did she intend that Miles
shouldn't know of it?  That would be out of the question--if Miles
didn't mention it Joel would.  But it was an hour or more before he
could get down to work again.

Wednesday there was a four-hour wrangle in a conference room
crowded with planets and nebulae of cigarette smoke.  Three men and
a woman paced the carpet in turn, suggesting or condemning,
speaking sharply or persuasively, confidently or despairingly.  At
the end Joel lingered to talk to Miles.

The man was tired--not with the exaltation of fatigue but life-
tired, with his lids sagging and his beard prominent over the blue
shadows near his mouth.

"I hear you're flying to the Notre Dame game."

Miles looked beyond him and shook his head.

"I've given up the idea."

"Why?"

"On account of you."  Still he did not look at Joel.

"What the hell, Miles?"

"That's why I've given it up."  He broke into a perfunctory laugh
at himself.  "I can't tell what Stella might do just out of spite--
she's invited you to take her to the Perrys', hasn't she?  I
wouldn't enjoy the game."

The fine instinct that moved swiftly and confidently on the set,
muddled so weakly and helplessly through his personal life.

"Look, Miles," Joel said frowning.  "I've never made any passes
whatsoever at Stella.  If you're really seriously cancelling your
trip on account of me, I won't go to the Perrys' with her.  I won't
see her.  You can trust me absolutely."

Miles looked at him, carefully now.

"Maybe."  He shrugged his shoulders.  "Anyhow there'd just be
somebody else.  I wouldn't have any fun."

"You don't seem to have much confidence in Stella.  She told me
she'd always been true to you."

"Maybe she has."  In the last few minutes several more muscles had
sagged around Miles' mouth, "But how can I ask anything of her
after what's happened?  How can I expect her--"  He broke off and
his face grew harder as he said, "I'll tell you one thing, right or
wrong and no matter what I've done, if I ever had anything on her
I'd divorce her.  I can't have my pride hurt--that would be the
last straw."

His tone annoyed Joel, but he said:

"Hasn't she calmed down about the Eva Goebel thing?"

"No."  Miles snuffled pessimistically.  "I can't get over it
either."

"I thought it was finished."

"I'm trying not to see Eva again, but you know it isn't easy just
to drop something like that--it isn't some girl I kissed last night
in a taxi!  The psychoanalyst says--"

"I know," Joel interrupted.  "Stella told me."  This was
depressing.  "Well, as far as I'm concerned if you go to the game I
won't see Stella.  And I'm sure Stella has nothing on her
conscience about anybody."

"Maybe not," Miles repeated listlessly.  "Anyhow I'll stay and take
her to the party.  Say," he said suddenly, "I wish you'd come too.
I've got to have somebody sympathetic to talk to.  That's the
trouble--I've influenced Stella in everything.  Especially I've
influenced her so that she likes all the men I like--it's very
difficult."

"It must be," Joel agreed.


IV


Joel could not get to the dinner.  Self-conscious in his silk hat
against the unemployment, he waited for the others in front of the
Hollywood Theatre and watched the evening parade: obscure replicas
of bright, particular picture stars, spavined men in polo coats, a
stomping dervish with the beard and staff of an apostle, a pair of
chic Filipinos in collegiate clothes, reminder that this corner of
the Republic opened to the seven seas, a long fantastic carnival of
young shouts which proved to be a fraternity initiation.  The line
split to pass two smart limousines that stopped at the curb.

There she was, in a dress like ice-water, made in a thousand pale-
blue pieces, with icicles trickling at the throat.  He started
forward.

"So you like my dress?"

"Where's Miles?"

"He flew to the game after all.  He left yesterday morning--at
least I think--"  She broke off.  "I just got a telegram from South
Bend saying that he's starting back.  I forgot--you know all these
people?"

The party of eight moved into the theater.

Miles had gone after all and Joel wondered if he should have come.
But during the performance, with Stella a profile under the pure
grain of light hair, he thought no more about Miles.  Once he
turned and looked at her and she looked back at him, smiling and
meeting his eyes for as long as he wanted.  Between the acts they
smoked in the lobby and she whispered:

"They're all going to the opening of Jack Johnson's night club--I
don't want to go, do you?"

"Do we have to?"

"I suppose not."  She hesitated.  "I'd like to talk to you.  I
suppose we could go to our house--if I were only sure--"

Again she hesitated and Joel asked:

"Sure of what?"

"Sure that--oh, I'm haywire I know, but how can I be sure Miles
went to the game?"

"You mean you think he's with Eva Goebel?"

"No, not so much that--but supposing he was here watching
everything I do.  You know Miles does odd things sometimes.  Once
he wanted a man with a long beard to drink tea with him and he sent
down to the casting agency for one, and drank tea with him all
afternoon."

"That's different.  He sent you a wire from South Bend--that proves
he's at the game."

After the play they said good night to the others at the curb and
were answered by looks of amusement.  They slid off along the
golden garish thoroughfare through the crowd that had gathered
around Stella.

"You see he could arrange the telegrams," Stella said, "very
easily."

That was true.  And with the idea that perhaps her uneasiness was
justified, Joel grew angry: if Miles had trained a camera on them
he felt no obligations toward Miles.  Aloud he said:

"That's nonsense."

There were Christmas trees already in the shop windows and the full
moon over the boulevard was only a prop, as scenic as the giant
boudoir lamps of the corners.  On into the dark foliage of Beverly
Hills that flamed as eucalyptus by day, Joel saw only the flash of
a white face under his own, the arc of her shoulder.  She pulled
away suddenly and looked up at him.

"Your eyes are like your mother's," she said.  "I used to have a
scrap book full of pictures of her."

"Your eyes are like your own and not a bit like any other eyes," he
answered.

Something made Joel look out into the grounds as they went into the
house, as if Miles were lurking in the shrubbery.  A telegram
waited on the hall table.  She read aloud:


                                                   CHICAGO.

Home tomorrow night.  Thinking of you.  Love.

                                                     MILES.


"You see," she said, throwing the slip back on the table, "he could
easily have faked that."  She asked the butler for drinks and
sandwiches and ran upstairs, while Joel walked into the empty
reception rooms.  Strolling about he wandered to the piano where he
had stood in disgrace two Sundays before.

"Then we could put over," he said aloud, "a story of divorce, the
younger generators and the Foreign Legion."

His thoughts jumped to another telegram.

"You were one of the most agreeable people at our party--"

An idea occurred to him.  If Stella's telegram had been purely a
gesture of courtesy then it was likely that Miles had inspired it,
for it was Miles who had invited him.  Probably Miles had said:

"Send him a wire--he's miserable--he thinks he's queered himself."

It fitted in with "I've influenced Stella in everything.
Especially I've influenced her so that she likes all the men I
like."  A woman would do a thing like that because she felt
sympathetic--only a man would do it because he felt responsible.

When Stella came back into the room he took both her hands.

"I have a strange feeling that I'm a sort of pawn in a spite game
you're playing against Miles," he said.

"Help yourself to a drink."

"And the odd thing is that I'm in love with you anyhow."

The telephone rang and she freed herself to answer it.

"Another wire from Miles," she announced.  "He dropped it, or it
says he dropped it, from the airplane at Kansas City."

"I suppose he asked to be remembered to me."

"No, he just said he loved me.  I believe he does.  He's so very
weak."

"Come sit beside me," Joel urged her.

It was early.  And it was still a few minutes short of midnight a
half-hour later, when Joel walked to the cold hearth, and said
tersely:

"Meaning that you haven't any curiosity about me?"

"Not at all.  You attract me a lot and you know it.  The point is
that I suppose I really do love Miles."

"Obviously."

"And tonight I feel uneasy about everything."

He wasn't angry--he was even faintly relieved that a possible
entanglement was avoided.  Still as he looked at her, the warmth
and softness of her body thawing her cold blue costume, he knew she
was one of the things he would always regret.

"I've got to go," he said.  "I'll phone a taxi."

"Nonsense--there's a chauffeur on duty."

He winced at her readiness to have him go, and seeing this she
kissed him lightly and said, "You're sweet, Joel."  Then suddenly
three things happened: he took down his drink at a gulp, the phone
rang loud through the house and a clock in the hall struck in
trumpet notes.

NINE--TEN--ELEVEN--TWELVE--


V


It was Sunday again.  Joel realized that he had come to the theater
this evening with the work of the week still hanging about him like
cerements.  He had made love to Stella as he might attack some
matter to be cleaned up hurriedly before the day's end.  But this
was Sunday--the lovely, lazy perspective of the next twenty-four
hours unrolled before him--every minute was something to be
approached with lulling indirection, every moment held the germ of
innumerable possibilities.  Nothing was impossible--everything was
just beginning.  He poured himself another drink.

With a sharp moan, Stella slipped forward inertly by the telephone.
Joel picked her up and laid her on the sofa.  He squirted soda-
water on a handkerchief and slapped it over her face.  The
telephone mouthpiece was still grinding and he put it to his ear.

"--the plane fell just this side of Kansas City.  The body of Miles
Calman has been identified and--"

He hung up the receiver.

"Lie still," he said, stalling, as Stella opened her eyes.

"Oh, what's happened?" she whispered.  "Call them back.  Oh, what's
happened?"

"I'll call them right away.  What's your doctor's name?"

"Did they say Miles was dead?"

"Lie quiet--is there a servant still up?"

"Hold me--I'm frightened."

He put his arm around her.

"I want the name of your doctor," he said sternly.  "It may be a
mistake but I want someone here."

"It's Doctor--Oh, God, is Miles dead?"

Joel ran upstairs and searched through strange medicine cabinets
for spirits of ammonia.  When he came down Stella cried:

"He isn't dead--I know he isn't.  This is part of his scheme.  He's
torturing me.  I know he's alive.  I can feel he's alive."

"I want to get hold of some close friend of yours, Stella.  You
can't stay here alone tonight."

"Oh, no," she cried.  "I can't see anybody.  You stay.  I haven't
got any friend."  She got up, tears streaming down her face.  "Oh,
Miles is my only friend.  He's not dead--he can't be dead.  I'm
going there right away and see.  Get a train.  You'll have to come
with me."

"You can't.  There's nothing to do tonight.  I want you to tell me
the name of some woman I can call: Lois?  Joan?  Carmel?  Isn't
there somebody?"

Stella stared at him blindly.

"Eva Goebel was my best friend," she said.

Joel thought of Miles, his sad and desperate face in the office two
days before.  In the awful silence of his death all was clear about
him.  He was the only American-born director with both an
interesting temperament and an artistic conscience.  Meshed in an
industry, he had paid with his ruined nerves for having no
resilience, no healthy cynicism, no refuge--only a pitiful and
precarious escape.

There was a sound at the outer door--it opened suddenly, and there
were footsteps in the hall.

"Miles!" Stella screamed.  "Is it you, Miles?  Oh, it's Miles."

A telegraph boy appeared in the doorway.

"I couldn't find the bell.  I heard you talking inside."

The telegram was a duplicate of the one that had been phoned.
While Stella read it over and over, as though it were a black lie,
Joel telephoned.  It was still early and he had difficulty getting
anyone; when finally he succeeded in finding some friends he made
Stella take a stiff drink.

"You'll stay here, Joel," she whispered, as though she were half-
asleep.  "You won't go away.  Miles liked you--he said you--"  She
shivered violently, "Oh, my God, you don't know how alone I feel."
Her eyes closed, "Put your arms around me.  Miles had a suit like
that."  She started bolt upright.  "Think of what he must have
felt.  He was afraid of almost everything, anyhow."

She shook her head dazedly.  Suddenly she seized Joel's face and
held it close to hers.

"You won't go.  You like me--you love me, don't you?  Don't call up
anybody.  Tomorrow's time enough.  You stay here with me tonight."

He stared at her, at first incredulously, and then with shocked
understanding.  In her dark groping Stella was trying to keep Miles
alive by sustaining a situation in which he had figured--as if
Miles' mind could not die so long as the possibilities that had
worried him still existed.  It was a distraught and tortured effort
to stave off the realization that he was dead.

Resolutely Joel went to the phone and called a doctor.

"Don't, oh, don't call anybody!" Stella cried.  "Come back here and
put your arms around me."

"Is Doctor Bales in?"

"Joel," Stella cried.  "I thought I could count on you.  Miles
liked you.  He was jealous of you--Joel, come here."

Ah then--if he betrayed Miles she would be keeping him alive--for
if he were really dead how could he be betrayed?

"--has just had a very severe shock.  Can you come at once, and get
hold of a nurse?"

"Joel!"

Now the door-bell and the telephone began to ring intermittently,
and automobiles were stopping in front of the door.

"But you're not going," Stella begged him.  "You're going to stay,
aren't you?"

"No," he answered.  "But I'll be back, if you need me."

Standing on the steps of the house which now hummed and palpitated
with the life that flutters around death like protective leaves, he
began to sob a little in his throat.

"Everything he touched he did something magical to," he thought.
"He even brought that little gamin alive and made her a sort of
masterpiece."

And then:

"What a hell of a hole he leaves in this damn wilderness--already!"

And then with a certain bitterness, "Oh, yes, I'll be back--I'll be
back!"






DESIGN IN PLASTER


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Esquire (November, 1939)



"How long does the doctor think now?" Mary asked.  With his good arm
Martin threw back the top of the sheet, disclosing that the plaster
armor had been cut away in front in the form of a square, so that
his abdomen and the lower part of his diaphragm bulged a little
from the aperture.  His dislocated arm was still high over his head
in an involuntary salute.

"This was a great advance," he told her.  "But it took the heat
wave to make Ottinger put in this window.  I can't say much for the
view but--have you seen the wire collection?"

"Yes, I've seen it," his wife answered, trying to look amused.

It was laid out on the bureau like a set of surgeons' tools--wires
bent to every length and shape so that the nurse could reach any
point inside the plaster cast when perspiration made the itching
unbearable.

Martin was ashamed at repeating himself.

"I apologize," he said.  "After two months you get medical
psychology.  All this stuff is fascinating to me.  In fact--" he
added, and with only faint irony, "--it is in a way of becoming my
life."

Mary came over and sat beside the bed raising him, cast and all,
into her slender arms.  He was chief electrical engineer at the
studio and his thirty-foot fall wasn't costing a penny in doctor's
bills.  But that--and the fact that the catastrophe had swung them
together after a four months' separation, was its only bright spot.

"I feel so close," she whispered.  "Even through this plaster."

"Do you think that's a nice way to talk?"

"Yes."

"So do I."

Presently she stood up and rearranged her bright hair in the
mirror.  He had seen her do it half a thousand times but suddenly
there was a quality of remoteness about it that made him sad.

"What are you doing tonight?" he asked.

Mary turned, almost with surprise.

"It seems strange to have you ask me."

"Why?  You almost always tell me.  You're my contact with the world
of glamour."

"But you like to keep bargains.  That was our arrangement when we
began to live apart."

"You're being very technical."

"No--but that WAS the arrangement.  As a matter of fact I'm not
doing anything.  Bieman asked me to go to a preview, but he bores
me.  And that French crowd called up."

"Which member of it?"

She came closer and looked at him.

"Why, I believe you're jealous," she said.  "The wife of course.
Or HE did, to be exact, but he was calling for his wife--she'd be
there.  I've never seen you like this before."

Martin was wise enough to wink as if it meant nothing and let it
die away, but Mary said an unfortunate last word.

"I thought you liked me to go with them."

"That's it," Martin tried to go slow, "--with 'them,' but now it's
'he.'"

"They're all leaving Monday," she said almost impatiently.  "I'll
probably never see him again."

Silence for a minute.  Since his accident there were not an
unlimited number of things to talk about, except when there was
love between them.  Or even pity--he was accepting even pity in the
past fortnight.  Especially their uncertain plans about the future
were in need of being preceded by a mood of love.

"I'm going to get up for a minute," he said suddenly.  "No, don't
help me--don't call the nurse.  I've got it figured out."

The cast extended half way to his knee on one side but with a snake-
like motion he managed to get to the side of the bed--then rise
with a gigantic heave.  He tied on a dressing gown, still without
assistance, and went to the window.  Young people were splashing
and calling in the outdoor pool of the hotel.

"I'll go along," said Mary.  "Can I bring you anything tomorrow?
Or tonight if you feel lonely?"

"Not tonight.  You know I'm always cross at night--and I don't like
you making that long drive twice a day.  Go along--be happy."

"Shall I ring for the nurse?"

"I'll ring presently."

He didn't though--he just stood.  He knew that Mary was wearing
out, that this resurgence of her love was wearing out.  His
accident was a very temporary dam of a stream that had begun to
overflow months before.

When the pains began at six with their customary regularity the
nurse gave him something with codein in it, shook him a cocktail
and ordered dinner, one of those dinners it was a struggle to
digest since he had been sealed up in his individual bomb-shelter.
Then she was off duty four hours and he was alone.  Alone with Mary
and the Frenchman.

He didn't know the Frenchman except by name but Mary had said once:

"Joris is rather like you--only naturally not formed--rather
immature."

Since she said that, the company of Mary and Joris had grown
increasingly unattractive in the long hours between seven and
eleven.  He had talked with them, driven around with them, gone to
pictures and parties with them--sometimes with the half comforting
ghost of Joris' wife along.  He had been near as they made love and
even that was endurable as long as he could seem to hear and see
them.  It was when they became hushed and secret that his stomach
winced inside the plaster cast.  That was when he had pictures of
the Frenchman going toward Mary and Mary waiting.  Because he was
not sure just how Joris felt about her or about the whole
situation.

"I told him I loved you," Mary said--and he believed her, "I told
him that I could never love anyone but you."

Still he could not be sure how Mary felt as she waited in her
apartment for Joris.  He could not tell if, when she said good
night at her door, she turned away relieved, or whether she walked
around her living room a little and later, reading her book,
dropped it in her lap and looked up at the ceiling.  Or whether her
phone rang once more for one more good night.

Martin hadn't worried about any of these things in the first two
months of their separation when he had been on his feet and well.

At half-past eight he took up the phone and called her; the line
was busy and still busy at a quarter of nine.  At nine it was out
of order; at nine-fifteen it didn't answer and at a little before
nine-thirty it was busy again.  Martin got up, slowly drew on his
trousers and with the help of a bellboy put on a shirt and coat.

"Don't you want me to come, Mr. Harris?" asked the bellboy.

"No thanks.  Tell the taxi I'll be right down."

When the boy had gone he tripped on the slightly raised floor of
the bathroom, swung about on one arm and cut his head against the
wash bowl.  It was not so much, but he did a clumsy repair job with
the adhesive and, feeling ridiculous at his image in the mirror,
sat down and called Mary's number a last time--for no answer.  Then
he went out, not because he wanted to go to Mary's but because he
had to go somewhere toward the flame, and he didn't know any other
place to go.

At ten-thirty Mary, in her nightgown, was at the phone.

"Thanks for calling.  But, Joris, if you want to know the truth I
have a splitting headache.  I'm turning in."

"Mary, listen," Joris insisted.  "It happens Marianne has a
headache too and has turned in.  This is the last night I'll have a
chance to see you alone.  Besides, you told me you'd NEVER had a
headache."

Mary laughed.

"That's true--but I AM tired."

"I would promise to stay one-half hour--word of honor.  I am only
just around the corner."

"No," she said and a faint touch of annoyance gave firmness to the
word.  "Tomorrow I'll have either lunch or dinner if you like, but
now I'm going to bed."

She stopped.  She had heard a sound, a weight crunching against the
outer door of her apartment.  Then three odd, short bell rings.

"There's someone--call me in the morning," she said.  Hurriedly
hanging up the phone she got into a dressing gown.

By the door of her apartment she asked cautiously.

"Who's there?"

No answer--only a heavier sound--a human slipping to the floor.

"Who is it?"

She drew back and away from a frightening moan.  There was a little
shutter high in the door, like the peephole of a speakeasy, and
feeling sure from the sound that whoever it was, wounded or drunk,
was on the floor Mary reached up and peeped out.  She could see
only a hand covered with freshly ripening blood, and shut the trap
hurriedly.  After a shaken moment, she peered once more.

This time she recognized something--afterwards she could not have
said what--a way the arm lay, a corner of the plaster cast--but it
was enough to make her open the door quickly and duck down to
Martin's side.

"Get doctor," he whispered.  "Fell on the steps and broke."

His eyes closed as she ran for the phone.

Doctor and ambulance came at the same time.  What Martin had done
was simple enough, a little triumph of misfortune.  On the first
flight of stairs that he had gone up for eight weeks, he had
stumbled, tried to save himself with the arm that was no good for
anything, then spun down catching and ripping on the stair rail.
After that a five minute drag up to her door.

Mary wanted to exclaim, "Why?  Why?" but there was no one to hear.
He came awake as the stretcher was put under him to carry him to
the hospital, repair the new breakage with a new cast, start it
over again.  Seeing Mary he called quickly.  "Don't you come.  I
don't like anyone around when--when--Promise on your word of honor
not to come?"

The orthopedist said he would phone her in an hour.  And five
minutes later it was with the confused thought that he was already
calling that Mary answered the phone.

"I can't talk, Joris," she said.  "There was an awful accident--"

"Can I help?"

"It's gone now.  It was my husband--"

Suddenly Mary knew she wanted to do anything but wait alone for
word from the hospital.

"Come over then," she said.  "You can take me up there if I'm
needed."

She sat in place by the phone until he came--jumped to her feet
with an exclamation at his ring.

"Why?  Why?" she sobbed at last.  "I offered to go see him at his
hotel."

"Not drunk?"

"No, no--he almost never takes a drink.  Will you wait right
outside my door while I dress and get ready?"

The news came half an hour later that Martin's shoulder was set
again, that he was sleeping under the ethylene gas and would sleep
till morning.  Joris Deglen was very gentle, swinging her feet up
on the sofa, putting a pillow at her back and answering her
incessant "Why?" with a different response every time--Martin had
been delirious; he was lonely; then at a certain moment telling the
truth he had long guessed at: Martin was jealous.

"That was it," Mary said bitterly.  "We were to be free--only I
wasn't free.  Only free to sneak about behind his back."

She was free now though, free as air.  And later, when he said he
wouldn't go just yet, but would sit in the living room reading
until she quieted down, Mary went into her room with her head clear
as morning.  After she undressed for the second time that night she
stayed for a few minutes before the mirror arranging her hair and
keeping her mind free of all thoughts about Martin except that he
was sleeping and at the moment felt no pain.

Then she opened her bedroom door and called down the corridor into
the living room:

"Do you want to come and tell me good night?"






DICE, BRASSKNUCKLES & GUITAR


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


International (May 1923)



Parts of New Jersey, as you know, are under water, and other parts
are under continual surveillance by the authorities.  But here and
there lie patches of garden country dotted with old-fashioned frame
mansions, which have wide shady porches and a red swing on the
lawn.  And perhaps, on the widest and shadiest of the porches there
is even a hammock left over from the hammock days, stirring gently
in a mid-Victorian wind.

When tourists come to such last-century landmarks they stop their
cars and gaze for a while and then mutter:  "Well, thank God this
age is joined on to something" or else they say:  "Well, of course,
that house is mostly halls and has a thousand rats and one
bathroom, but there's an atmosphere about it--"

The tourist doesn't stay long.  He drives on to his Elizabethan
villa of pressed cardboard or his early Norman meat-market or his
medieval Italian pigeon-coop--because this is the twentieth century
and Victorian houses are as unfashionable as the works of Mrs.
Humphry Ward.

He can't see the hammock from the road--but sometimes there's a
girl in the hammock.  There was this afternoon.  She was asleep in
it and apparently unaware of the esthetic horrors which surrounded
her, the stone statue of Diana, for instance, which grinned
idiotically under the sunlight on the lawn.

There was something enormously yellow about the whole scene--there
was this sunlight, for instance, that was yellow, and the hammock
was of the particularly hideous yellow peculiar to hammocks, and
the girl's yellow hair was spread out upon the hammock in a sort of
invidious comparison.

She slept with her lips closed and her hands clasped behind her
head, as it is proper for young girls to sleep.  Her breast rose
and fell slightly with no more emphasis than the sway of the
hammock's fringe.

Her name, Amanthis, was as old-fashioned as the house she lived in.
I regret to say that her mid-Victorian connections ceased abruptly
at this point.

Now if this were a moving picture (as, of course, I hope it will
some day be) I would take as many thousand feet of her as I was
allowed--then I would move the camera up close and show the yellow
down on the back of her neck where her hair stopped and the warm
color of her cheeks and arms, because I like to think of her
sleeping there, as you yourself might have slept, back in your
young days.  Then I would hire a man named Israel Glucose to write
some idiotic line of transition, and switch thereby to another
scene that was taking place at no particular spot far down the
road.

In a moving automobile sat a southern gentleman accompanied by his
body-servant.  He was on his way, after a fashion, to New York but
he was somewhat hampered by the fact that the upper and lower
portions of his automobile were no longer in exact juxtaposition.
In fact from time to time the two riders would dismount, shove the
body on to the chassis, corner to corner, and then continue onward,
vibrating slightly in involuntary unison with the motor.

Except that it had no door in back the car might have been built
early in the mechanical age.  It was covered with the mud of eight
states and adorned in front by an enormous but defunct motometer
and behind by a mangy pennant bearing the legend "Tarleton, Ga."
In the dim past someone had begun to paint the hood yellow but
unfortunately had been called away when but half through the task.

As the gentleman and his body-servant were passing the house where
Amanthis lay beautifully asleep in the hammock, something happened--
the body fell off the car.  My only apology for stating this so
suddenly is that it happened very suddenly indeed.  When the noise
had died down and the dust had drifted away master and man arose
and inspected the two halves.

"Look-a-there," said the gentleman in disgust, "the doggone thing
got all separated that time."

"She bust in two," agreed the body-servant.

"Hugo," said the gentleman, after some consideration, "we got to
get a hammer an' nails an' TACK it on."

They glanced up at the Victorian house.  On all sides faintly
irregular fields stretched away to a faintly irregular unpopulated
horizon.  There was no choice, so the black Hugo opened the gate
and followed his master up a gravel walk, casting only the blasé
glances of a confirmed traveler at the red swing and the stone
statue of Diana which turned on them a storm-crazed stare.

At the exact moment when they reached the porch Amanthis awoke, sat
up suddenly and looked them over.

The gentleman was young, perhaps twenty-four, and his name was Jim
Powell.  He was dressed in a tight and dusty readymade suit which
was evidently expected to take flight at a moment's notice, for it
was secured to his body by a line of six preposterous buttons.

There were supernumerary buttons upon the coat-sleeves also and
Amanthis could not resist a glance to determine whether or not more
buttons ran up the side of his trouser leg.  But the trouser
bottoms were distinguished only by their shape, which was that of a
bell.  His vest was cut low, barely restraining an amazing necktie
from fluttering in the wind.

He bowed formally, dusting his knees with a thatched straw hat.
Simultaneously he smiled, half shutting his faded blue eyes and
displaying white and beautifully symmetrical teeth.

"Good evenin'," he said in abandoned Georgian.  "My automobile has
met with an accident out yonder by your gate.  I wondered if it
wouldn't be too much to ask you if I could have the use of a hammer
and some tacks--nails, for a little while."

Amanthis laughed.  For a moment she laughed uncontrollably.  Mr.
Jim Powell laughed, politely and appreciatively, with her.  His
body-servant, deep in the throes of colored adolescence, alone
preserved a dignified gravity.

"I better introduce who I am, maybe," said the visitor.  "My name's
Powell.  I'm a resident of Tarleton, Georgia.  This here nigger's
my boy Hugo."

"Your SON!"  The girl stared from one to the other in wild
fascination.

"No, he's my body-servant, I guess you'd call it.  We call a nigger
a boy down yonder."

At this reference to the finer customs of his native soil the boy
Hugo put his hands behind his back and looked darkly and
superciliously down the lawn.

"Yas'm," he muttered, "I'm a body-servant."

"Where you going in your automobile," demanded Amanthis.

"Goin' north for the summer."

"Where to?"

The tourist waved his hand with a careless gesture as if to
indicate the Adirondacks, the Thousand Islands, Newport--but he
said:

"We're tryin' New York."

"Have you ever been there before?"

"Never have.  But I been to Atlanta lots of times.  An' we passed
through all kinds of cities this trip.  Man!"

He whistled to express the enormous spectacularity of his recent
travels.

"Listen," said Amanthis intently, "you better have something to
eat.  Tell your--your body-servant to go 'round in back and ask the
cook to send us out some sandwiches and lemonade.  Or maybe you
don't drink lemonade--very few people do any more."

Mr. Powell by a circular motion of his finger sped Hugo on the
designated mission.  Then he seated himself gingerly in a rocking-
chair and began revolving his thatched straw hat rapidly in his
hands.

"You cer'nly are mighty kind," he told her.  "An' if I wanted
anything stronger than lemonade I got a bottle of good old corn out
in the car.  I brought it along because I thought maybe I wouldn't
be able to drink the whisky they got up here."

"Listen," she said, "my name's Powell too.  Amanthis Powell."

"Say, is that right?"  He laughed ecstatically.  "Maybe we're kin
to each other.  I come from mighty good people," he went on.  "Pore
though.  I got some money because my aunt she was using it to keep
her in a sanitarium and she died."  He paused, presumably out of
respect to his late aunt.  Then he concluded with brisk
nonchalance, "I ain't touched the principal but I got a lot of the
income all at once so I thought I'd come north for the summer."

At this point Hugo reappeared on the veranda steps and became
audible.

"White lady back there she asked me don't I want eat some too.
What I tell her?"

"You tell her yes mamm if she be so kind," directed his master.
And as Hugo retired he confided to Amanthis:  "That boy's got no
sense at all.  He don't want to do nothing without I tell him he
can.  I brought him up," he added, not without pride.

When the sandwiches arrived Mr. Powell stood up.  He was
unaccustomed to white servants and obviously expected an
introduction.

"Are you a married lady?" he inquired of Amanthis, when the servant
was gone.

"No," she answered, and added from the security of eighteen, "I'm
an old maid."

Again he laughed politely.

"You mean you're a society girl."

She shook her head.  Mr. Powell noted with embarrassed enthusiasm
the particular yellowness of her yellow hair.

"Does this old place look like it?" she said cheerfully.  "No, you
perceive in me a daughter of the countryside.  Color--one hundred
percent spontaneous--in the daytime anyhow.  Suitors--promising
young barbers from the neighboring village with somebody's late
hair still clinging to their coat-sleeves."

"Your daddy oughtn't to let you go with a country barber," said the
tourist disapprovingly.  He considered--"You ought to be a New York
society girl."

"No."  Amanthis shook her head sadly.  "I'm too good-looking.  To
be a New York society girl you have to have a long nose and
projecting teeth and dress like the actresses did three years ago."

Jim began to tap his foot rhythmically on the porch and in a moment
Amanthis discovered that she was unconsciously doing the same
thing.

"Stop!" she commanded, "Don't make me do that."

He looked down at his foot.

"Excuse me," he said humbly.  "I don't know--it's just something I
do."

This intense discussion was now interrupted by Hugo who appeared on
the steps bearing a hammer and a handful of nails.

Mr. Powell arose unwillingly and looked at his watch.

"We got to go, daggone it," he said, frowning heavily.  "See here.
Wouldn't you LIKE to be a New York society girl and go to those
dances an' all, like you read about, where they throw gold pieces
away?"

She looked at him with a curious expression.

"Don't your folks know some society people?" he went on.

"All I've got's my daddy--and, you see, he's a judge."

"That's too bad," he agreed.

She got herself by some means from the hammock and they went down
toward the road, side by side.

"Well, I'll keep my eyes open for you and let you know," he
persisted.  "A pretty girl like you ought to go around in society.
We may be kin to each other, you see, and us Powells ought to stick
together."

"What are you going to do in New York?"

They were now almost at the gate and the tourist pointed to the two
depressing sectors of his automobile.

"I'm goin' to drive a taxi.  This one right here.  Only it's got so
it busts in two all the time."

"You're going to drive THAT in New York?"

Jim looked at her uncertainly.  Such a pretty girl should certainly
control the habit of shaking all over upon no provocation at all.

"Yes mamm," he said with dignity.

Amanthis watched while they placed the upper half of the car upon
the lower half and nailed it severely into place.  Then Mr. Powell
took the wheel and his body-servant climbed in beside him.

"I'm cer'nly very much obliged to you indeed for your hospitality.
Convey my respects to your father."

"I will," she assured him.  "Come back and see me, if you don't
mind barbers in the room."

He dismissed this unpleasant thought with a gesture.

"Your company would always be charming."  He put the car into gear
as though to drown out the temerity of his parting speech.  "You're
the prettiest girl I've seen up north--by far."

Then with a groan and a rattle Mr. Powell of southern Georgia with
his own car and his own body-servant and his own ambitions and his
own private cloud of dust continued on north for the summer.

She thought she would never see him again.  She lay in her hammock,
slim and beautiful, opened her left eye slightly to see June come
in and then closed it and retired contentedly back into her dreams.

But one day when the midsummer vines had climbed the precarious
sides of the red swing in the lawn, Mr. Jim Powell of Tarleton,
Georgia, came vibrating back into her life.  They sat on the wide
porch as before.

"I've got a great scheme," he told her.

"Did you drive your taxi like you said?"

"Yes mamm, but the business was right bad.  I waited around in
front of all those hotels and theaters an' nobody ever got in."

"NObody?"

"Well, one night there was some drunk fellas they got in, only just
as I was gettin' started my automobile came apart.  And another
night it was rainin' and there wasn't no other taxis and a lady got
in because she said she had to go a long ways.  But before we got
there she made me stop and she got out.  She seemed kinda mad and
she went walkin' off in the rain.  Mighty proud lot of people they
got up in New York."

"And so you're going home?" asked Amanthis sympathetically.

"No MAMM.  I got an idea."  His blue eyes grew narrow.  "Has that
barber been around here--with hair on his sleeves?"

"No.  He's--he's gone away."

"Well, then, first thing is I want to leave this car of mine here
with you, if that's all right.  It ain't the right color for a
taxi.  To pay for its keep I'd like to have you drive it just as
much as you want.  'Long as you got a hammer an' nails with you
there ain't much bad that can happen--"

"I'll take care of it," interrupted Amanthis, "but where are YOU
going?"

"Southampton.  It's about the most aristocratic watering trough--
watering-place there is around here, so that's where I'm going."

She sat up in amazement.

"What are you going to do there?"

"Listen."  He leaned toward her confidentially.  "Were you serious
about wanting to be a New York society girl?"

"Deadly serious."

"That's all I wanted to know," he said inscrutably.  "You just wait
here on this porch a couple of weeks and--and sleep.  And if any
barbers come to see you with hair on their sleeves you tell 'em
you're too sleepy to see 'em."

"What then?"

"Then you'll hear from me.  Just tell your old daddy he can do all
the judging he wants but you're goin' to do some DANCIN'.  Mamm,"
he continued decisively, "you talk about society!  Before one month
I'm goin' to have you in more society than you ever saw."

Further than this he would say nothing.  His manner conveyed that
she was going to be suspended over a perfect pool of gaiety and
violently immersed, to an accompaniment of:  "Is it gay enough for
you, mamm?  Shall I let in a little more excitement, mamm?"

"Well," answered Amanthis, lazily considering, "there are few
things for which I'd forego the luxury of sleeping through July and
August--but if you'll write me a letter I'll--I'll run up to
Southampton."

Jim snapped his fingers ecstatically.

"More society," he assured her with all the confidence at his
command, "than anybody ever saw."

Three days later a young man wearing a straw hat that might have
been cut from the thatched roof of an English cottage rang the
doorbell of the enormous and astounding Madison Harlan house at
Southampton.  He asked the butler if there were any people in the
house between the ages of sixteen and twenty.  He was informed that
Miss Genevieve Harlan and Mr. Ronald Harlan answered that
description and thereupon he handed in a most peculiar card and
requested in fetching Georgian that it be brought to their
attention.

As a result he was closeted for almost an hour with Mr. Ronald
Harlan (who was a student at the Hillkiss School) and Miss
Genevieve Harlan (who was not uncelebrated at Southampton dances).
When he left he bore a short note in Miss Harlan's handwriting
which he presented together with his peculiar card at the next
large estate.  It happened to be that of the Clifton Garneaus.
Here, as if by magic, the same audience was granted him.

He went on--it was a hot day, and men who could not afford to do so
were carrying their coats on the public highway, but Jim, a native
of southernmost Georgia, was as fresh and cool at the last house as
at the first.  He visited ten houses that day.  Anyone following
him in his course might have taken him to be some curiously gifted
book-agent with a much sought-after volume as his stock in trade.

There was something in his unexpected demand for the adolescent
members of the family which made hardened butlers lose their
critical acumen.  As he left each house a close observer might have
seen that fascinated eyes followed him to the door and excited
voices whispered something which hinted at a future meeting.

The second day he visited twelve houses.  Southampton has grown
enormously--he might have kept on his round for a week and never
seen the same butler twice--but it was only the palatial, the
amazing houses which intrigued him.

On the third day he did a thing that many people have been told to
do and few have done--he hired a hall.  Perhaps the sixteen-to-
twenty-year-old people in the enormous houses had told him to.  The
hall he hired had once been "Mr. Snorkey's Private Gymnasium for
Gentlemen."  It was situated over a garage on the south edge of
Southampton and in the days of its prosperity had been, I regret to
say, a place where gentlemen could, under Mr. Snorkey's direction,
work off the effects of the night before.  It was now abandoned--
Mr. Snorkey had given up and gone away and died.

We will now skip three weeks during which time we may assume that
the project which had to do with hiring a hall and visiting the two
dozen largest houses in Southampton got under way.

The day to which we will skip was the July day on which Mr. James
Powell sent a wire to Miss Amanthis Powell saying that if she still
aspired to the gaiety of the highest society she should set out for
Southampton by the earliest possible train.  He himself would meet
her at the station.

Jim was no longer a man of leisure, so when she failed to arrive at
the time her wire had promised he grew restless.  He supposed she
was coming on a later train, turned to go back to his--his project--
and met her entering the station from the street side.

"Why, how did you--"

"Well," said Amanthis, "I arrived this morning instead, and I
didn't want to bother you so I found a respectable, not to say
dull, boarding-house on the Ocean Road."

She was quite different from the indolent Amanthis of the porch
hammock, he thought.  She wore a suit of robins' egg blue and a
rakish young hat with a curling feather--she was attired not unlike
those young ladies between sixteen and twenty who of late were
absorbing his attention.  Yes, she would do very well.

He bowed her profoundly into a taxicab and got in beside her.

"Isn't it about time you told me your scheme?" she suggested.

"Well, it's about these society girls up here."  He waved his hand
airily.  "I know 'em all."

"Where are they?"

"Right now they're with Hugo.  You remember--that's my body-
servant."

"With Hugo!"  Her eyes widened.  "Why?  What's it all about?"

"Well, I got--I got sort of a school, I guess you'd call it."

"A school?"

"It's a sort of Academy.  And I'm the head of it.  I invented it."

He flipped a card from his case as though he were shaking down a
thermometer.

"Look."

She took the card.  In large lettering it bore the legend


                     JAMES POWELL; J.M.
              "Dice, Brassknuckles and Guitar"


She stared in amazement.

"Dice, Brassknuckles and Guitar?" she repeated in awe.

"Yes mamm."

"What does it mean?  What--do you SELL 'em?"

"No mamm, I teach 'em.  It's a profession."

"Dice, Brassknuckles and Guitar?  What's the J. M.?"

"That stands for Jazz Master."

"But what is it?  What's it about?"

"Well, you see, it's like this.  One night when I was in New York I
got talkin' to a young fella who was drunk.  He was one of my
fares.  And he'd taken some society girl somewhere and lost her."

"LOST her?"

"Yes mamm.  He forgot her, I guess.  And he was right worried.
Well, I got to thinkin' that these girls nowadays--these society
girls--they lead a sort of dangerous life and my course of study
offers a means of protection against these dangers."

"You teach 'em to use brassknuckles?"

"Yes mamm, if necessary.  Look here, you take a girl and she goes
into some café where she's got no business to go.  Well then, her
escort he gets a little too much to drink an' he goes to sleep an'
then some other fella comes up and says 'Hello, sweet mamma' or
whatever one of those mashers says up here.  What does she do?  She
can't scream, on account of no real lady'll scream nowadays--no--
She just reaches down in her pocket and slips her fingers into a
pair of Powell's defensive brassknuckles, débutante's size,
executes what I call the Society Hook, and Wham! that big fella's
on his way to the cellar."

"Well--what--what's the guitar for?" whispered the awed Amanthis.
"Do they have to knock somebody over with the guitar?"

"No, MAMM!" exclaimed Jim in horror.  "No mamm.  In my course no
lady would be taught to raise a guitar against anybody.  I teach
'em to play.  Shucks! you ought to hear 'em.  Why, when I've given
'em two lessons you'd think some of 'em was colored."

"And the dice?"

"Dice?  I'm related to a dice.  My grandfather was a dice.  I teach
'em how to make those dice perform.  I protect pocketbook as well
as person."

"Did you--Have you got any pupils?"

"Mamm I got all the really nice, rich people in the place.  What I
told you ain't all.  I teach lots of things.  I teach 'em the
jellyroll--and the Mississippi Sunrise.  Why, there was one girl
she came to me and said she wanted to learn to snap her fingers.  I
mean REALLY snap 'em--like they do.  She said she never could snap
her fingers since she was little.  I gave her two lessons and now
Wham!  Her daddy says he's goin' to leave home."

"When do you have it?" demanded the weak and shaken Amanthis.

"Three times a week.  We're goin' there right now."

"And where do I fit in?"

"Well, you'll just be one of the pupils.  I got it fixed up that
you come from very high-tone people down in New Jersey.  I didn't
tell 'em your daddy was a judge--I told 'em he was the man that had
the patent on lump sugar."

She gasped.

"So all you got to do," he went on, "is to pretend you never saw no
barber."

They were now at the south end of the village and Amanthis saw a
row of cars parked in front of a two-story building.  The cars were
all low, long, rakish and of a brilliant hue.  They were the sort
of car that is manufactured to solve the millionaire's problem on
his son's eighteenth birthday.

Then Amanthis was ascending a narrow stairs to the second story.
Here, painted on a door from which came the sounds of music and
laughter were the words:


                     JAMES POWELL; J. M.
              "Dice, Brassknuckles and Guitar"
                      Mon.--Wed.--Fri.
                       Hours 3-5 P.M.


"Now if you'll just step this way--" said the Principal, pushing
open the door.

Amanthis found herself in a long, bright room, populated with girls
and men of about her own age.  The scene presented itself to her at
first as a sort of animated afternoon tea but after a moment she
began to see, here and there, a motive and a pattern to the
proceedings.

The students were scattered into groups, sitting, kneeling,
standing, but all rapaciously intent on the subjects which
engrossed them.  From six young ladies gathered in a ring around
some indistinguishable objects came a medley of cries and
exclamations--plaintive, pleading, supplicating, exhorting,
imploring and lamenting--their voices serving as tenor to an
undertone of mysterious clatters.

Next to this group, four young men were surrounding an adolescent
black, who proved to be none other than Mr. Powell's late body-
servant.  The young men were roaring at Hugo apparently unrelated
phrases, expressing a wide gamut of emotion.  Now their voices rose
to a sort of clamor, now they spoke softly and gently, with mellow
implication.  Every little while Hugo would answer them with words
of approbation, correction or disapproval.

"What are they doing?" whispered Amanthis to Jim.

"That there's a course in southern accent.  Lot of young men up
here want to learn southern accent--so we teach it--Georgia,
Florida, Alabama, Eastern Shore, Ole Virginian.  Some of 'em even
want straight nigger--for song purposes."

They walked around among the groups.  Some girls with metal
knuckles were furiously insulting two punching bags on each of
which was painted the leering, winking face of a "masher."  A mixed
group, led by a banjo tom-tom, were rolling harmonic syllables from
their guitars.  There were couples dancing flat-footed in the
corner to a phonograph record made by Rastus Muldoon's Savannah
Band; there were couples stalking a slow Chicago with a Memphis
Sideswoop solemnly around the room.

"Are there any rules?" asked Amanthis.

Jim considered.

"Well," he answered finally, "they can't smoke unless they're over
sixteen, and the boys have got to shoot square dice and I don't let
'em bring liquor into the Academy."

"I see."

"And now, Miss Powell, if you're ready I'll ask you to take off
your hat and go over and join Miss Genevieve Harlan at that
punching bag in the corner."  He raised his voice.  "Hugo," he
called, "there's a new student here.  Equip her with a pair of
Powell's Defensive Brassknuckles--débutante size."

I regret to say that I never saw Jim Powell's famous Jazz School in
action nor followed his personally conducted tours into the
mysteries of Dice, Brassknuckles and Guitar.  So I can give you
only such details as were later reported to me by one of his
admiring pupils.  During all the discussion of it afterwards no one
ever denied that it was an enormous success, and no pupil ever
regretted having received its degree--Bachelor of Jazz.

The parents innocently assumed that it was a sort of musical and
dancing academy, but its real curriculum was transmitted from Santa
Barbara to Biddeford Pool by that underground associated press
which links up the so-called younger generation.  Invitations to
visit Southampton were at a premium--and Southampton generally is
almost as dull for young people as Newport.

The Academy branched out with a small but well-groomed Jazz
Orchestra.

"If I could keep it dark," Jim confided to Amanthis, "I'd have up
Rastus Muldoon's Band from Savannah.  That's the band I've always
wanted to lead."

He was making money.  His charges were not exorbitant--as a rule
his pupils were not particularly flush--but he moved from his
boarding-house to the Casino Hotel where he took a suite and had
Hugo serve him his breakfast in bed.

The establishing of Amanthis as a member of Southampton's younger
set was easier than he had expected.  Within a week she was known
to everyone in the school by her first name.  Miss Genevieve Harlan
took such a fancy to her that she was invited to a sub-deb dance at
the Harlan house--and evidently acquitted herself with tact, for
thereafter she was invited to almost every such entertainment in
Southampton.

Jim saw less of her than he would have liked.  Not that her manner
toward him changed--she walked with him often in the mornings, she
was always willing to listen to his plans--but after she was taken
up by the fashionable her evenings seemed to be monopolized.
Several times Jim arrived at her boarding-house to find her out of
breath, as if she had just come in at a run, presumably from some
festivity in which he had no share.

So as the summer waned he found that one thing was lacking to
complete the triumph of his enterprise.  Despite the hospitality
shown to Amanthis, the doors of Southampton were closed to him.
Polite to, or rather, fascinated by him as his pupils were from
three to five, after that hour they moved in another world.

His was the position of a golf professional who, though he may
fraternize, and even command, on the links, loses his privileges
with the sun-down.  He may look in the club window but he cannot
dance.  And, likewise, it was not given to Jim to see his teachings
put into effect.  He could hear the gossip of the morning after--
that was all.

But while the golf professional, being English, holds himself
proudly below his patrons, Jim Powell, who "came from a right good
family down there--pore though," lay awake many nights in his hotel
bed and heard the music drifting into his window from the Katzbys'
house or the Beach Club, and turned over restlessly and wondered
what was the matter.  In the early days of his success he had
bought himself a dress-suit, thinking that he would soon have a
chance to wear it--but it still lay untouched in the box in which
it had come from the tailor's.

Perhaps, he thought, there was some real gap which separated him
from the rest.  It worried him.  One boy in particular, Martin Van
Vleck, son of Van Vleck the ash-can King, made him conscious of the
gap.  Van Vleck was twenty-one, a tutoring-school product who still
hoped to enter Yale.  Several times Jim had heard him make remarks
not intended for Jim's ear--once in regard to the suit with
multiple buttons, again in reference to Jim's long, pointed shoes.
Jim had passed these over.

He knew that Van Vleck was attending the school chiefly to
monopolize the time of little Martha Katzby, who was just sixteen
and too young to have attention of a boy of twenty-one--especially
the attention of Van Vleck, who was so spiritually exhausted by his
educational failures that he drew on the rather exhaustible
innocence of sixteen.

It was late in September, two days before the Harlan dance which
was to be the last and biggest of the season for this younger
crowd.  Jim, as usual, was not invited.  He had hoped that he would
be.  The two young Harlans, Ronald and Genevieve, had been his
first patrons when he arrived at Southampton--and it was Genevieve
who had taken such a fancy to Amanthis.  To have been at their
dance--the most magnificent dance of all--would have crowned and
justified the success of the waning summer.

His class, gathering for the afternoon, was loudly anticipating the
next day's revel with no more thought of him than if he had been
the family butler.  Hugo, standing beside Jim, chuckled suddenly
and remarked:

"Look yonder that man Van Vleck.  He paralyzed.  He been havin'
powerful lotta corn this evenin'."

Jim turned and stared at Van Vleck, who had linked arms with little
Martha Katzby and was saying something to her in a low voice.  Jim
saw her try to draw away.

He put his whistle to his mouth and blew it.

"All right," he cried, "Le's go!  Group one tossin' the drumstick,
high an' zig-zag, group two, test your mouth organs for the
Riverfront Shuffle.  Promise 'em sugar!  Flatfoots this way!
Orchestra--let's have the Florida Drag-Out played as a dirge."

There was an unaccustomed sharpness in his voice and the exercises
began with a mutter of facetious protest.

With his smoldering grievance directing itself toward Van Vleck,
Jim was walking here and there among the groups when Hugo tapped
him suddenly on the arm.  He looked around.  Two participants had
withdrawn from the mouth organ institute--one of them was Van Vleck
and he was giving a drink out of his flask to fifteen-year-old
Ronald Harlan.

Jim strode across the room.  Van Vleck turned defiantly as he came
up.

"All right," said Jim, trembling with anger, "you know the rules.
You get out!"

The music died slowly away and there was a sudden drifting over in
the direction of the trouble.  Somebody snickered.  An atmosphere
of anticipation formed instantly.  Despite the fact that they all
liked Jim their sympathies were divided--Van Vleck was one of them.

"Get out!" repeated Jim, more quietly.

"Are you talking to me?" inquired Van Vleck coldly.

"Yes."

"Then you better say 'sir.'"

"I wouldn't say 'sir' to anybody that'd give a little boy whisky!
You get out!"

"Look here!" said Van Vleck furiously.  "You've butted in once too
much.  I've known Ronald since he was two years old.  Ask HIM if he
wants YOU to tell him what he can do!"

Ronald Harlan, his dignity offended, grew several years older and
looked haughtily at Jim.

"Mind your own business!" he said defiantly, albeit a little
guiltily.

"Hear that?" demanded Van Vleck.  "My God, can't you see you're
just a servant?  Ronald here'd no more think of asking you to his
party than he would his bootlegger."

"Youbettergetout!" cried Jim incoherently.

Van Vleck did not move.  Reaching out suddenly, Jim caught his
wrist and jerking it behind his back forced his arm upward until
Van Vleck bent forward in agony.  Jim leaned and picked the flask
from the floor with his free hand.  Then he signed Hugo to open the
hall-door, uttered an abrupt "You STEP!" and marched his helpless
captive out into the hall where he literally THREW him downstairs,
head over heels bumping from wall to banister, and hurled his flask
after him.

Then he reentered his academy, closed the door behind him and stood
with his back against it.

"It--it happens to be a rule that nobody drinks while in this
Academy."  He paused, looking from face to face, finding there
sympathy, awe, disapproval, conflicting emotions.  They stirred
uneasily.  He caught Amanthis's eye, fancied he saw a faint nod of
encouragement and, with almost an effort, went on:

"I just HAD to throw that fella out an' you-all know it."  Then he
concluded with a transparent affectation of dismissing an
unimportant matter--"All right, let's go!  Orchestra--!"

But no one felt exactly like going on.  The spontaneity of the
proceedings had been violently disturbed.  Someone made a run or
two on the sliding guitar and several of the girls began whamming
at the leer on the punching bags, but Ronald Harlan, followed by
two other boys, got their hats and went silently out the door.

Jim and Hugo moved among the groups as usual until a certain
measure of routine activity was restored but the enthusiasm was
unrecapturable and Jim, shaken and discouraged, considered
discontinuing school for the day.  But he dared not.  If they went
home in this mood they might not come back.  The whole thing
depended on a mood.  He must recreate it, he thought frantically--
now, at once!

But try as he might, there was little response.  He himself was not
happy--he could communicate no gaiety to them.  They watched his
efforts listlessly and, he thought, a little contemptuously.

Then the tension snapped when the door burst suddenly open,
precipitating a brace of middle-aged and excited women into the
room.  No person over twenty-one had ever entered the Academy
before--but Van Vleck had gone direct to headquarters.  The women
were Mrs. Clifton Garneau and Mrs. Poindexter Katzby, two of the
most fashionable and, at present, two of the most flurried women in
Southampton.  They were in search of their daughters as, in these
days, so many women continually are.

The business was over in about three minutes.

"And as for you!" cried Mrs. Clifton Garneau in an awful voice,
"your idea is to run a bar and--and opium den for children!  You
ghastly, horrible, unspeakable man!  I can smell morphin fumes!
Don't tell me I can't smell morphin fumes.  I can smell morphin
fumes!"

"And," bellowed Mrs. Poindexter Katzby, "you have colored men
around!  You have colored girls hidden!  I'm going to the police!"

Not content with herding their own daughters from the room, they
insisted on the exodus of their friends' daughters.  Jim was not a
little touched when several of them--including even little Martha
Katzby, before she was snatched fiercely away by her mother--came
up and shook hands with him.  But they were all going, haughtily,
regretfully or with shame-faced mutters of apology.

"Good-by," he told them wistfully.  "In the morning I'll send you
the money that's due you."

And, after all, they were not sorry to go.  Outside, the sound of
their starting motors, the triumphant put-put of their cut-outs
cutting the warm September air, was a jubilant sound--a sound of
youth and hopes high as the sun.  Down to the ocean, to roll in the
waves and forget--forget him and their discomfort at his
humiliation.

They were gone--he was alone with Hugo in the room.  He sat down
suddenly with his face in his hands.

"Hugo," he said huskily.  "They don't want us up here."

"Don't you care," said a voice.

He looked up to see Amanthis standing beside him.

"You better go with them," he told her.  "You better not be seen
here with me."

"Why?"

"Because you're in society now and I'm no better to those people
than a servant.  You're in society--I fixed that up.  You better go
or they won't invite you to any of their dances."

"They won't anyhow, Jim," she said gently.  "They didn't invite me
to the one tomorrow night."

He looked up indignantly.

"They DIDN'T?"

She shook her head.

"I'll MAKE 'em!" he said wildly.  "I'll tell 'em they got to.  I'll--
I'll--"

She came close to him with shining eyes.

"Don't you mind, Jim," she soothed him.  "Don't you mind.  They
don't matter.  We'll have a party of our own tomorrow--just you and
I."

"I come from right good folks," he said, defiantly.  "Pore though."

She laid her hand softly on his shoulder.

"I understand.  You're better than all of them put together, Jim."

He got up and went to the window and stared out mournfully into the
late afternoon.

"I reckon I should have let you sleep in that hammock."

She laughed.

"I'm awfully glad you didn't."

He turned and faced the room, and his face was dark.

"Sweep up and lock up, Hugo," he said, his voice trembling.  "The
summer's over and we're going down home."

Autumn had come early.  Jim Powell woke next morning to find his
room cool, and the phenomenon of frosted breath in September
absorbed him for a moment to the exclusion of the day before.  Then
the lines of his face drooped with unhappiness as he remembered the
humiliation which had washed the cheery glitter from the summer.
There was nothing left for him except to go back where he was
known, where under no provocation were such things said to white
people as had been said to him here.

After breakfast a measure of his customary light-heartedness
returned.  He was a child of the South--brooding was alien to his
nature.  He could conjure up an injury only a certain number of
times before it faded into the great vacancy of the past.

But when, from force of habit, he strolled over to his defunct
establishment, already as obsolete as Snorkey's late sanitarium,
melancholy again dwelt in his heart.  Hugo was there, a specter of
despair, deep in the lugubrious blues amidst his master's broken
hopes.

Usually a few words from Jim were enough to raise him to an
inarticulate ecstasy, but this morning there were no words to
utter.  For two months Hugo had lived on a pinnacle of which he had
never dreamed.  He had enjoyed his work simply and passionately,
arriving before school hours and lingering long after Mr. Powell's
pupils had gone.

The day dragged toward a not-too-promising night.  Amanthis did not
appear and Jim wondered forlornly if she had not changed her mind
about dining with him that night.  Perhaps it would be better if
she were not seen with them.  But then, he reflected dismally, no
one would see them anyhow--everybody was going to the big dance at
the Harlans' house.

When twilight threw unbearable shadows into the school hall he
locked it up for the last time, took down the sign "James Powell;
J. M., Dice, Brassknuckles and Guitar," and went back to his hotel.
Looking over his scrawled accounts he saw that there was another
month's rent to pay on his school and some bills for windows broken
and new equipment that had hardly been used.  Jim had lived in
state, and he realized that financially he would have nothing to
show for the summer after all.

When he had finished he took his new dress-suit out of its box and
inspected it, running his hand over the satin of the lapels and
lining.  This, at least, he owned and perhaps in Tarleton somebody
would ask him to a party where he could wear it.

"Shucks!" he said scoffingly.  "It was just a no account old
academy, anyhow.  Some of those boys round the garage down home
could of beat it all hollow."

Whistling "Jeanne of Jelly-bean Town" to a not-dispirited rhythm
Jim encased himself in his first dress-suit and walked downtown.

"Orchids," he said to the clerk.  He surveyed his purchase with
some pride.  He knew that no girl at the Harlan dance would wear
anything lovelier than these exotic blossoms that leaned
languorously backward against green ferns.

In a taxi-cab, carefully selected to look like a private car, he
drove to Amanthis's boarding-house.  She came down wearing a rose-
colored evening dress into which the orchids melted like colors
into a sunset.

"I reckon we'll go to the Casino Hotel," he suggested, "unless you
got some other place--"

At their table, looking out over the dark ocean, his mood became a
contended sadness.  The windows were shut against the cool but the
orchestra played "Kalula" and "South Sea Moon" and for awhile, with
her young loveliness opposite him, he felt himself to be a romantic
participant in the life around him.  They did not dance, and he was
glad--it would have reminded him of that other brighter and more
radiant dance to which they could not go.

After dinner they took a taxi and followed the sandy roads for an
hour, glimpsing the now starry ocean through the casual trees.

"I want to thank you," she said, "for all you've done for me, Jim."

"That's all right--we Powells ought to stick together."

"What are you going to do?"

"I'm going to Tarleton tomorrow."

"I'm sorry," she said softly.  "Are you going to drive down?"

"I got to.  I got to get the car south because I couldn't get what
she was worth by sellin' it.  You don't suppose anybody's stole my
car out of your barn?" he asked in sudden alarm.

She repressed a smile.

"No."

"I'm sorry about this--about you," he went on huskily, "and--and I
would like to have gone to just one of their dances.  You shouldn't
of stayed with me yesterday.  Maybe it kept 'em from asking you."

"Jim," she suggested eagerly, "let's go and stand outside and
listen to their old music.  We don't care."

"They'll be coming out," he objected.

"No, it's too cold.  Besides there's nothing they could do to you
any more than they HAVE done."

She gave the chauffeur a direction and a few minutes later they
stopped in front of the heavy Georgian beauty of the Madison Harlan
house whence the windows cast their gaiety in bright patches on the
lawn.  There was laughter inside and the plaintive wind of
fashionable horns, and now and again the slow, mysterious shuffle
of dancing feet.

"Let's go up close," whispered Amanthis in an ecstatic trance, "I
want to hear."

They walked toward the house, keeping in the shadow of the great
trees.  Jim proceeded with awe--suddenly he stopped and seized
Amanthis's arm.

"Man!" he cried in an excited whisper.  "Do you know what that is?"

"A night watchman?"  Amanthis cast a startled look around.

"It's Rastus Muldoon's Band from Savannah!  I heard 'em once, and I
KNOW.  It's Rastus Muldoon's Band!"

They moved closer till they could see first pompadours, then
slicked male heads, and high coiffures and finally even bobbed hair
pressed under black ties.  They could distinguish chatter below the
ceaseless laughter.  Two figures appeared on the porch, gulped
something quickly from flasks and returned inside.  But the music
had bewitched Jim Powell.  His eyes were fixed and he moved his
feet like a blind man.

Pressed in close behind some dark bushes they listened.  The number
ended.  A breeze from the ocean blew over them and Jim shivered
slightly.  Then, in a wistful whisper:

"I've always wanted to lead that band.  Just once."  His voice grew
listless.  "Come on.  Let's go.  I reckon I don't belong around
here."

He held out his arm to her but instead of taking it she stepped
suddenly out of the bushes and into a bright patch of light.

"Come on, Jim," she said startlingly.  "Let's go inside."

"What--?"

She seized his arm and though he drew back in a sort of stupefied
horror at her boldness she urged him persistently toward the great
front door.

"Watch out!" he gasped.  "Somebody's coming out of that house and
see us."

"No, Jim," she said firmly.  "Nobody's coming out of that house--
but two people are going in."

"Why?" he demanded wildly, standing in full glare of the porte-
cochere lamps.  "Why?"

"Why?" she mocked him.  "Why, just because this dance happens to be
given for me."

He thought she was mad.

"Come home before they see us," he begged her.

The great doors swung open and a gentleman stepped out on the
porch.  In horror Jim recognized Mr. Madison Harlan.  He made a
movement as though to break away and run.  But the man walked down
the steps holding out both hands to Amanthis.

"Hello at last," he cried.  "Where on earth have you two been?
Cousin Amanthis--"  He kissed her, and turned cordially to Jim.
"And for you, Mr. Powell," he went on, "to make up for being late
you've got to promise that for just one number you're going to lead
that band."

New Jersey was warm, all except the part that was under water, and
that mattered only to the fishes.  All the tourists who rode
through the long green miles stopped their cars in front of a
spreading old-fashioned country house and looked at the red swing
on the lawn and the wide, shady porch, and sighed and drove on--
swerving a little to avoid a jet-black body-servant in the road.
The body-servant was applying a hammer and nails to a decayed
flivver which flaunted from its rear the legend, "Tarleton, Ga."

A girl with yellow hair and a warm color to her face was lying in
the hammock looking as though she could fall asleep any moment.
Near her sat a gentleman in an extraordinarily tight suit.  They
had come down together the day before from the fashionable resort
at Southampton.

"When you first appeared," she was explaining, "I never thought I'd
see you again so I made that up about the barber and all.  As a
matter of fact, I've been around quite a bit--with or without
brassknuckles.  I'm coming out this autumn."

"I reckon I had a lot to learn," said Jim.

"And you see," went on Amanthis, looking at him rather anxiously,
"I'd been invited up to Southampton to visit my cousins--and when
you said you were going, I wanted to see what you'd do.  I always
slept at the Harlans' but I kept a room at the boarding-house so
you wouldn't know.  The reason I didn't get there on the right
train was because I had to come early and warn a lot of people to
pretend not to know me."

Jim got up, nodding his head in comprehension.

"I reckon I and Hugo had better be movin' along.  We got to make
Baltimore by night."

"That's a long way."

"I want to sleep south tonight," he said simply.

Together they walked down the path and past the idiotic statue of
Diana on the lawn.

"You see," added Amanthis gently, "you don't have to be rich up
here in order to--to go around, any more than you do in Georgia--"
She broke off abruptly, "Won't you come back next year and start
another Academy?"

"No mamm, not me.  That Mr. Harlan told me I could go on with the
one I had but I told him no."

"Haven't you--didn't you make money?"

"No mamm," he answered.  "I got enough of my own income to just get
me home.  I didn't have my principal along.  One time I was way
ahead but I was livin' high and there was my rent an' apparatus and
those musicians.  Besides, there at the end I had to pay what
they'd advanced me for their lessons."

"You shouldn't have done that!" cried Amanthis indignantly.

"They didn't want me to, but I told 'em they'd have to take it."

He didn't consider it necessary to mention that Mr. Harlan had
tried to present him with a check.

They reached the automobile just as Hugo drove in his last nail.
Jim opened a pocket of the door and took from it an unlabeled
bottle containing a whitish-yellow liquid.

"I intended to get you a present," he told her awkwardly, "but my
money got away before I could, so I thought I'd send you something
from Georgia.  This here's just a personal remembrance.  It won't
do for you to drink but maybe after you come out into society you
might want to show some of those young fellas what good old corn
tastes like."

She took the bottle.

"Thank you, Jim."

"That's all right."  He turned to Hugo.  "I reckon we'll go along
now.  Give the lady the hammer."

"Oh, you can have the hammer," said Amanthis tearfully.  "Oh, won't
you promise to come back?"

"Someday--maybe."

He looked for a moment at her yellow hair and her blue eyes misty
with sleep and tears.  Then he got into his car and as his foot
found the clutch his whole manner underwent a change.

"I'll say good-by mamm," he announced with impressive dignity,
"we're goin' south for the winter."

The gesture of his straw hat indicated Palm Beach, St. Augustine,
Miami.  His body-servant spun the crank, gained his seat and became
part of the intense vibration into which the automobile was thrown.

"South for the winter," repeated Jim, and then he added softly,
"You're the prettiest girl I ever knew.  You go back up there and
lie down in that hammock, and sleep--sle-eep--"

It was almost a lullaby, as he said it.  He bowed to her,
magnificently, profoundly, including the whole North in the
splendor of his obeisance--

Then they were gone down the road in quite a preposterous cloud of
dust.  Just before they reached the first bend Amanthis saw them
come to a full stop, dismount and shove the top part of the car on
to the bottom pan.  They took their seats again without looking
around.  Then the bend--and they were out of sight, leaving only a
faint brown mist to show that they had passed.


THE END






EMOTIONAL BANKRUPTCY


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (15 August 1931)



"There's that nut with the spyglass again," remarked Josephine.
Lillian Hammel unhooked a lace sofa cushion from her waist and came
to the window.  "He's standing back so we can't see him.  He's
looking at the room above."

The peeper was working from a house on the other side of narrow
Sixty-eighth Street, all unconscious that his activities were a
matter of knowledge and, lately, of indifference to the pupils of
Miss Truby's finishing school.  They had even identified him as the
undistinguished but quite proper young man who issued from the
house with a brief case at eight every morning, apparently
oblivious of the school across the street.

"What a horrible person," said Lillian.

"They're all the same," Josephine said.  "I'll bet almost every man
we know would do the same thing, if he had a telescope and nothing
to do in the afternoon.  I'll bet Louie Randall would, anyhow."

"Josephine, is he actually following you to Princeton?" Lillian
asked.

"Yes, dearie."

"Doesn't he think he's got his nerve?"

"He'll get away with it," Josephine assured her.

"Won't Paul be wild?"

"I can't worry about that.  I only know half a dozen boys at
Princeton, and with Louie I know I'll have at least one good dancer
to depend on.  Paul's too short for me, and he's a bum dancer
anyhow."

Not that Josephine was very tall; she was an exquisite size for
seventeen and of a beauty that was flowering marvelously day by day
into something richer and warmer.  People gasped nowadays, whereas
a year ago they would merely have stared, and scarcely glanced at
her a year before that.  She was manifestly to be the spectacular
débutante of Chicago next year, in spite of the fact that she was
an egotist who played not for popularity but for individual men.
While Josephine always recovered, the men frequently didn't--her
mail from Chicago, from New Haven, from the Yale Battery on the
border, averaged a dozen letters a day.

This was in the fall of 1916, with the thunder of far-off guns
already growing louder on the air.  When the two girls started for
the Princeton prom two days later, they carried with them the Poems
of Alan Seeger, supplemented by copies of Smart Set and Snappy
Stories, bought surreptitiously at the station news stand.  When
compared to a seventeen-year-old girl of today, Lillian Hammel was
an innocent; Josephine Perry, however, belonged to the ages.

They read nothing en route save a few love epigrams beginning:  "A
woman of thirty is--"  The train was crowded and a sustained,
excited chatter flowed along the aisles of the coaches.  There were
very young girls in a gallantly concealed state of terror; there
were privately bored girls who would never see twenty-five again;
there were unattractive girls, blandly unconscious of what was in
store; and there were little, confident parties who felt as though
they were going home.

"They say it's not like Yale," said Josephine.  "They don't do
things so elaborately here.  They don't rush you from place to
place, from one tea to another, like they do at New Haven."

"Will you ever forget that divine time last spring?" exclaimed
Lillian.

They both sighed.

"At least there'll be Louie Randall," said Josephine.

There would indeed be Louie Randall, whom Josephine had seen fit to
invite herself, without the formality of telling her Princeton
escort that he was coming.  The escort, at that moment pacing up
and down at the station platform with many other young men, was
probably under the impression that it was his party.  But he was
wrong; it was Josephine's party; even Lillian was coming with
another Princeton man, named Martin Munn, whom Josephine had
thoughtfully provided.  "Please ask her," she had written.  "We'll
manage to see a lot of each other, if you do, because the man I'm
coming with isn't really very keen about me, so he won't mind."

But Paul Dempster cared a lot; so much so that when the train came
puffing up from the Junction he gulped a full pint of air, which is
a mild form of swooning.  He had been devoted to Josephine for a
year--long after her own interest had waned--he had long lost any
power of judging her objectively; she was become simply a
projection of his own dreams, a radiant, nebulous mass of light.

But Josephine saw Paul clearly enough as they stepped off the
train.  She gave herself up to him immediately, as if to get it
over with, to clear the decks for more vital action.

"So thrilled--so thrilled!  So darling to ask me!"  Immemorial
words, still doing service after fifteen years.

She took his arm snugly, settling it in hers with a series of
little readjustments, as if she wanted it right because it was
going to be there forever.

"I bet you're not glad to see me at all," she whispered.  "I'll bet
you've forgotten me.  I know you."

Rudimentary stuff, but it sent Paul Dempster into a confused and
happy trance.  He had the adequate surface of nineteen, but,
within, all was still in a ferment of adolescence.

He could only answer gruffly:  "Big chance."  And then:  "Martin
had a chemistry lab.  He'll meet us at the club."

Slowly the crowd of youth swirled up the steps and beneath Blair
arch, floating in an autumn dream and scattering the yellow leaves
with their feet.  Slowly they moved between stretches of greensward
under the elms and cloisters, with breath misty upon the crisp
evening, following the hope that lay just ahead, the goal of
happiness almost reached.

They sat before a big fire in the Witherspoon Club, the largest of
those undergraduate mansions for which Princeton is famous.  Martin
Munn, Lillian's escort, was a quiet, handsome boy whom Josephine
had met several times, but whose sentimental nature she had not
explored.  Now, with the phonograph playing Down Among the
Sheltering Palms, with the soft orange light of the great room
glowing upon the scattered groups, who seemed to have brought in
the atmosphere of infinite promise from outside, Josephine looked
at him appraisingly.  A familiar current of curiosity coursed
through her; already her replies to Paul had grown abstracted.  But
still in the warm enchantment of the walk from the station, Paul
did not notice.  He was far from guessing that he had already been
served his ration; of special attention he would get no more.  He
was now cast for another rôle.

At the exact moment when it was suggested that they dress for
dinner the party became aware of an individual who had just entered
the club and was standing by the entrance looking not exactly at
home, for he blinked about unfamiliarly, but not in the least ill
at ease.  He was tall, with long, dancing legs, and his face was
that of an old, experienced weasel to whom no henhouse was
impregnable.

"Why, Louie Randall!" exclaimed Josephine in a tone of
astonishment.

She talked to him for a moment as if unwillingly, and then
introduced him all around, meanwhile whispering to Paul:  "He's a
boy from New Haven.  I never dreamed he'd follow me down here."

Randall within a few minutes was somehow one of the party.  He had
a light and witty way about him; no dark suspicions had penetrated
Paul's mind.

"Oh, by the way," said Louie Randall, "I wonder if I can find a
place to change my clothes.  I've got a suitcase outside."

There was a pause.  Josephine was apparently uninterested.  The
pause grew difficult, and Paul heard himself saying:  "You can
change in my room if you want to."

"I don't want to put you out."

"Not at all."

Josephine raised her eyebrows at Paul, disclaiming responsibility
for the man's presumption; a moment later, Randall said:  "Do you
live near here?"

"Pretty near."

"Because I have a taxi and I could take you there if you're going
to change, and you could show me where it is.  I don't want to put
you out."

The repetition of this ambiguous statement suggested that otherwise
Paul might find his belongings in the street.  He rose unwillingly;
he did not hear Josephine whisper to Martin Munn:  "Please don't
you go yet."  But Lillian did, and without minding at all.  Her
love affairs never conflicted with Josephine's, which is why they
had been intimate friends so long.  When Louie Randall and his
involuntary host had departed, she excused herself and went to
dress upstairs.

"I'd like to see all over the clubhouse," suggested Josephine.  She
felt the old excitement mounting in her pulse, felt her cheeks
begin to glow like an electric heater.

"These are the private dining rooms," Martin explained as they
walked around. . . .  "The billiard room. . . .  The squash
courts. . . .  This library is modeled on something in a Cercersion
monastery in--in India or somewhere. . . .  This"--he opened a door
and peered in--"this is the president's room, but I don't know where
the light is."

Josephine walked in with a little laugh.  "It's very nice in here,"
she said.  "You can't see anything at all.  Oh, what have I run
into?  Come and save me!"

When they emerged a few minutes later, Martin smoothed back his
hair hurriedly.

"You darling!" he said.

Josephine made a funny little clicking sound.

"What is it?" he demanded.  "Why have you got such a funny look on
your face?"

Josephine didn't answer.

"Have I done something?  Are you angry?  You look as if you'd seen
a ghost," he said.

"You haven't done anything," she answered, and added, with an
effort:  "You were--sweet."  She shuddered.  "Show me my room, will
you?"

"How strange," she was thinking.  "He's so attractive, but I didn't
enjoy kissing him at all.  For the first time in my life--even when
it was a man I didn't especially care for--I had no feeling about
him at all.  I've often been bored afterward, but at the time it's
always meant something."

The experience depressed her more than she could account for.  This
was only her second prom, but neither before nor after did she ever
enjoy one so little.  She had never been more enthusiastically
rushed, but through it all she seemed to float in a detached dream.
The men were not individuals tonight, but dummies; men from
Princeton, men from New Haven, new men, old beaus--were all as
unreal as sticks.  She wondered if her face wore that bovine
expression she had often noted on the faces of stupid and apathetic
girls.

"It's a mood," she told herself.  "I'm just tired."

But next day, at a bright and active luncheon, she seemed to
herself to have less vivacity than the dozen girls who boasted
wanly that they hadn't gone to bed at all.  After the football game
she walked with Paul Dempster to the station, trying contritely to
give him the last end of the week-end, as she had given him the
beginning.

"Then why won't you go to the theater with us tonight?" he was
pleading.  "That was the understanding in my letter.  We were to
come to New York with you and all go to the theater."

"Because," she explained patiently, "Lillian and I have to be back
to school by eight.  That's the only condition on which we were
allowed to come."

"Oh, hell," he said.  "I'll bet you're doing something tonight with
that Randall."

She denied this scornfully, but Paul was suddenly realizing that
Randall had dined with them, Randall had slept upon his couch, and
Randall, though at the game he had sat on the Yale side of the
field, was somehow with them now.

His was the last face that Paul saw as the train pulled out for the
Junction.

He had thanked Paul very graciously and asked him to stay with him
if he was ever in New Haven.

Nevertheless, if the miserable Princetonian had witnessed a scene
in the Pennsylvania Station an hour later, his pain would have been
moderated, for now Louie Randall was arguing bitterly:

"But why not take a chance?  The chaperon doesn't know what time
you have to be in."

"We do."

When finally he had accepted the inevitable and departed, Josephine
sighed and turned to Lillian.

"Where are we going to meet Wallie and Joe?  At the Ritz?"

"Yes, and we'd better hurry," said Lillian.  "The Follies begin at
nine."


II


It had been like that for almost a year--a game played with
technical mastery, but with the fire and enthusiasm gone--and
Josephine was still a month short of eighteen.  One evening during
Thanksgiving vacation, as they waited for dinner in the library of
Christine Dicer's house on Gramercy Park, Josephine said to
Lillian:

"I keep thinking how excited I'd have been a year ago.  A new
place, a new dress, meeting new men."

"You've been around too much, dearie; you're blasé."

Josephine bridled impatiently: "I hate that word, and it's not
true.  I don't care about anything in the world except men, and you
know it.  But they're not like they used to be. . . .  What are you
laughing at?"

"When you were six years old they were different?"

"They were.  They used to have more spirit when we played drop-the-
handkerchief--even the little Ikeys that used to come in the back
gate.  The boys at dancing school were so exciting; they were all
so sweet.  I used to wonder what it would be like to kiss every one
of them, and sometimes it was wonderful.  And then came Travis and
Tony Harker and Ridge Saunders and Ralph and John Bailey, and
finally I began to realize that I was doing it all.  They were
nothing, most of them--not heroes or men of the world or anything I
thought.  They were just easy.  That sounds conceited, but it's
true."

She paused for a moment.

"Last night in bed I was thinking of the sort of man I really could
love, but he'd be different from anybody I've ever met.  He'd have
to have certain things.  He wouldn't necessarily be very handsome,
but pleasant looking; and with a good figure, and strong.  Then
he'd have to have some kind of position in the world, or else not
care whether he had one or not; if you see what I mean.  He'd have
to be a leader, not just like everybody else.  And dignified, but
very pash, and with lots of experience, so I'd believe everything
he said or thought was right.  And every time I looked at him I'd
have to get that thrill I sometimes get out of a new man; only with
him I'd have to get it over and over every time I looked at him,
all my life."

"And you'd want him to be very much in love with you.  That's what
I'd want first of all."

"Of course," said Josephine abstractedly, "but principally I'd want
to be always sure of loving him.  It's much more fun to love
someone than to be loved by someone."

There were footsteps in the hall outside and a man walked into the
room.  He was an officer in the uniform of the French aviation--a
glove-fitting tunic of horizon blue, and boots and belt that shone
like mirrors in the lamplight.  He was young, with gray eyes that
seemed to be looking off into the distance, and a red-brown
military mustache.  Across his left breast was a line of colored
ribbons, and there were gold-embroidered stripes on his arms and
wings on his collar.

"Good evening," he said courteously.  "I was directed in here.  I
hope I'm not breaking into something."

Josephine did not move; from head to foot she saw him, and as she
watched he seemed to come nearer, filling her whole vision.  She
heard Lillian's voice, and then the officer's voice, saying:

"My name's Dicer; I'm Christine's cousin.  Do you mind if I smoke a
cigarette?"

He didn't sit down.  He moved about the room and turned over a
magazine, not oblivious to their presence, but as if respecting
their conversation.  But when he saw that silence had fallen, he
sat against a table near them with his arms folded and smiled at
them.

"You're in the French army," Lillian ventured.

"Yes, I've just got back, and very glad to be here."

He didn't look glad, Josephine noticed.  He looked as if he wanted
to get out now, but had no place to go to.

For the first time in her life she felt no confidence.  She had
absolutely nothing to say.  She hoped the emptiness that she had
felt ever since her soul poured suddenly out toward his beautiful
image didn't show in her face.  She made her lips into a smile, and
kept thinking how once, long ago, Travis de Coppet had worn his
uncle's opera cloak to dancing school and suddenly seemed like a
man out of the great world.  So, now, the war overseas had gone on
so long, touched us so little, save for confining us to our own
shores, that it had a legendary quality about it, and the figure
before her seemed to have stepped out of a gigantic red fairy tale.

She was glad when the other dinner guests came and the room filled
with people, strangers she could talk to or laugh with or yawn at,
according to their deserts.  She despised the girls fluttering
around Captain Dicer, but she admired him for not showing by a
flicker of his eye that he either enjoyed it or hated it.
Especially she disliked a tall, possessive blonde who once passed,
her hand on his arm; he should have flicked away with a
handkerchief the contamination of his immaculateness.

They went in to dinner; he was far away from her, and she was glad.
All she could see of him was his blue cuff farther up the table
when he reached for a glass, but she felt that they were alone
together, none the less because he did not know.

The man next to her gave her the superfluous information that he
was a hero:

"He's Christine's cousin, brought up in France, and joined at the
beginning of the war.  He was shot down behind the German lines and
escaped by jumping off a train.  There was a lot about it in the
papers.  I think he's over here on some kind of propaganda
work. . . .  Great horseman too.  Everybody likes him."

After dinner she sat quietly while two men talked over her, sat
persistently willing him to come to her.  Ah, but she would be so
nice, avoiding any curiosity or sentimentality about his
experiences, avoiding any of the things that must have bored and
embarrassed him since he had been home.  She heard the voices
around him:

"Captain Dicer. . . .  Germans crucify all the Canadian soldiers
they capture. . . .  How much longer do you think the war . . . to
be behind the enemy lines. . . .  Were you frightened?"  And then a
heavy, male voice telling him about it, between puffs of a cigar:
"The way I see it, Captain Dicer, neither side is getting anywhere.
It strikes me they're afraid of each other."

It seemed a long time later that he came over to her, but at just
the right moment, when there was a vacant seat beside her and he
could slip into it.

"I wanted to talk to the prettiest girl for a while.  I've wanted
to all evening; it's been pretty heavy going."

Josephine wanted to lean against the shining leather of his belt,
and more, she wanted to take his head in her lap.  All her life had
pointed toward this moment.  She knew what he wanted, and gave it
to him; not words, but a smile of warmth and delight--a smile that
said, "I'm yours for the asking; I'm won."  It was not a smile that
undervalued herself, because through its beauty it spoke for both
of them, expressed all the potential joy that existed between them.

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I'm a girl."

"I thought you were a flower.  I wondered why they put you on a
chair."

"Vive la France," answered Josephine demurely.  She dropped her
eyes to his chest.  "Do you collect stamps, too, or only coins?"

He laughed.  "It's good to meet an American girl again.  I hoped
they'd at least put me across from you at table, so I could rest my
eyes on you."

"I could see your cuff."

"I could see your arm.  At least--yes, I thought it was your green
bracelet."

Later he suggested:  "Why couldn't you come out with me one of
these evenings?"

"It's not done.  I'm still in school."

"Well, some afternoon then.  I'd like to go to a tea-dance place
and hear some new tunes.  The newest thing I know is Waiting for
the Robert E. Lee."

"My nurse used to sing me to sleep with it."

"When could you?"

"I'm afraid you'll have to make up a party.  Your aunt, Mrs. Dicer,
is very strict."

"I keep forgetting," he agreed.  "How old are you?"

"Eighteen," she said, anticipating by a month.

That was the point at which they were interrupted and the evening
ended for her.  The other young men in dinner coats looked like
people in mourning beside the banner of his uniform.  Some of them
were persistent about Josephine, but she was in a reverie of
horizon blue and she wanted to be alone.

"This is it at last," something whispered inside her.

Later that night and next day, she still moved in a trance.
Another day more and she would see him--forty-eight hours, forty,
thirty.  The very word "blasé" made her laugh; she had never known
such excitement, such expectation.  The blessed day itself was a
haze of magic music and softly lit winter rooms, of automobiles
where her knee trembled against the top lacing of his boot.  She
was proud of the eyes that followed them when they danced; she was
proud of him even when he was dancing with another girl.

"He may think I'm too young," she thought anxiously.  "That's why
he won't say anything.  If he did, I'd leave school; I'd run away
with him tonight."

School opened next day and Josephine wrote home:


DEAR MOTHER:  I wonder if I can't spend part of the vacation in New
York.  Christine Dicer wants me to stay a week with her, which
would still leave me a full ten days in Chicago.  One reason is
that the Metropolitan is putting on Wagner's Der Ring des
Nibelungen and if I come home right away I can only see the
Rheingold.  Also there are two evening dresses that aren't finished--


The answer came by return post:


. . . because, in the first place, your eighteenth birthday falls
then, and your father would feel very badly, because it would be
the first birthday you hadn't passed with us; and, in the second
place, I've never met the Dicers; and, thirdly, I've planned a
little dance for you and I need your help; and, lastly, I can't
believe that the reasons you give are your real ones.  During
Christmas week the Chicago Grand Opera Company is giving--


Meanwhile Capt. Edward Dicer had sent flowers and several formal
little notes that sounded to her like translations from the French.
She was self-conscious, answering them; so she did it in slang.
His French education and his years in the war while America was
whirling toward the Jazz Age had made him, though he was only
twenty-three, seem of a more formal, more courteous generation than
her own.  She wondered what he would think of such limp exotics as
Travis de Coppet, or Book Chaffee, or Louie Randall.  Two days
before vacation he wrote asking when her train left for the West.
That was something, and for seventy-two hours she lived on it,
unable to turn her attention to the masses of Christmas invitations
and unheeded letters that she had meant to answer before leaving.
But on the day itself, Lillian brought her a marked copy of Town
Tattle that, from its ragged appearance, had already been passed
around the school.


It is rumored that a certain Tuxedo papa who was somewhat
irrasticable about the marital choice of a previous offspring views
with equanimity the fact that his remaining daughter is so often in
company with a young man fresh from his exploits in the French
army.


Captain Dicer did not come to the train.  He sent no flowers.
Lillian, who loved Josephine like part of herself, wept in their
compartment.  Josephine comforted her, saying:  "But listen,
darling; it's all the same to me.  I didn't have a chance, being in
school like we were.  It's all right."  But she was awake hours and
hours after Lillian was asleep.


III


Eighteen--it was to have meant so many things:  When I'm eighteen I
can--Until a girl's eighteen--You'll see things differently when
you're eighteen.

That, at least, was true.  Josephine saw her vacation invitations
as so many overdue bills.  Abstractedly she counted them as she
always had before--twenty-eight dances, nineteen dinner and theater
parties, fifteen tea dances and receptions, a dozen luncheons, a
few miscellaneous bids, ranging from early breakfast for the Yale
Glee Club to a bob party at Lake Forest--seventy-eight in all, and
with the small dance she was giving herself, seventy-nine.  Seventy-
nine promises of gayety, seventy-nine offers to share fun with her.
Patiently she sat down, choosing and weighing, referring doubtful
cases to her mother.

"You seem a little white and tired," her mother said.

"I'm wasting away.  I've been jilted."

"That won't worry you very long.  I know my Josephine.  Tonight at
the Junior League german you'll meet the most marvelous men."

"No, I won't, mother.  The only hope for me is to get married.
I'll learn to love him and have his children and scratch his back--"

"Josephine!"

"I know two girls who married for love who told me they were
supposed to scratch their husbands' backs and send out the laundry.
But I'll go through with it, and the sooner the better."

"Every girl feels like that sometimes," said her mother cheerfully.
"Before I was married I had three or four beaus, and I honestly
liked each one of them as well as the others.  Each one had certain
qualities I liked, and I worried about it so long that it didn't
seem worth while; I might as well have counted eenie, meenie,
mynie, mo.  Then one day when I was feeling lonely your father came
to take me driving, and from that day I never had a single doubt.
Love isn't like it is in books."

"But it is," said Josephine gloomily.  "At least for me it always
has been."

For the first time it seemed to her more peaceful to be with a
crowd than to be alone with a man.  The beginning of a line wearied
her; how many lines had she listened to in three years?  New men
were pointed out as exciting, were introduced, and she took
pleasure in freezing them to unhappiness with languid answers and
wandering glances.  Ancient admirers looked favorably upon the
metamorphosis, grateful for a little overdue time at last.
Josephine was glad when the holiday drew to a close.  Returning
from a luncheon one gray afternoon, the day after New Year's, she
thought that for once it was nice to think she had nothing to do
until dinner.  Kicking off her overshoes in the hall, she found
herself staring at something on the table that at first seemed a
projection of her own imagination.  It was a card fresh from a case--
MR. EDWARD DICER.

Instantly the world jerked into life, spun around dizzily and came
to rest on a new world.  The hall where he must have stood throbbed
with life; she pictured his straight figure against the open door,
and thought how he must have stood with his hat and cane in hand.
Outside the house, Chicago, permeated with his presence, pulsed
with the old delight.  She heard the phone ring in the downstairs
lounge and, still in her fur coat, ran for it.

"Hello!"

"Miss Josephine, please."

"Oh, hello!"

"Oh.  This is Edward Dicer."

"I saw your card."

"I must have just missed you."

What did the words matter when every word was winged and
breathless?

"I'm only here for the day.  Unfortunately, I'm tied up for dinner
tonight with the people I'm visiting."

"Can you come over now?"

"If you like."

"Come right away."

She rushed upstairs to change her dress, singing for the first time
in weeks.  She sang:


    "Where's my shoes?
       Where's my new gray shoes, shoes, shoes?
     I think I put them here,
       But I guess--oh, where the deuce--"


Dressed, she was at the head of the stairs when the bell rang.

"Never mind," she called to the maid; "I'll answer."

She opened upon Mr. and Mrs. Warren Dillon.  They were old friends
and she hadn't seen them before, this Christmas.

"Josephine!  We came to meet Constance here, but we hoped we'd have
a glimpse of you; but you're rushing around so."

Aghast, she led the way into the library.  "What time is sister
meeting you?" she asked when she could.

"Oh, in half an hour, if she isn't delayed."

She tried to be especially polite, to atone in advance for what
impoliteness might be necessary later.  In five minutes the bell
rang again; there was the romantic figure on the porch, cut sharp
and clear against the bleak sky; and up the steps behind him came
Travis de Coppet and Ed Bement.

"Stay!" she whispered quickly.  "These people will all go."

"I've two hours," he said.  "Of course, I'll wait if you want me
to."

She wanted to throw her arms around him then, but she controlled
herself, even her hands.  She introduced everyone, she sent for
tea.  The men asked Edward Dicer questions about the war and he
parried them politely but restlessly.

After half an hour he asked Josephine:  "Have you the time?  I must
keep track of my train."

They might have noticed the watch on his own wrist and taken the
hint, but he fascinated them all, as though they had isolated a
rare specimen and were determined to find out all about it.  Even
had they realized Josephine's state of mind, it would have seemed
to them that she was selfish to want something of such general
interest for her own.

The arrival of Constance, her married sister, did not help matters;
again Dicer was caught up into the phenomenon of human curiosity.
As the clock in the hall struck six, he shot a desperate glance at
Josephine.  With a belated appreciation of the situation, the group
broke itself up.  Constance took the Dillons upstairs to the other
sitting room, the two young men went home.

Silence, save for the voices fading off on the stairs, the
automobile crunching away on the snow outside.  Before a word was
said, Josephine rang for the maid, and instructing her that she was
not at home, closed the door into the hall.  Then she went and sat
down on the couch next to him and clasped her hands and waited.

"Thank God," he said.  "I thought if they stayed another minute--"

"Wasn't it terrible?"

"I came out here because of you.  The night you left New York I was
ten minutes late getting to the train because I was detained at the
French propaganda office.  I'm not much good at letters.  Since
then I've thought of nothing but getting out here to see you."

"I felt sad."  But not now; now she was thinking that in a moment
she would be in his arms, feeling the buttons of his tunic press
bruisingly against her, feeling his diagonal belt as something that
bound them both and made her part of him.  There were no doubts, no
reservations, he was everything she wanted.

"I'm over here for six months more--perhaps a year.  Then, if this
damned war goes on, I'll have to go back.  I suppose I haven't
really got the right--"

"Wait--wait!" she cried.  She wanted a moment longer to taste, to
feel fully her happiness.  "Wait," she repeated, putting her hand
on his.  She felt every object in the room vividly; she saw the
seconds passing, each one carrying a load of loveliness toward the
future.  "All right; now tell me."

"Just that I love you," he whispered.  She was in his arms, her
hair against his cheek.  "We haven't known each other long, and
you're only eighteen, but I've learned to be afraid of waiting."

Now she leaned her head back until she was looking up at him,
supported by his arm.  Her neck curved gracefully, full and soft,
and she leaned in toward his shoulder, as she knew how, so that her
lips were every minute closer to him.  "Now," she thought.  He gave
a funny little sigh and pulled her face up to his.

After a minute she leaned away from him and twisted herself
upright.

"Darling--darling--darling," he said.

She looked at him, stared at him.  Gently he pulled her over again
and kissed her.  This time, when she sat up, she rose and went
across the room, where she opened a dish of almonds and dropped
some in her mouth.  Then she came back and sat beside him, looking
straight ahead, then darting a sudden glance at him.

"What are you thinking, darling, darling Josephine?"  She didn't
answer; he put both hands over hers.  "What are you feeling, then?"

As he breathed, she could hear the faint sound of his leather belt
moving on his shoulder; she could feel his strong, kind handsome
eyes looking at her; she could feel his proud self feeding on glory
as others feed on security; she heard the jingle of spurs ring in
his strong, rich, compelling voice.

"I feel nothing at all," she said.

"What do you mean?"  He was startled.

"Oh, help me!" she cried.  "Help me!"

"I don't understand what you mean."

"Kiss me again."

He kissed her.  This time he held on to her and looked down into
her face.

"What do you mean?" he demanded.  "You mean you don't love me?"

"I don't feel anything."

"But you did love me."

"I don't know."

He let her go.  She went across the room and sat down.

"I don't understand," he said after a minute.

"I think you're perfect," she said, her lips quivering.

"But I'm not--thrilling to you?"

"Oh, yes, very thrilling.  I was thrilled all afternoon."

"Then what is it, darling?"

"I don't know.  When you kissed me I wanted to laugh."  It made her
sick to say this, but a desperate, interior honesty drove her on.
She saw his eyes change, saw him withdrawing a little from her.
"Help me," she repeated.

"Help you how?  You'll have to be more definite.  I love you; I
thought perhaps you loved me.  That's all.  If I don't please you--"

"But you do.  You're everything--you're everything I've always
wanted."  Her voice continued inside herself:  "But I've had
everything."

"But you simply don't love me."

"I've got nothing to give you.  I don't feel anything at all."

He got up abruptly.  He felt her vast, tragic apathy pervading the
room, and it set up an indifference in him now, too--a lot of
things suddenly melted out of him.

"Good-by."

"You won't help me," she murmured abstractedly.

"How in the devil can I help you?" he answered impatiently.  "You
feel indifferent to me.  You can't change that, but neither can I.
Good-by."

"Good-by."

She was very tired and lay face downward on the couch with that
awful, awful realization that all the old things are true.  One
cannot both spend and have.  The love of her life had come by, and
looking in her empty basket, she had found not a flower left for
him--not one.  After a while she wept.

"Oh, what have I done to myself?" she wailed.  "What have I done?
What have I done?"






FAMILY IN THE WIND


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)



The Saturday Evening Post (4 June, 1932)



The two men drove up the hill toward the blood-red sun.  The cotton
fields bordering the road were thin and withered, and no breeze
stirred in the pines.

"When I am totally sober," the doctor was saying--"I mean when I am
totally sober--I don't see the same world that you do.  I'm like a
friend of mine who had one good eye and got glasses made to correct
his bad eye; the result was that he kept seeing elliptical suns and
falling off tilted curbs, until he had to throw the glasses away.
Granted that I am thoroughly anaesthetized the greater part of the
day--well, I only undertake work that I know I can do when I am in
that condition."

"Yeah," agreed his brother Gene uncomfortably.  The doctor was a
little tight at the moment and Gene could find no opening for what
he had to say.  Like so many Southerners of the humbler classes, he
had a deep-seated courtesy, characteristic of all violent and
passionate lands--he could not change the subject until there was a
moment's silence, and Forrest would not shut up.

"I'm very happy," he continued, "or very miserable.  I chuckle
or I weep alcoholically and, as I continue to slow up, life
accommodatingly goes faster, so that the less there is of myself
inside, the more diverting becomes the moving picture without.  I
have cut myself off from the respect of my fellow man, but I am
aware of a compensatory cirrhosis of the emotions.  And because my
sensitivity, my pity, no longer has direction, but fixes itself on
whatever is at hand, I have become an exceptionally good fellow--
much more so than when I was a good doctor."

As the road straightened after the next bend and Gene saw his house
in the distance, he remembered his wife's face as she had made him
promise, and he could wait no longer:  "Forrest, I got a thing--"

But at that moment the doctor brought his car to a sudden stop in
front of a small house just beyond a grove of pines.  On the front
steps a girl of eight was playing with a gray cat.

"This is the sweetest little kid I ever saw," the doctor said to
Gene, and then to the child, in a grave voice:  "Helen, do you need
any pills for kitty?"

The little girl laughed.

"Well, I don't know," she said doubtfully.  She was playing another
game with the cat now and this came as rather an interruption.

"Because kitty telephoned me this morning," the doctor continued,
"and said her mother was neglecting her and couldn't I get her a
trained nurse from Montgomery."

"She did not."  The little girl grabbed the cat close indignantly;
the doctor took a nickle from his pocket and tossed it to the
steps.

"I recommend a good dose of milk," he said as he put the car into
gear.  "Good night, Helen."

"Good night, doctor."

As they drove off, Gene tried again:  "Listen; stop," he said.
"Stop here a little way down. . . .  Here."

The doctor stopped the car and the brothers faced each other.  They
were alike as to robustness of figure and a certain asceticism of
feature and they were both in their middle forties; they were
unlike in that the doctor's glasses failed to conceal the veined,
weeping eyes of a soak, and that he wore corrugated city wrinkles;
Gene's wrinkles bounded fields, followed the lines of rooftrees, of
poles propping up sheds.  His eyes were a fine, furry blue.  But
the sharpest contrast lay in the fact that Gene Janney was a
country man while Dr. Forrest Janney was obviously a man of
education.

"Well?" the doctor asked.

"You know Pinky's at home," Gene said, looking down the road.

"So I hear," the doctor answered noncommittally.

"He got in a row in Birmingham and somebody shot him in the head."
Gene hesitated.  "We got Doc Behrer because we thought maybe you
wouldn't--maybe you wouldn't--"

"I wouldn't," agreed Doctor Janney blandly.

"But look, Forrest; here's the thing," Gene insisted.  "You know
how it is--you often say Doc Behrer doesn't know nothing.  Shucks,
I never thought he was much either.  He says the bullet's pressing
on the--pressing on the brain, and he can't take it out without
causin' a hemmering, and he says he doesn't know whether we could
get him to Birmingham or Montgomery, or not, he's so low.  Doc
wasn't no help.  What we want--"

"No," said his brother, shaking his head.  "No."

"I just want you to look at him and tell us what to do," Gene
begged.  "He's unconscious, Forrest.  He wouldn't know you; you'd
hardly know him.  Thing is his mother's about crazy."

"She's in the grip of a purely animal instinct."  The doctor took
from his hip a flask containing half water and half Alabama corn,
and drank.  "You and I know that boy ought to been drowned the day
he was born."

Gene flinched.  "He's bad," he admitted, "but I don't know--You see
him lying there--"

As the liquor spread over the doctor's insides he felt an instinct
to do something, not to violate his prejudices but simply to make
some gesture, to assert his own moribund but still struggling will
to power.

"All right, I'll see him," he said.  "I'll do nothing myself to
help him, because he ought to be dead.  And even his death wouldn't
make up for what he did to Mary Decker."

Gene Janney pursed his lips.  "Forrest, you sure about that?"

"Sure about it!" exclaimed the doctor.  "Of course I'm sure.  She
died of starvation; she hadn't had more than a couple cups of
coffee in a week.  And if you looked at her shoes, you could see
she'd walked for miles."

"Doc Behrer says--"

"What does he know?  I performed the autopsy the day they found her
on the Birmingham Highway.  There was nothing the matter with her
but starvation.  That--that"--his voice shook with feeling--"that
Pinky got tired of her and turned her out, and she was trying to
get home.  It suits me fine that he was invalided home himself a
couple of weeks later."

As he talked, the doctor had plunged the car savagely into gear and
let the clutch out with a jump; in a moment they drew up before
Gene Janney's home.

It was a square frame house with a brick foundation and a well-kept
lawn blocked off from the farm, a house rather superior to the
buildings that composed the town of Bending and the surrounding
agricultural area, yet not essentially different in type or in its
interior economy.  The last of the plantation houses in this
section of Alabama had long disappeared, the proud pillars yielding
to poverty, rot and rain.

Gene's wife, Rose, got up from her rocking-chair on the porch.

"Hello, doc."  She greeted him a little nervously and without
meeting his eyes.  "You been a stranger here lately."

The doctor met her eyes for several seconds.  "How do you do,
Rose," he said.  "Hi, Edith. . . .  Hi, Eugene"--this to the little
boy and girl who stood beside their mother; and then:  "Hi, Butch!"
to the stocky youth of nineteen who came around the corner of the
house hugging a round stone.

"Goin to have a sort of low wall along the front here--kind of
neater," Gene explained.

All of them had a lingering respect for the doctor.  They felt
reproachful toward him because they could no longer refer to him as
their celebrated relative--"one of the bess surgeons up in
Montgomery, yes, suh"--but there was his learning and the position
he had once occupied in the larger world, before he had committed
professional suicide by taking to cynicism and drink.  He had come
home to Bending and bought a half interest in the local drug store
two years ago, keeping up his license, but practising only when
sorely needed.

"Rose," said Gene, "doc says he'll take a look at Pinky."

Pinky Janney, his lips curved mean and white under a new beard, lay
in bed in a darkened room.  When the doctor removed the bandage
from his head, his breath blew into a low groan, but his paunchy
body did not move.  After a few minutes, the doctor replaced the
bandage and, with Gene and Rose, returned to the porch.

"Behrer wouldn't operate?" he asked.

"No."

"Why didn't they operate in Birmingham?"

"I don't know."

"H'm."  The doctor put on his hat.  "That bullet ought to come out,
and soon.  It's pressing against the carotid sheath.  That's the--
anyhow, you can't get him to Montgomery with that pulse."

"What'll we do?"  Gene's question carried a little tail of silence
as he sucked his breath back.

"Get Behrer to think it over.  Or else get somebody in Montgomery.
There's about a 25 per cent chance that the operation would save
him; without the operation he hasn't any chance at all."

"Who'll we get in Montgomery?" asked Gene.

"Any good surgeon would do it.  Even Behrer could do it if he had
any nerve."

Suddenly Rose Janney came close to him, her eyes straining and
burning with an animal maternalism.  She seized his coat where it
hung open.

"Doc, you do it!  You can do it.  You know you were as good a
surgeon as any of em once.  Please, doc, you go on do it."

He stepped back a little so that her hands fell from his coat, and
held out his own hands in front of him.

"See how they tremble?" he said with elaborate irony.  "Look close
and you'll see.  I wouldn't dare operate."

"You could do it all right," said Gene hastily, "with a drink to
stiffen you up."

The doctor shook his head and said, looking at Rose:  "No.  You
see, my decisions are not reliable, and if anything went wrong, it
would seem to be my fault."  He was acting a little now--he chose
his words carefully.  "I hear that when I found that Mary Decker
died of starvation, my opinion was questioned on the ground that I
was a drunkard."

"I didn't say that," lied Rose breathlessly.

"Certainly not.  I just mention it to show how careful I've got to
be."  He moved down the steps.  "Well, my advice is to see Behrer
again, or, failing that, get somebody from the city.  Good night."

But before he had reached the gate, Rose came tearing after him,
her eyes white with fury.

"I did say you were a drunkard!" she cried.  "When you said Mary
Decker died of starvation, you made it out as if it was Pinky's
fault--you, swilling yourself full of corn all day!  How can
anybody tell whether you know what you're doing or not?  Why did
you think so much about Mary Decker, anyhow--a girl half your age?
Everybody saw how she used to come in your drug store and talk to
you--"

Gene, who had followed, seized her arms.  "Shut up now, Rose. . . .
Drive along, Forrest."

Forrest drove along, stopping at the next bend to drink from his
flask.  Across the fallow cotton fields he could see the house
where Mary Decker had lived, and had it been six months before, he
might have detoured to ask her why she hadn't come into the store
that day for her free soda, or to delight her with a sample
cosmetic left by a salesman that morning.  He had not told Mary
Decker how he felt about her; never intended to--she was seventeen,
he was forty-five, and he no longer dealt in futures--but only
after she ran away to Birmingham with Pinky Janney, did he realize
how much his love for her had counted in his lonely life.

His thoughts went back to his brother's house.

"Now, if I were a gentleman," he thought, "I wouldn't have done
like that.  And another person might have been sacrificed to that
dirty dog, because if he died afterward Rose would say I killed
him."

Yet he felt pretty bad as he put his car away; not that he could
have acted differently, but just that it was all so ugly.

He had been home scarcely ten minutes when a car creaked to rest
outside and Butch Janney came in.  His mouth was set tight and his
eyes were narrowed as though to permit of no escape to the temper
that possessed him until it should be unleashed upon its proper
objective.

"Hi, Butch."

"I want to tell you, Uncle Forrest, you can't talk to my mother
thataway.  I'll kill you, you talk to my mother like that!"

"Now shut up, Butch, and sit down," said the doctor sharply.

"She's already bout sick on account of Pinky, and you come over and
talk to her like that."

"Your mother did all the insulting that was done, Butch.  I just
took it."

"She doesn't know what she's saying and you ought to understand
that."

The doctor thought a minute.  "Butch, what do you think of Pinky?"

Butch hesitated uncomfortably.  "Well, I can't say I ever thought
so much of him"--his tone changed defiantly--"but after all, he's
my own brother--"

"Wait a minute, Butch.  What do you think of the way he treated
Mary Decker?"

But Butch had shaken himself free, and now he let go the artillery
of his rage:

"That ant the point; the point is anybody that doesn't do right to
my mother has me to answer to.  It's only fair when you got all the
education--"

"I got my education myself, Butch."

"I don't care.  We're going to try again to get Doc Behrer to
operate or get us some fellow from the city.  But if we can't, I'm
coming and get you, and you're going to take that bullet out if I
have to hold a gun to you while you do it."  He nodded, panting a
little; then he turned and went out and drove away.

"Something tells me," said the doctor to himself, "that there's no
more peace for me in Chilton County."  He called to his colored boy
to put supper on the table.  Then he rolled himself a cigarette and
went out on the back stoop.

The weather had changed.  The sky was now overcast and the grass
stirred restlessly and there was a sudden flurry of drops without a
sequel.  A minute ago it had been warm, but now the moisture on his
forehead was suddenly cool, and he wiped it away with his
handkerchief.  There was a buzzing in his ears and he swallowed and
shook his head.  For a moment he thought he must be sick; then
suddenly the buzzing detached itself from him, grew into a swelling
sound, louder and ever nearer, that might have been the roar of an
approaching train.


II


Butch Janney was halfway home when he saw it--a huge, black,
approaching cloud whose lower edge bumped the ground.  Even as he
stared at it vaguely, it seemed to spread until it included the
whole southern sky, and he saw pale electric fire in it [had
heard an increasing roar].  He was in a strong wind now; blown
débris, bits of broken branches, splinters, larger objects
unidentifiable in the growing darkness, flew by him.  Instinctively
he got out of his car and, by now hardly able to stand against the
wind, ran for a bank, or rather found himself thrown and pinned
against a bank.  Then for a minute, two minutes, he was in the
black centre of pandemonium.

First there was the sound, and he was part of the sound, so
engulfed in it and possessed by it that he had no existence apart
from it.  It was not a collection of sounds, it was just Sound
itself; a great screeching bow drawn across the chords of the
universe.  The sound and force were inseparable.  The sound as well
as the force held him to what he felt was the bank like a man
crucified.  Somewhere in this first moment his face, pinned
sideways, saw his automobile make a little jump, spin halfway
around and then go bobbing off over a field in a series of great
helpless leaps.  Then began the bombardment, the sound dividing its
sustained cannon note into the cracks of a gigantic machine gun.
He was only half-conscious as he felt himself become part of one of
those cracks, felt himself lifted away from the bank to tear
through space, through a blinding, lacerating mass of twigs and
branches, and then, for an incalculable time, he knew nothing at
all.

His body hurt him.  He was lying between two branches in the top of
a tree; the air was full of dust and rain, and he could hear
nothing; it was a long time before he realized that the tree he was
in had been blown down and that his involuntary perch among the
pine needles was only five feet from the ground.

"Say, man!" he cried aloud, outraged.  "Say, man!  Say, what a
wind!  Say, man!"

Made acute by pain and fear, he guessed that he had been standing
on the tree's root and had been catapulted by the terrific wrench
as the big pine was torn from the earth.  Feeling over himself, he
found that his left ear was caked full of dirt, as if someone had
wanted to take an impression of the inside.  His clothes were in
rags, his coat had torn on the back seam, and he could feel where,
as some stray gust tried to undress him, it had cut into him under
the arms.

Reaching the ground, he set off in the direction of his father's
house, but it was a new and unfamiliar landscape he traversed.  The
Thing--he did not know it was a tornado--had cut a path a quarter
of a mile wide, and he was confused, as the dust slowly settled, by
vistas he had never seen before.  It was unreal that Bending church
tower should be visible from here; there had been groves of trees
between.

But where was here?  For he should be close to the Baldwin house;
only as he tripped over great piles of boards, like a carelessly
kept lumberyard, did Butch realize that there was no more Baldwin
house, and then, looking around wildly, that there was no Necrawney
house on the hill, no Peltzer house below it.  There was not a
light, not a sound, save the rain falling on the fallen trees.

He broke into a run.  When he saw the bulk of his father's house in
the distance, he gave a "Hey!" of relief, but coming closer, he
realized that something was missing.  There were no outhouses and
the built-on wing that held Pinky's room had been sheared
completely away.

"Mother!" he called.  "Dad!"  There was no answer; a dog bounded
out of the yard and licked his hand. . . .


. . . It was full dark twenty minutes later when Doc Janney stopped
his car in front of his own drug store in Bending.  The electric
lights had gone out, but there were men with lanterns in the
street, and in a minute a small crowd had collected around him.  He
unlocked the door hurriedly.

"Somebody break open the old Wiggins Hospital."  He pointed across
the street.  "I've got six badly injured in my car.  I want some
fellows to carry em in.  Is Doc Behrer here?"

"Here he is," offered eager voices out of the darkness as the
doctor, case in hand, came through the crowd.  The two men stood
face to face by lantern light, forgetting that they disliked each
other.

"God knows how many more there's going to be," said Doc Janney.
"I'm getting dressing and disinfectant.  There'll be a lot of
fractures--"  He raised his voice, "Somebody bring me a barrel!"

"I'll get started over there," said Doc Behrer.  "There's about
half a dozen more crawled in."

"What's been done?" demanded Doc Janney of the men who followed him
into the drug store.  "Have they called Birmingham and Montgomery?"

"The telephone wires are down, but the telegraph got through."

"Well, somebody get Doctor Cohen from Wettala, and tell any people
who have automobiles to go up the Willard Pike and cut across
toward Corsica and all through those roads there.  There's not a
house left at the crossroads by the nigger store.  I passed a lot
of folks walking in, all of them hurt, but I didn't have room for
anybody else."  As he talked he was throwing bandages, disinfectant
and drugs into a blanket.  "I thought I had a lot more stuff than
this in stock!  And wait!" he called.  "Somebody drive out and look
down in that hollow where the Wooleys live.  Drive right across the
fields--the road's blocked. . . .  Now, you with the cap--Ed Jenks,
ain't it?"

"Yes, doc."

"You see what I got here?  You collect everything in the store that
looks like this and bring it across the way, understand?"

"Yes, doc."

As the doctor went out into the street, the victims were streaming
into town--a woman on foot with a badly injured child, a buckboard
full of groaning Negroes, frantic men gasping terrible stories.
Everywhere confusion and hysteria mounted in the dimly illumined
darkness.  A mud-covered reporter from Birmingham drove up in a
sidecar, the wheels crossing the fallen wires and brushwood that
clogged the street, and there was the siren of a police car from
Cooper, thirty miles away.

Already a crowd pressed around the doors of the hospital, closed
these three months for lack of patients.  The doctor squeezed past
the mêlée of white faces and established himself in the nearest
ward, grateful for the waiting row of old iron beds.  Doctor Behrer
was already at work across the hall.

"Get me half a dozen lanterns," he ordered.

"Doctors Behrer wants idodine and adhesive."

"All right, there it is. . . .  Here, you, Shinkey, stand by the
door and keep everybody out except cases that can't walk.  Somebody
run over and see if there ain't some candles in the grocery store."

The street outside was full of sound now--the cries of women, the
contrary directions of volunteer gangs trying to clear the highway,
the tense staccato of people rising to an emergency.  A little
before midnight arrived the first unit of the Red Cross.  But the
three doctors, presently joined by two others from near-by
villages, had lost track of time long before that.  The dead began
to be brought in by ten o'clock; there were twenty, twenty-five,
thirty, forty--the list grew.  Having no more needs, these waited,
as became simple husbandmen, in a garage behind, while the stream
of injured--hundreds of them--flowed through the old hospital built
to house only a score.  The storm had dealt out fractures of the
leg, collar bone, ribs and hip, lacerations of the back, elbows,
ears, eyelids, nose; there were wounds from flying planks, and odd
splinters in odd places, and a scalped man, who would recover to
grow a new head of hair.  Living or dead, Doc Janney knew every
face, almost every name.

"Don't you fret now.  Billy's all right.  Hold still and let me tie
this.  People are drifting in every minute, but it's so consarned
dark they can't find 'em--All right, Mrs. Oakey.  That's nothing.
Ev here'll touch it with iodine. . . .  Now let's see this man."

Two o'clock.  The old doctor from Wettala gave out, but now there
were fresh men from Montgomery to take his place.  Upon the air of
the room, heavy with disinfectant, floated the ceaseless babble of
human speech reaching the doctor dimly through layer after layer of
increasing fatigue:

". . . Over and over--just rolled me over and over.  Got hold of a
bush and the bush came along too."

"JEFF!  WHERE'S JEFF?"

". . . I bet that pig sailed a hundred yards--"

"--just stopped the train in time.  All the passengers got out and
helped pull the poles--"

"WHERE'S JEFF?"

"He says, 'Let's get down cellar,' and I says, 'We ain't got no
cellar'--"

"--If there's no more stretchers, find some light doors."

". . . Five seconds?  Say, it was more like five minutes!"

At some time he heard that Gene and Rose had been seen with their
two youngest children.  He had passed their house on the way in
and, seeing it standing, hurried on.  The Janney family had been
lucky; the doctor's own house was outside the sweep of the storm.

Only as he saw the electric lights go on suddenly in the streets
and glimpsed the crowd waiting for hot coffee in front of the Red
Cross did the doctor realize how tired he was.

"You better go rest," a young man was saying.  "I'll take this side
of the room.  I've got two nurses with me."

"All right--all right.  I'll finish this row."

The injured were being evacuated to the cities by train as fast as
their wounds were dressed, and their places taken by others.  He
had only two beds to go--in the first one he found Pinky Janney.

He put his stethoscope to the heart.  It was beating feebly.  That
he, so weak, so nearly gone, had survived this storm at all was
remarkable.  How he had got there, who had found him and carried
him, was a mystery in itself.  The doctor went over the body; there
were small contusions and lacerations, two broken fingers, the dirt-
filled ears that marked every case--nothing else.  For a moment the
doctor hesitated, but even when he closed his eyes, the image of
Mary Decker seemed to have receded, eluding him.  Something purely
professional that had nothing to do with human sensibilities had
been set in motion inside him, and he was powerless to head it off.
He held out his hands before him; they were trembling slightly.

"Hell's bells!" he muttered.

He went out of the room and around the corner of the hall, where he
drew from his pocket the flask containing the last of the corn and
water he had had in the afternoon.  He emptied it.  Returning to
the ward, he disinfected two instruments and applied a local
anaesthetic to a square section at the base of Pinky's skull where
the wound had healed over the bullet.  He called a nurse to his
side and then, scalpel in hand, knelt on one knee beside his
nephew's bed.


III


Two days later the doctor drove slowly around the mournful
countryside.  He had withdrawn from the emergency work after the
first desperate night, feeling that his status as a pharmacist
might embarrass his collaborators.  But there was much to be done
in bringing the damage to outlying sections under the aegis of the
Red Cross, and he devoted himself to that.

The path of the demon was easy to follow.  It had pursued an
irregular course on its seven-league boots, cutting cross country,
through woods, or even urbanely keeping to roads until they curved,
when it went off on its own again.  Sometimes the trail could be
traced by cotton fields, apparently in full bloom, but this cotton
came from the insides of hundreds of quilts and mattresses
redistributed in the fields by the storm.

At a lumber pile that had lately been a Negro cabin, he stopped a
moment to listen to a dialogue between two reporters and two shy
pickaninnies.  The old grandmother, her head bandaged, sat among
the ruins, gnawing some vague meat and moving her rocker
ceaselessly.

"But where is the river you were blown across?" one of the
reporters demanded.

"There."

"Where?"

The pickaninnies looked to their grandmother for aid.

"Right there behind you-all," spoke up the old woman.

The newspapermen looked disgustedly at a muddy stream four yards
wide.

"That's no river."

"That's a Menada River, we always calls it ever since I was a gull.
Yes, suh, that's a Menada River.  An them two boys was blowed right
across it an set down on the othah side just as pretty, 'thout any
hurt at all.  Chimney fell on me," she concluded, feeling her head.

"Do you mean to say that's all it was?" demanded the younger
reporter indignantly.  "That's the river they were blow across!
And one hundred and twenty million people have been led to believe--"

"That's all right, boys," interrupted Doc Janney.  "That's a right
good river for these parts.  And it'll get bigger as those little
fellahs get older."

He tossed a quarter to the old woman and drove on.

Passing a country church, he stopped and counted the new brown
mounds that marred the graveyard.  He was nearing the centre of the
holocaust now.  There was the Howden house where three had been
killed; there remained a gaunt chimney, a rubbish heap and a
scarecrow surviving ironically in the kitchen garden.  In the ruins
of the house across the way a rooster strutted on top of a piano,
reigning vociferously over an estate of trunks, boots, cans, books,
calendars, rugs, chairs and window frames, a twisted radio and a
legless sewing machine.  Everywhere there was bedding--blankets,
mattresses, bent springs, shredded padding--he had not realized how
much of people's lives was spent in bed.  Here and there, cows and
horses, often stained with disinfectant, were grazing again in the
fields.  At intervals there were Red Cross tents, and sitting by
one of these, with the gray cat in her arms, the doctor came upon
little Helen Kilrain.  The usual lumber pile, like a child's
building game knocked down in a fit of temper, told the story.

"Hello, dear," he greeted her, his heart sinking.  "How did kitty
like the tornado?"

"She didn't."

"What did she do?"

"She meowed."

"Oh."

"She wanted to get away, but I hanged on to her and she scratched
me--see?"

He glanced at the Red Cross tent.  "Who's taking care of you?"

"The lady from the Red Cross and Mrs. Wells," she answered.  "My
father got hurt.  He stood over me so it wouldn't fall on me, and I
stood over kitty.  He's in the hospital in Birmingham.  When he
comes back, I guess he'll build our house again."

The doctor winced.  He knew that her father would build no more
houses; he had died that morning.  She was alone, and she did not
know she was alone.  Around her stretched the dark universe,
impersonal, inconscient.  Her lovely little face looked up at him
confidently as he asked:  "You got any kin anywhere, Helen?"

"I don't know."

"You've got kitty, anyhow, haven't you?"

"It's just a cat," she admitted calmly, but anguished by her own
betrayal of her love, she hugged it closer.

"Taking care of a cat must be pretty hard."

"Oh, no," she said hurriedly.  "It isn't any trouble at all.  It
doesn't eat hardly anything."

He put his hand in his pocket, and then changed his mind suddenly.

"Dear, I'm coming back and see you later--later today.  You take
good care of kitty now, won't you?"

"Oh, yes," she answered lightly.

The doctor drove on.  He stopped next at a house that had escaped
damaged.  Walt Cupps, the owner, was cleaning a shotgun on his
front porch.

"What's that, Walt?  Going to shoot up the next tornado?"

"Ain't going to be a next tornado."

"You can't tell.  Just take a look at that sky now.  It's getting
mighty dark."

Walt laughed and slapped his gun.  "Not for a hundred years,
anyhow.  This here is for looters.  There's a lot of 'em around,
and not all black either.  Wish when you go to town that you'd tell
'em to scatter some militia out here."

"I'll tell em now.  You come out all right?"

"I did, thank God.  With six of us in the house.  It took off one
hen, and probably it's still carrying it around somewhere."

The doctor drove on toward town, overcome by a feeling of
uneasiness he could not define.

"It's the weather," he thought.  "It's the same kind of feel in the
air there was last Saturday."

For a month the doctor had felt an urge to go away permanently.
Once this countryside had seemed to promise peace.  When the
impetus that had lifted him temporarily out of tired old stock was
exhausted, he had come back here to rest, to watch the earth put
forth, and live on simple, pleasant terms with his neighbors.
Peace!  He knew that the present family quarrel would never heal,
nothing would ever be the same; it would all be bitter forever.
And he had seen the placid countryside turned into a land of
mourning.  There was no peace here.  Move on!

On the road he overtook Butch Janney walking to town.

"I was coming to see you," said Butch, frowning.  "You operated on
Pinky after all, didn't you?"

"Jump in. . . .  Yes, I did.  How did you know?"

"Doc Behrer told us."  He shot a quick look at the doctor, who did
not miss the quality of suspicion in it.  "They don't think he'll
last out the day."

"I'm sorry for your mother."

Butch laughed unpleasantly.  "Yes, you are."

"I said I'm sorry for your mother," said the doctor sharply.

"I heard you."

They drove for a moment in silence.

"Did you find your automobile?"

"Did I?"  Butch laughed ruefully.  "I found something--I don't know
whether you'd call it a car any more.  And, you know, I could of
had tornado insurance for twenty-five cents."  His voice trembled
indignantly:  "Twenty-five cents--but who would ever of thought of
getting tornado insurance?"

It was growing darker; there was a thin crackle of thunder far to
the southward.

"Well, all I hope," said Butch with narrowed glance, "is that you
hadn't been drinking anything when you operated on Pinky."

"You know, Butch," the doctor said slowly, "that was a pretty dirty
trick of mine to bring that tornado here."

He had not expected the sarcasm to hit home, but he expected a
retort--when suddenly he caught sight of Butch's face.  It was fish-
white, the mouth was open, the eyes fixed and staring, and from the
throat came a mewling sound.  Limply he raised one hand before him,
and then the doctor saw.

Less than a mile away, an enormous, top-shaped black cloud filled
the sky and bore toward them, dipping and swirling, and in front of
it sailed already a heavy, singing wind.

"It's come back!" the doctor yelled.

Fifty yards ahead of them was the old iron bridge spanning Bilby
Creek.  He stepped hard on the accelerator and drove for it.  The
fields were full of running figures headed in the same direction.
Reaching the bridge, he jumped out and yanked Butch's arm.

"Get out, you fool!  Get out!"

A nerveless mass stumbled from the car; in a moment they were in a
group of half a dozen, huddled in the triangular space that the
bridge made with the shore.

"Is it coming here?"

"No, it's turning!"

"We had to leave grampa!"

"Oh, save me, save me!  Jesus save me!  Help me!"

"Jesus save my soul!"

There was a quick rush of wind outside, sending little tentacles
under the bridge with a curious tension in them that made the
doctor's skin crawl.  Then immediately there was a vacuum, with no
more wind, but a sudden thresh of rain.  The doctor crawled to the
edge of the bridge and put his head up cautiously.

"It's passed," he said.  "We only felt the edge; the centre went
way to the right of us."

He could see it plainly; for a second he could even distinguish
objects in it--shrubbery and small trees, planks and loose earth.
Crawling farther out, he produced his watch and tried to time it,
but the thick curtain of rain blotted it from sight.

Soaked to the skin, he crawled back underneath.  Butch lay
shivering in the farthest corner, and the doctor shook him.

"It went in the direction of your house!" the doctor cried.  "Pull
yourself together!  Who's there?"

"No one," Butch groaned.  "They're all down with Pinky."

The rain had changed to hail now; first small pellets, then larger
ones, and larger, until the sound of their fall upon the iron
bridge was an ear-splitting tattoo.

The spared wretches under the bridge were slowly recovering, and in
the relief there were titters of hysterical laughter.  After a
certain point of strain, the nervous system makes its transitions
without dignity or reason.  Even the doctor felt the contagion.

"This is worse than a calamity," he said dryly.  "It's getting to
be a nuisance."


IV


There were to be no more tornadoes in Alabama that spring.  The
second one--it was popularly thought to be the first one come back;
for to the people of Chilton County it had become a personified
force, definite as a pagan god--took a dozen houses, Gene Janney's
among them, and injured about thirty people.  But this time--
perhaps because everyone had developed some scheme of self-
protection--there were no fatalities.  It made its last dramatic
bow by sailing down the main street of Bending, prostrating the
telephone poles and crushing in the fronts of three shops,
including Doc Janney's drug store.

At the end of a week, houses were going up again, made of the old
boards; and before the end of the long, lush Alabama summer the
grass would be green again on all the graves.  But it will be years
before the people of the country cease to reckon events as
happening "before the tornado" or "after the tornado,"--and for
many families things will never be the same.

Doctor Janney decided that this was as good a time to leave as any.
He sold the remains of his drug store, gutted alike by charity and
catastrophe, and turned over his house to his brother until Gene
could rebuild his own.  He was going up to the city by train, for
his car had been rammed against a tree and couldn't be counted on
for much more than the trip to the station.

Several times on the way in he stopped by the roadside to say good-
by--once it was to Walter Cupps.

"So it hit you, after all," he said, looking at the melancholy back
house which alone marked the site.

"It's pretty bad," Walter answered.  "But just think; they was six
of us in or about the house and not one was injured.  I'm content
to give thanks to God for that."

"You were lucky there, Walt," the doctor agreed.  "Do you happen to
have heard whether the Red Cross took little Helen Kilrain to
Montgomery or to Birmingham?"

"To Montgomery.  Say, I was there when she came into town with that
cat, tryin' to get somebody to bandage up its paw.  She must of
walked miles through that rain and hail, but all that mattered to
her was her kitty.  Bad as I felt, I couldn't help laughin' at how
spunky she was."

The doctor was silent for a moment.  "Do you happen to recollect if
she has any people left?"

"I don't, suh," Walter replied, "but I think as not."

At his brother's place, the doctor made his last stop.  They were
all there, even the youngest, working among the ruins; already
Butch had a shed erected to house the salvage of their goods.  Save
for this the most orderly thing surviving was the pattern of round
white stone which was to have inclosed the garden.

The doctor took a hundred dollars in bills from his pocket and
handed it to Gene.

"You can pay it back sometime, but don't strain yourself," he said.
"It's money I got from the store."  He cut off Gene's thanks:
"Pack up my books carefully when I send for 'em."

"You reckon to practice medicine up there, Forrest?"

"I'll maybe try it."

The brothers held on to each other's hands for a moment; the two
youngest children came up to say good-by.  Rose stood in the
background in an old blue dress--she had no money to wear black for
her eldest son.

"Good-by, Rose," said the doctor.

"Good-by," she responded, and then added in a dead voice, "Good
luck to you, Forrest."

For a moment he was tempted to say something conciliatory, but he
saw it was no use.  He was up against the maternal instinct, the
same force that had sent little Helen through the storm with her
injured cat.

At the station he bought a one-way ticket to Montgomery.  The
village was drab under the sky of a retarded spring, and as the
train pulled out, it was odd to think that six months ago it had
seemed to him as good a place as any other.

He was alone in the white section of the day coach; presently he
felt for a bottle on his hip and drew it forth.  "After all, a man
of forty-five is entitled to more artificial courage when he starts
over again."  He began thinking of Helen.  "She hasn't got any kin.
I guess she's my little girl now."

He patted the bottle, then looked down at it as if in surprise.

"Well, we'll have to put you aside for a while, old friend.  Any
cat that's worth all that trouble and care is going to need a lot
of grade-B milk."

He settled down in his seat, looking out the window.  In his memory
of that terrible week the winds still sailed about him, came in as
draughts through the corridor of the car--winds of the world--
cyclones, hurricane, tornadoes--grey and black, expected or
unforeseen, some from the sky, some from the caves of hell.

But he would not let them touch Helen again--if he could help it.

He dozed momentarily, but a haunting dream woke him:  "Daddy stood
over me and I stood over Kitty."

"All right, Helen," he said aloud, for he often talked to himself,
"I guess the old brig can keep afloat a little longer--in any
wind."



THE FIEND


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)



Esquire (January 1935)



On June 3, 1895, on a country road near Stillwater, Minnesota, Mrs.
Crenshaw Engels and her seven year old son, Mark, were waylaid and
murdered by a fiend, under circumstances so atrocious that,
fortunately, it is not necessary to set them down here.

Crenshaw Engels, the husband and father, was a photographer in
Stillwater.  He was a great reader and considered "a little
unsafe," for he had spoken his mind frankly about the railroad-
agrarian struggles of the time--but no one denied that he was a
devoted family man, and the catastrophe visited upon him hung over
the little town for many weeks.  There was a move to lynch the
perpetrator of the horror, for Minnesota did not permit the capital
punishment it deserved, but the instigators were foiled by the big
stone penitentiary close at hand.

The cloud hung over Engel's home so that folks went there only in
moods of penitence, of fear or guilt, hoping that they would be
visited in turn should their lives ever chance to trek under a
black sky.  The photography studio suffered also: the routine of
being posed, the necessary silences and pauses in the process,
permitted the clients too much time to regard the prematurely aged
face of Crenshaw Engels, and high school students, newly married
couples, mothers of new babies, were always glad to escape from the
place into the open air.  So Crenshaw's business fell off and he
went through a time of hardship--finally liquidating the lease, the
apparatus and the good will, and wearing out the money obtained.
He sold his house for a little more than its two mortgages, went to
board and took a position clerking in Radamacher's Department
Store.

In the sight of his neighbors he had become a man ruined by
adversity, a man manqué, a man emptied.  But in the last opinion
they were wrong--he was empty of all save one thing.  His memory
was long as a Jew's, and though his heart was in the grave he was
sane as when his wife and son had started on their last walk that
summer morning.  At the first trial he lost control and got at the
Fiend, seizing him by the necktie--and then had been dragged off
with the Fiend's tie in such a knot that the man was nearly
garotted.

At the second trial Crenshaw cried aloud once.  Afterwards he went
to all the members of the state legislature in the county and
handed them a bill he had written himself for the introduction of
capital punishment in the state--the bill to be retroactive on
criminals condemned to life imprisonment.  The bill fell through;
it was on the day Crenshaw heard this that he got inside the
penitentiary by a ruse and was only apprehended in time to be
prevented from shooting the Fiend in his cell.

Crenshaw was given a suspended sentence and for some months it was
assumed that the agony was fading gradually from his mind.  In fact
when he presented himself to the warden in another rôle a year
after the crime, the official was sympathetic to his statement that
he had had a change of heart and felt he could only emerge from the
valley of shadow by forgiveness, that he wanted to help the Fiend,
show him the True Path by means of good books and appeals to his
buried better nature.  So, after being carefully searched, Crenshaw
was permitted to sit for half an hour in the corridor outside the
Fiend's cell.

But had the warden suspected the truth he would not have permitted
the visit--for, far from forgiving, Crenshaw's plan was to wreak
upon the Fiend a mental revenge to replace the physical one of
which he was subducted.

When he faced the Fiend, Crenshaw felt his scalp tingle.  From
behind the bars a roly-poly man, who somehow made his convict's
uniform resemble a business suit, a man with thick brown-rimmed
glasses and the trim air of an insurance salesman, looked at him
uncertainly.  Feeling faint Crenshaw sat down in the chair that had
been brought for him.

"The air around you stinks!" he cried suddenly.  "This whole
corridor, this whole prison."

"I suppose it does," admitted the Fiend, "I noticed it too."

"You'll have time to notice it," Crenshaw muttered.  "All your life
you'll pace up and down stinking in that little cell, with
everything getting blacker and blacker.  And after that there'll be
hell waiting for you.  For all eternity you'll be shut in a little
space, but in hell it'll be so small that you can't stand up or
stretch out."

"WILL it now?" asked the Fiend concerned.

"It will!" said Crenshaw.  "You'll be alone with your own vile
thoughts in that little space, forever and ever and ever.  You'll
itch with corruption so that you can never sleep, and you'll always
be thirsty, with water just out of reach."

"WILL I now?" repeated the Fiend, even more concerned.  "I remember
once--"

"All the time you'll be full of horror," Crenshaw interrupted.
"You'll be like a person just about to go crazy but can't go crazy.
All the time you'll be thinking that it's forever and ever."

"That's bad," said the Fiend, shaking his head gloomily.  "That's
real bad."

"Now listen here to me," went on Crenshaw.  "I've brought you some
books you're going to read.  It's arranged that you get no books or
papers except what I bring you."

As a beginning Crenshaw had brought half a dozen books which his
vagarious curiosity had collected over as many years.  They
comprised a German doctor's thousand case histories of sexual
abnormality--cases with no cures, no hopes, no prognoses, cases
listed cold; a series of sermons by a New England Divine of the
Great Revival which pictured the tortures of the damned in hell; a
collection of horror stories; and a volume of erotic pieces from
each of which the last two pages, containing the consummations, had
been torn out; a volume of detective stories mutilated in the same
manner.  A tome of the Newgate calendar completed the batch.  These
Crenshaw handed through the bars--the Fiend took them and put them
on his iron cot.

This was the first of Crenshaw's long series of fortnightly visits.
Always he brought with him something somber and menacing to say,
something dark and terrible to read--save that once when the Fiend
had had nothing to read for a long time he brought him four
inspiringly titled books--that proved to have nothing but blank
paper inside.  Another time, pretending to concede a point, he
promised to bring newspapers--he brought ten copies of the yellowed
journal that had reported the crime and the arrest.  Sometimes he
obtained medical books that showed in color the red and blue and
green ravages of leprosy and skin disease, the mounds of shattered
cells, the verminous tissue and brown corrupted blood.

And there was no sewer of the publishing world from which he did
not obtain records of all that was gross and vile in man.

Crenshaw could not keep this up indefinitely both because of the
expense and because of the exhaustibility of such books.  When five
years had passed he leaned toward another form of torture.  He
built up false hopes in the Fiend with protests of his own change
of heart and manoeuvres for a pardon, and then dashed the hopes to
pieces.  Or else he pretended to have a pistol with him, or an
inflammatory substance that would make the cell a raging Inferno
and consume the Fiend in two minutes--once he threw a dummy bottle
into the cell and listened in delight to the screams as the Fiend
ran back and forth waiting for the explosion.  At other times he
would pretend grimly that the legislature had passed a new law
which provided that the Fiend would be executed in a few hours.

A decade passed.  Crenshaw was gray at forty--he was white at fifty
when the alternating routine of his fortnightly visits to the
graves of his loved ones and to the penitentiary had become the
only part of his life--the long days at Radamacher's were only a
weary dream.  Sometimes he went and sat outside the Fiend's cell,
with no word said during the half hour he was allowed to be there.
The Fiend too had grown white in twenty years.  He was very
respectable-looking with his horn-rimmed glasses and his white
hair.  He seemed to have a great respect for Crenshaw and even when
the latter, in a renewal of diminishing vitality, promised him one
day that on his very next visit he was going to bring a revolver
and end the matter, he nodded gravely as if in agreement, said, "I
suppose so.  Yes, I suppose you're perfectly right," and did not
mention the matter to the guards.  On the occasion of the next
visit he was waiting with his hands on the bars of the cell looking
at Crenshaw both hopefully and desperately.  At certain tensions
and strains death takes on, indeed, the quality of a great
adventure as any soldier can testify.

Years passed.  Crenshaw was promoted to floor manager at
Radamacher's--there were new generations now that did not know of
his tragedy and regarded him as an austere nonentity.  He came into
a little legacy and bought new stones for the graves of his wife
and son.  He knew he would soon be retired and while a third decade
lapsed through the white winters, the short sweet smoky summers, it
became more and more plain to him that the time had come to put an
end to the Fiend; to avoid any mischance by which the other would
survive him.

The moment he fixed upon came at the exact end of thirty years.
Crenshaw had long owned the pistol with which it would be
accomplished; he had fingered the shells lovingly and calculated
the lodgement of each in the Fiend's body, so that death would be
sure but lingering--he studied the tales of abdominal wounds in the
war news and delighted in the agony that made victims pray to be
killed.

After that, what happened to HIM did not matter.

When the day came he had no trouble in smuggling the pistol into
the penitentiary.  But to his surprise he found the Fiend scrunched
up upon his iron cot, instead of waiting for him avidly by the
bars.

"I'm sick," the Fiend said.  "My stomach's been burning me up all
morning.  They gave me a physic but now it's worse and nobody
comes."

Crenshaw fancied momentarily that this was a premonition in the
man's bowels of a bullet that would shortly ride ragged through
that spot.

"Come up to the bars," he said mildly.

"I can't move."

"Yes, you can."

"I'm doubled up.  All doubled up."

"Come doubled up then."

With an effort the Fiend moved himself, only to fall on his side on
the cement floor.  He groaned and then lay quiet for a minute,
after which, still bent in two, he began to drag himself a foot at
a time toward the bars.

Suddenly Crenshaw set off at a run toward the end of the corridor.

"I want the prison doctor," he demanded of the guard, "That man's
sick--SICK, I tell you."

"The doctor has--"

"Get him--get him now!"

The guard hesitated, but Crenshaw had become a tolerated, even
privileged person around the prison, and in a moment the guard took
down his phone and called the infirmary.

All that afternoon Crenshaw waited in the bare area inside the
gates, walking up and down with his hands behind his back.  From
time to time he went to the front entrance and demanded of the
guard:

"Any news?"

"Nothing yet.  They'll call me when there's anything."

Late in the afternoon the Warden appeared at the door, looked about
and spotted Crenshaw.  The latter, all alert, hastened over.

"He's dead," the Warden said.  "His appendix burst.  They did
everything they could."

"Dead," Crenshaw repeated.

"I'm sorry to bring you this news.  I know how--"

"It's all right," said Crenshaw, and licking his lips.  "So he's
dead."

The Warden lit a cigarette.

"While you're here, Mr. Engels, I wonder if you can let me have
that pass that was issued to you--I can turn it in to the office.
That is--I suppose you won't need it any more."

Crenshaw took the blue card from his wallet and handed it over.
The Warden shook hands with him.

"One thing more," Crenshaw demanded as the Warden turned away.
"Which is the--the window of the infirmary?"

"It's on the interior court, you can't see it from here."

"Oh."

When the Warden had gone Crenshaw still stood there a long time,
the tears running out down his face.  He could not collect his
thoughts and he began by trying to remember what day it was;
Saturday, the day, every other week, on which he came to see the
Fiend.

He would not see the Fiend two weeks from now.

In a misery of solitude and despair he muttered aloud:  "So he is
dead.  He has left me."  And then with a long sigh of mingled grief
and fear, "So I have lost him--my only friend--now I am alone."

He was still saying that to himself as he passed through the outer
gate, and as his coat caught in the great swing of the outer door
the guard opened up to release it, he heard a reiteration of the
words:

"I'm alone.  At last--at last I am alone."


Once more he called on the Fiend, after many weeks.

"But he's dead," the Warden told him kindly.

"Oh, yes," Crenshaw said.  "I guess I must have forgotten."

And he set off back home, his boots sinking deep into the white
diamond surface of the flats.






FINANCING FINNEGAN


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Esquire (January 1938)



Finnegan and I have the same literary agent to sell our writings
for us--but though I'd often been in Mr. Cannon's office just
before and just after Finnegan's visits, I had never met him.
Likewise we had the same publisher and often when I arrived there
Finnegan had just departed.  I gathered from a thoughtful sighing
way in which they spoke of him--

"Ah--Finnegan--"

"Oh yes, Finnegan was here."

--that the distinguished author's visit had been not uneventful.
Certain remarks implied that he had taken something with him when
he went--manuscripts, I supposed, one of those great successful
novels of his.  He had taken "it" off for a final revision, a last
draft, of which he was rumored to make ten in order to achieve that
facile flow, that ready wit, which distinguished his work.  I
discovered only gradually that most of Finnegan's visits had to do
with money.

"I'm sorry you're leaving," Mr. Cannon would tell me, "Finnegan
will be here tomorrow."  Then after a thoughtful pause, "I'll
probably have to spend some time with him."

I don't know what note in his voice reminded me of a talk with a
nervous bank president when Dillinger was reported in the vicinity.
His eyes looked out into the distance and he spoke as to himself:

"Of course he may be bringing a manuscript.  He has a novel he's
working on, you know.  And a play too."

He spoke as though he were talking about some interesting but
remote events of the cinquecento; but his eyes became more hopeful
as he added:  "Or maybe a short story."

"He's very versatile, isn't he?" I said.

"Oh yes," Mr. Cannon perked up.  "He can do anything--anything when
he puts his mind to it.  There's never been such a talent."

"I haven't seen much of his work lately."

"Oh, but he's working hard.  Some of the magazines have stories of
his that they're holding."

"Holding for what?"

"Oh, for a more appropriate time--an upswing.  They like to think
they have something of Finnegan's."

His was indeed a name with ingots in it.  His career had started
brilliantly and if it had not kept up to its first exalted level,
at least it started brilliantly all over again every few years.  He
was the perennial man of promise in American letters--what he could
actually do with words was astounding, they glowed and coruscated--
he wrote sentences, paragraphs, chapters that were masterpieces of
fine weaving and spinning.  It was only when I met some poor devil
of a screen writer who had been trying to make a logical story out
of one of his books that I realized he had his enemies.

"It's all beautiful when you read it," this man said disgustedly,
"but when you write it down plain it's like a week in the nut-
house."

From Mr. Cannon's office I went over to my publishers on Fifth
Avenue and there too I learned in no time that Finnegan was
expected tomorrow.

Indeed he had thrown such a long shadow before him that the
luncheon where I expected to discuss my own work was largely
devoted to Finnegan.  Again I had the feeling that my host, Mr.
George Jaggers, was talking not to me but to himself.

"Finnegan's a great writer," he said.

"Undoubtedly."

"And he's really quite all right, you know."

As I hadn't questioned the fact I inquired whether there was any
doubt about it.

"Oh no," he said hurriedly.  "It's just that he's had such a run of
hard luck lately--"

I shook my head sympathetically.  "I know.  That diving into a half-
empty pool was a tough break."

"Oh, it wasn't half-empty.  It was full of water.  Full to the
brim.  You ought to hear Finnegan on the subject--he makes a side-
splitting story of it.  It seems he was in a run-down condition and
just diving from the side of the pool, you know--" Mr. Jaggers
pointed his knife and fork at the table, "and he saw some young
girls diving from the fifteen-foot board.  He says he thought of
his lost youth and went up to do the same and made a beautiful swan
dive--but his shoulder broke while he was still in the air."  He
looked at me rather anxiously.  "Haven't you heard of cases like
that--a ball player throwing his arm out of joint?"

I couldn't think of any orthopedic parallels at the moment.

"And then," he continued dreamily, "Finnegan had to write on the
ceiling."

"On the ceiling?"

"Practically.  He didn't give up writing--he has plenty of guts,
that fellow, though you may not believe it.  He had some sort of
arrangement built that was suspended from the ceiling and he lay on
his back and wrote in the air."

I had to grant that it was a courageous arrangement.

"Did it affect his work?" I inquired.  "Did you have to read his
stories backward--like Chinese?"

"They were rather confused for a while," he admitted, "but he's all
right now.  I got several letters from him that sounded more like
the old Finnegan--full of life and hope and plans for the future--"

The faraway look came into his face and I turned the discussion to
affairs closer to my heart.  Only when we were back in his office
did the subject recur--and I blush as I write this because it
includes confessing something I seldom do--reading another man's
telegram.  It happened because Mr. Jaggers was intercepted in the
hall and when I went into his office and sat down it was stretched
out open before me:


WITH FIFTY I COULD AT LEAST PAY TYPIST AND GET HAIRCUT AND PENCILS
LIFE HAS BECOME IMPOSSIBLE AND I EXIST ON DREAM OF GOOD NEWS
DESPERATELY FINNEGAN


I couldn't believe my eyes--fifty dollars, and I happened to know
that Finnegan's price for short stories was somewhere around three
thousand.  George Jaggers found me still staring dazedly at the
telegram.  After he read it he stared at me with stricken eyes.

"I don't see how I can conscientiously do it," he said.

I started and glanced around to make sure I was in the prosperous
publishing office in New York.  Then I understood--I had misread
the telegram.  Finnegan was asking for fifty thousand as an advance--
a demand that would have staggered any publisher no matter who the
writer was.

"Only last week," said Mr. Jaggers disconsolately, "I sent him a
hundred dollars.  It puts my department in the red every season, so
I don't dare tell my partners any more.  I take it out of my own
pocket--give up a suit and a pair of shoes."

"You mean Finnegan's broke?"

"Broke!"  He looked at me and laughed soundlessly--in fact I didn't
exactly like the way that he laughed.  My brother had a nervous--
but that is afield from this story.  After a minute he pulled
himself together.  "You won't say anything about this, will you?
The truth is Finnegan's been in a slump, he's had blow after blow
in the past few years, but now he's snapping out of it and I know
we'll get back every cent we've--"  He tried to think of a word but
"given him" slipped out.  This time it was he who was eager to
change the subject.

Don't let me give the impression that Finnegan's affairs absorbed
me during a whole week in New York--it was inevitable, though, that
being much in the offices of my agent and my publisher, I happened
in on a lot.  For instance, two days later, using the telephone in
Mr. Cannon's office, I was accidentally switched in on a
conversation he was having with George Jaggers.  It was only partly
eavesdropping, you see, because I could only hear one end of the
conversation and that isn't as bad as hearing it all.

"But I got the impression he was in good health . . . he did say
something about his heart a few months ago but I understood it got
well . . . yes, and he talked about some operation he wanted to
have--I think he said it was cancer. . . .  Well, I felt like
telling him I had a little operation up my sleeve too, that I'd
have had by now if I could afford it. . . .  No, I didn't say it.
He seemed in such good spirits that it would have been a shame to
bring him down.  He's starting a story today, he read me some of it
on the phone. . . .

". . . I did give him twenty-five because he didn't have a cent in
his pocket . . . oh, yes--I'm sure he'll be all right now.  He
sounds as if he means business."

I understood it all now.  The two men had entered into a silent
conspiracy to cheer each other up about Finnegan.  Their investment
in him, in his future, had reached a sum so considerable that
Finnegan belonged to them.  They could not bear to hear a word
against him--even from themselves.


II


I spoke my mind to Mr. Cannon.  "If this Finnegan is a four-flusher
you can't go on indefinitely giving him money.  If he's through
he's through and there's nothing to be done about it.  It's absurd
that you should put off an operation when Finnegan's out somewhere
diving into half-empty swimming pools."

"It was full," said Mr. Cannon patiently--"full to the brim."

"Well, full or empty the man sounds like a nuisance to me."

"Look here," said Cannon, "I've got a talk to Hollywood due on the
wire.  Meanwhile you might glance over that."  He threw a
manuscript into my lap.  "Maybe it'll help you understand.  He
brought it in yesterday."

It was a short story.  I began it in a mood of disgust but before
I'd read five minutes I was completely immersed in it, utterly
charmed, utterly convinced and wishing to God I could write like
that.  When Cannon finished his phone call I kept him waiting while
I finished it and when I did there were tears in these hard old
professional eyes.  Any magazine in the country would have run it
first in any issue.

But then nobody had ever denied that Finnegan could write.


III


Months passed before I went again to New York, and then, so far as
the offices of my agent and my publisher were concerned, I
descended upon a quieter, more stable world.  There was at last
time to talk about my own conscientious if uninspired literary
pursuits, to visit Mr. Cannon in the country and to kill summer
evenings with George Jaggers where the vertical New York starlight
falls like lingering lightning into restaurant gardens.  Finnegan
might have been at the North Pole--and as a matter of fact he was.
He had quite a group with him, including three Bryn Mawr
anthropologists, and it sounded as if he might collect a lot of
material there.  They were going to stay several months, and if the
thing had somehow the ring of a promising little house party about
it, that was probably due to my jealous, cynical disposition.

"We're all just delighted," said Cannon.  "It's a God-send for him.
He was fed up and he needed just this--this--"

"Ice and snow," I supplied.

"Yes, ice and snow.  The last thing he said was characteristic of
him.  Whatever he writes is going to be pure white--it's going to
have a blinding glare about it."

"I can imagine it will.  But tell me--who's financing it?  Last
time I was here I gathered the man was insolvent."

"Oh, he was really very decent about that.  He owed me some money
and I believe he owed George Jaggers a little too--"  He
"believed," the old hypocrite.  He knew damn well--"so before he
left he made most of his life insurance over to us.  That's in case
he doesn't come back--those trips are dangerous of course."

"I should think so," I said--"especially with three
anthropologists."

"So Jaggers and I are absolutely covered in case anything happens--
it's as simple as that."

"Did the life-insurance company finance the trip?"

He fidgeted perceptibly.

"Oh, no.  In fact when they learned the reason for the assignments
they were a little upset.  George Jaggers and I felt that when he
had a specific plan like this with a specific book at the end of
it, we were justified in backing him a little further."

"I don't see it," I said flatly.

"You don't?"  The old harassed look came back into his eyes.
"Well, I'll admit we hesitated.  In principle I know it's wrong.  I
used to advance authors small sums from time to time, but lately
I've made a rule against it--and kept it.  It's only been waived
once in the last two years and that was for a woman who was having
a bad struggle--Margaret Trahill, do you know her?  She was an old
girl of Finnegan's, by the way."

"Remember I don't even know Finnegan."

"That's right.  You must meet him when he comes back--if he does
come back.  You'd like him--he's utterly charming."

Again I departed from New York, to imaginative North Poles of my
own, while the year rolled through summer and fall.  When the first
snap of November was in the air, I thought of the Finnegan
expedition with a sort of shiver and any envy of the man departed.
He was probably earning any loot, literary or anthropological, he
might bring back.  Then, when I hadn't been back in New York three
days, I read in the paper that he and some other members of his
party had walked off into a snowstorm when the food supply gave
out, and the Arctic had claimed another sacrifice.

I was sorry for him, but practical enough to be glad that Cannon
and Jaggers were well protected.  Of course, with Finnegan scarcely
cold--if such a simile is not too harrowing--they did not talk
about it but I gathered that the insurance companies had waived
habeas corpus or whatever it is in their lingo, and it seemed quite
sure that they would collect.

His son, a fine looking young fellow, came into George Jaggers'
office while I was there and from him I could guess at Finnegan's
charm--a shy frankness together with an impression of a very quiet
brave battle going on inside of him that he couldn't quite bring
himself to talk about--but that showed as heat lightning in his
work.

"The boy writes well too," said George after he had gone.  "He's
brought in some remarkable poems.  He's not ready to step into his
father's shoes, but there's a definite promise."

"Can I see one of his things?"

"Certainly--here's one he left just as he went out."

George took a paper from his desk, opened it and cleared his
throat.  Then he squinted and bent over a little in his chair.

"Dear Mr. Jaggers," he began, "I didn't like to ask you this in
person--"  Jaggers stopped, his eyes reading ahead rapidly.

"How much does he want?" I inquired.

He sighed.

"He gave me the impression that this was some of his work," he said
in a pained voice.

"But it is," I consoled him.  "Of course he isn't quite ready to
step into his father's shoes."

I was sorry afterwards to have said this, for after all Finnegan
had paid his debts, and it was nice to be alive now that better
times were back and books were no longer rated as unnecessary
luxuries.  Many authors I knew who had skimped along during the
depression were now making long-deferred trips or paying off
mortgages or turning out the more finished kind of work that can
only be done with a certain leisure and security.  I had just got a
thousand dollars advance for a venture in Hollywood and was going
to fly out with all the verve of the old days when there was
chicken feed in every pot.  Going in to say good-by to Cannon and
collect the money, it was nice to find he too was profiting--wanted
me to go along and see a motor boat he was buying.

But some last-minute stuff came up to delay him and I grew
impatient and decided to skip it.  Getting no response to a knock
on the door of his sanctum, I opened it anyhow.

The inner office seemed in some confusion.  Mr. Cannon was on
several telephones at once and dictating something about an
insurance company to a stenographer.  One secretary was getting
hurriedly into her hat and coat as upon an errand and another was
counting bills from her purse.

"It'll be only a minute," said Cannon, "it's just a little office
riot--you never saw us like this."

"Is it Finnegan's insurance?" I couldn't help asking.  "Isn't it
any good?"

"His insurance--oh, perfectly all right, perfectly.  This is just a
matter of trying to raise a few hundred in a hurry.  The banks are
closed and we're all contributing."

"I've got that money you just gave me," I said.  "I don't need all
of it to get to the coast."  I peeled off a couple of hundred.
"Will this be enough?"

"That'll be fine--it just saves us.  Never mind, Miss Carlsen.
Mrs. Mapes, you needn't go now."

"I think I'll be running along," I said.

"Just wait two minutes," he urged.  "I've only got to take care of
this wire.  It's really splendid news.  Bucks you up."

It was a cablegram from Oslo, Norway--before I began to read I was
full of a premonition.


AM MIRACULOUSLY SAFE HERE BUT DETAINED BY AUTHORITIES PLEASE WIRE
PASSAGE MONEY FOR FOUR PEOPLE AND TWO HUNDRED EXTRA I AM BRINGING
BACK PLENTY GREETINGS FROM THE DEAD.

                                                     FINNEGAN


"Yes, that's splendid," I agreed.  "He'll have a story to tell
now."

"Won't he though," said Cannon.  "Miss Carlsen, will you wire the
parents of those girls--and you'd better inform Mr. Jaggers."

As we walked along the street a few minutes later, I saw that Mr.
Cannon, as if stunned by the wonder of this news, had fallen into a
brown study, and I did not disturb him, for after all I did not
know Finnegan and could not whole-heartedly share his joy.  His
mood of silence continued until we arrived at the door of the motor
boat show.  Just under the sign he stopped and stared upward, as if
aware for the first time where we were going.

"Oh, my," he said, stepping back.  "There's no use going in here
now.  I thought we were going to get a drink."

We did.  Mr. Cannon was still a little vague, a little under the
spell of the vast surprise--he fumbled so long for the money to pay
his round that I insisted it was on me.

I think he was in a daze during that whole time because, though he
is a man of the most punctilious accuracy, the two hundred I handed
him in his office has never shown to my credit in the statements he
has sent me.  I imagine, though, that some day I will surely get it
because some day Finnegan will click again and I know that people
will clamor to read what he writes.  Recently I've taken it upon
myself to investigate some of the stories about him and I've found
that they're mostly as false as the half-empty pool.  That pool was
full to the brim.

So far there's only been a short story about the polar expedition,
a love story.  Perhaps it wasn't as big a subject as he expected.
But the movies are interested in him--if they can get a good long
look at him first and I have every reason to think that he will
come through.  He'd better.



FIRST BLOOD


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (5 April 1930)



"I remember your coming to me in despair when Josephine was about
three!" cried Mrs. Bray.  "George was furious because he couldn't
decide what to go to work at, so he used to spank little
Josephine."

"I remember," said Josephine's mother.

"And so this is Josephine."

This was, indeed, Josephine.  She looked at Mrs. Bray and smiled,
and Mrs. Bray's eyes hardened imperceptibly.  Josephine kept on
smiling.

"How old are you, Josephine?"

"Just sixteen."

"Oh-h.  I would have said you were older."

At the first opportunity Josephine asked Mrs. Perry, "Can I go to
the movies with Lillian this afternoon?"

"No, dear; you have to study."  She turned to Mrs. Bray as if the
matter were dismissed--but:  "You darn fool," muttered Josephine
audibly.

Mrs. Bray said some words quickly to cover the situation, but, of
course, Mrs. Perry could not let it pass unreproved.

"What did you call mother, Josephine?"

"I don't see why I can't go to the movies with Lillian."

Her mother was content to let it go at this.

"Because you've got to study.  You go somewhere every day, and your
father wants it to stop."

"How crazy!" said Josephine, and she added vehemently, "How utterly
insane!  Father's got to be a maniac I think.  Next thing he'll
start tearing his hair and think he's Napoleon or something."

"No," interposed Mrs. Bray jovially as Mrs. Perry grew rosy.
"Perhaps she's right.  Maybe George IS crazy--I'm sure my husband's
crazy.  It's this war."

But she was not really amused; she thought Josephine ought to be
beaten with sticks.

They were talking about Anthony Harker, a contemporary of
Josephine's older sister.

"He's divine," Josephine interposed--not rudely, for, despite the
foregoing, she was not rude; it was seldom even that she appeared
to talk too much, though she lost her temper, and swore sometimes
when people were unreasonable.  "He's perfectly--"

"He's very popular.  Personally, I don't see very much to him.  He
seems rather superficial."

"Oh, no, mother," said Josephine.  "He's far from it.  Everybody
says he has a great deal of personality--which is more than you can
say of most of these jakes.  Any girl would be glad to get their
hands on him.  I'd marry him in a minute."

She had never thought of this before; in fact, the phrase had been
invented to express her feeling for Travis de Coppet.  When,
presently, tea was served, she excused herself and went to her
room.

It was a new house, but the Perrys were far from being new people.
They were Chicago Society, and almost very rich, and not uncultured
as things went thereabouts in 1914.  But Josephine was an
unconscious pioneer of the generation that was destined to "get out
of hand."

In her room she dressed herself for going to Lillian's house,
thinking meanwhile of Travis de Coppet and of riding home from the
Davidsons' dance last night.  Over his tuxedo, Travis had worn a
loose blue cape inherited from an old-fashioned uncle.  He was tall
and thin, an exquisite dancer, and his eyes had often been
described by female contemporaries as "very dark"--to an adult it
appeared that he had two black eyes in the collisional sense, and
that probably they were justifiably renewed every night; the area
surrounding them was so purple, or brown, or crimson, that they
were the first thing you noticed about his face, and, save for his
white teeth, the last.  Like Josephine, he was also something new.
There were a lot of new things in Chicago then, but lest the
interest of this narrative be divided, it should be remarked that
Josephine was the newest thing of all.

Dressed, she went down the stairs and through a softly opening side
door, out into the street.  It was October and a harsh breeze blew
her along under trees without leaves, past houses with cold
corners, past caves of the wind that were the mouths of residential
streets.  From that time until April, Chicago is an indoor city,
where entering by a door is like going into another world, for the
cold of the lake is unfriendly and not like real northern cold--it
serves only to accentuate the things that go on inside.  There is
no music outdoors, or love-making, and even in prosperous times the
wealth that rolls by in limousines is less glamorous than
embittering to those on the sidewalk.  But in the houses there is a
deep, warm quiet, or else an excited, singing noise, as if those
within were inventing things like new dances.  That is part of what
people mean when they say they love Chicago.

Josephine was going to meet her friend Lillian Hammel, but their
plan did not include attending the movies.  In comparison to it,
their mothers would have preferred the most objectionable, the most
lurid movie.  It was no less than to go for a long auto ride with
Travis de Coppet and Howard Page, in the course of which they would
kiss not once but a lot.  The four of them had been planning this
since the previous Saturday, when unkind circumstances had combined
to prevent its fulfillment.

Travis and Howard were already there--not sitting down, but still
in their overcoats, like symbols of action, hurrying the girls
breathlessly into the future.  Travis wore a fur collar on his
overcoat and carried a gold-headed cane; he kissed Josephine's hand
facetiously yet seriously, and she said, "Hel-LO, Travis!" with the
warm affection of a politician greeting a prospective vote.  But
for a minute the two girls exchanged news aside.

"I saw him," Lillian whispered, "just now."

"Did you?"

Their eyes blazed and fused together.

"Isn't he di-VINE?" said Josephine.

They were referring to Mr. Anthony Harker, who was twenty-two, and
unconscious of their existence, save that in the Perry house he
occasionally recognized Josephine as Constance's younger sister.

"He has the most beautiful nose," cried Lillian, suddenly laughing.
"It's--"  She drew it on the air with her finger and they both
became hilarious.  But Josephine's face composed itself as Travis'
black eyes, conspicuous as if they had been freshly made the
previous night, peered in from the hall.

"Well!" he said tensely.

The four young people went out, passed through fifty bitter feet of
wind and entered Page's car.  They were all very confident and knew
exactly what they wanted.  Both girls were expressly disobeying
their parents, but they had no more sense of guilt about it than a
soldier escaping from an enemy prison camp.  In the back seat,
Josephine and Travis looked at each other; she waited as he burned
darkly.

"Look," he said to his hand; it was trembling.  "Up till five this
morning.  Girls from the Follies."

"Oh, Travis!" she cried automatically, but for the first time a
communication such as this failed to thrill her.  She took his
hand, wondering what the matter was inside herself.

It was quite dark, and he bent over her suddenly, but as suddenly
she turned her face away.  Annoyed, he made cynical nods with his
head and lay back in the corner of the car.  He became engaged in
cherishing his dark secret--the secret that always made her yearn
toward him.  She could see it come into his eyes and fill them,
down to the cheek bones and up to the brows, but she could not
concentrate on him.  The romantic mystery of the world had moved
into another man.

Travis waited ten minutes for her capitulation; then he tried
again, and with this second approach she saw him plain for the
first time.  It was enough.  Josephine's imagination and her
desires were easily exploited up to a certain point, but after that
her very impulsiveness protected her.  Now, suddenly, she found
something real against Travis, and her voice was modulated with
lowly sorrow.

"I heard what you did last night.  I heard very well."

"What's the matter?"

"You told Ed Bement you were in for a big time because you were
going to take me home in your car."

"Who told you that?" he demanded, guilty but belittling.

"Ed Bement did, and he told me he almost hit you in the face when
you said it.  He could hardly keep restraining himself."

Once more Travis retired to his corner of the seat.  He accepted
this as the reason for her coolness, as in a measure it was.  In
view of Doctor Jung's theory that innumerable male voices argue in
the subconscious of a woman, and even speak through her lips, then
the absent Ed Bement was probably speaking through Josephine at
that moment.

"I've decided not to kiss any more boys, because I won't have
anything left to give the man I really love."

"Bull!" replied Travis.

"It's true.  There's been too much talk around Chicago about me.  A
man certainly doesn't respect a girl he can kiss whenever he wants
to, and I want to be respected by the man I'm going to marry some
day."

Ed Bement would have been overwhelmed had he realized the extent of
his dominance over her that afternoon.

Walking from the corner, where the youths discreetly left her, to
her house, Josephine felt that agreeable lightness which comes with
the end of a piece of work.  She would be a good girl now forever,
see less of boys, as her parents wished, try to be what Miss
Benbower's school denominated An Ideal Benbower Girl.  Then next
year, at Breerly, she could be an Ideal Breerly Girl.  But the
first stars were out over Lake Shore Drive, and all about her she
could feel Chicago swinging around its circle at a hundred miles an
hour, and Josephine knew that she only wanted to want such wants
for her soul's sake.  Actually, she had no desire for achievement.
Her grandfather had had that, her parents had had the consciousness
of it, but Josephine accepted the proud world into which she was
born.  This was easy in Chicago, which, unlike New York, was a city
state, where the old families formed a caste--intellect was
represented by the university professors, and there were no
ramifications, save that even the Perrys had to be nice to half a
dozen families even richer and more important than themselves.
Josephine loved to dance, but the field of feminine glory, the
ballroom floor, was something you slipped away from with a man.

As Josephine came to the iron gate of her house, she saw her sister
shivering on the top steps with a departing young man; then the
front door closed and the man came down the walk.  She knew who he
was.

He was abstracted, but he recognized her for just a moment in
passing.

"Oh, hello," he said.

She turned all the way round so that he could see her face by the
street lamp; she lifted her face full out of her fur collar and
toward him, and then smiled.

"Hello," she said modestly.

They passed.  She drew in her head like a turtle.

"Well, now he knows what I look like, anyhow," she told herself
excitedly as she went on into the house.


II


Several days later Constance Perry spoke to her mother in a serious
tone:

"Josephine is so conceited that I really think she's a little
crazy."

"She's very conceited," admitted Mrs. Perry.  "Father and I were
talking and we decided that after the first of the year she should
go East to school.  But you don't say a word about it until we know
more definitely."

"Heavens, mother, it's none too soon!  She and that terrible Travis
de Coppet running around with his cloak, as if they were about a
thousand years old.  They came into the Blackstone last week and my
SPINE crawled.  They looked just like two maniacs--Travis slinking
along, and Josephine twisting her mouth around as if she had St.
Vitus dance.  HONESTLY--"

"What did you begin to say about Anthony Harker?" interrupted Mrs.
Perry.

"That she's got a crush on him, and he's about old enough to be her
grandfather."

"Not quite."

"Mother, he's twenty-two and she's sixteen.  Every time Jo and
Lillian go by him, they giggle and stare--"

"Come here, Josephine," said Mrs. Perry.

Josephine came into the room slowly and leaned her backbone against
the edge of the opened door, teetering upon it calmly.

"What, mother?"

"Dear, you don't want to be laughed at, do you?"

Josephine turned sulkily to her sister.  "Who laughs at me?  You
do, I guess.  You're the only one that does."

"You're so conceited that you don't see it.  When you and Travis de
Coppet came into the Blackstone that afternoon, my SPINE crawled.
Everybody at our table and most of the other tables laughed--the
ones that weren't shocked."

"I guess they were more shocked," guessed Josephine complacently.

"You'll have a fine reputation by the time you come out."

"Oh, shut your mouth!" said Josephine.

There was a moment's silence.  Then Mrs. Perry whispered solemnly,
"I'll have to tell your father about this as soon as he comes
home."

"Go on, tell him."  Suddenly Josephine began to cry.  "Oh, why
can't anybody ever leave me alone?  I wish I was dead."

Her mother stood with her arm around her, saying, "Josephine--now,
Josephine"; but Josephine went on with deep, broken sobs that
seemed to come from the bottom of her heart.

"Just a lot--of--of ugly and jealous girls who get mad when anybody
looks at m-me, and make up all sorts of stories that are absolutely
untrue, just because I can get anybody I want.  I suppose that
Constance is mad about it because I went in and sat for FIVE
minutes with Anthony Harker while he was waiting last night."

"Yes, I was TER-ribly jealous!  I sat up and cried all night about
it.  Especially because he comes to talk to me about Marice Whaley.
Why!--you got him so crazy about you in that five minutes that he
couldn't stop laughing all the way to the Warrens."

Josephine drew in her breath in one last gasp, and stopped crying.
"If you want to know, I've decided to give him up."

"Ha-ha!" Constance exploded.  "Listen to THAT, mother!  She's going
to give him up--as if he ever looked at her or knew she was ALIVE!
Of all the conceited--"

But Mrs. Perry could stand no more.  She put her arm around
Josephine and hurried her to her room down the hall.

"All your sister meant was that she didn't like to see you laughed
at," she explained.

"Well, I've given him up," said Josephine gloomily.



She had given him up, renouncing a thousand kisses she had never
had, a hundred long, thrilling dances in his arms, a hundred
evenings not to be recaptured.  She did not mention the letter she
had written him last night--and had not sent, and now would never
send.

"You musn't think about such things at your age," said Mrs. Perry.
"You're just a child."

Josephine got up and went to the mirror.

"I promised Lillian to come over to her house.  I'm late now."



Back in her room, Mrs. Perry thought:  "Two months to February."
She was a pretty woman who wanted to be loved by everyone around
her; there was no power of governing in her.  She tied up her mind
like a neat package and put it in the post office, with Josephine
inside it safely addressed to the Breerly School.



An hour later, in the tea room at the Blackstone Hotel, Anthony
Harker and another young man lingered at table.  Anthony was a
happy fellow, lazy, rich enough, pleased with his current
popularity.  After a brief career in an Eastern university, he had
gone to a famous college in Virginia and in its less exigent shadow
completed his education; at least, he had absorbed certain
courtesies and mannerisms that Chicago girls found charming.

"There's that guy Travis de Coppet," his companion had just
remarked.  "What's he think he is, anyhow?"

Anthony looked remotely at the young people across the room,
recognizing the little Perry girl and other young females whom he
seemed to have encountered frequently in the street of late.
Although obviously much at home, they seemed silly and loud;
presently his eyes left them and searched the room for the party he
was due to join for dancing, but he was still sitting there when
the room--it had a twilight quality, in spite of the lights within
and the full dark outside--woke up to confident and exciting music.
A thickening parade drifted past him.  The men in sack suits, as
though they had just come from portentous affairs, and the women in
hats that seemed about to take flight, gave a special impermanence
to the scene.  This implication that this gathering, a little more
than uncalculated, a little less than clandestine, would shortly be
broken into formal series, made him anxious to seize its last
minutes, and he looked more and more intently into the crowd for
the face of anyone he knew.

One face emerged suddenly around a man's upper arm not five feet
away, and for a moment Anthony was the object of the saddest and
most tragic regard that had ever been directed upon him.  It was a
smile and not a smile--two big gray eyes with bright triangles of
color underneath, and a mouth twisted into a universal sympathy
that seemed to include both him and herself--yet withal, the
expression not of a victim, but rather of the very DE-mon of tender
melancholy--and for the first time Anthony really saw Josephine.

His immediate instinct was to see with whom she was dancing.  It
was a young man he knew, and with this assurance he was on his feet
giving a quick tug to his coat, and then out upon the floor.

"May I cut in, please?"

Josephine came close to him as they started, looked up into his
eyes for an instant, and then down and away.  She said nothing.
Realizing that she could not possibly be more than sixteen, Anthony
hoped that the party he was to join would not arrive in the middle
of the dance.

When that was over, she raised eyes to him again; a sense of having
been mistaken, of her being older than he had thought, possessed
him.  Just before he left her at her table, he was moved to say:

"Couldn't I have another later?"

"Oh, sure."

She united her eyes with his, every glint a spike--perhaps from the
railroads on which their family fortunes were founded, and upon
which they depended.  Anthony was disconcerted as he went back to
his table.

One hour later, they left the Blackstone together in her car.

This had simply happened--Josephine's statement, at the end of
their second dance, that she must leave, then her request, and his
own extreme self-consciousness as he walked beside her across the
empty floor.  It was a favor to her sister to take her home--but he
had that unmistakable feeling of expectation.

Nevertheless, once outside and shocked into reconsideration by the
bitter cold, he tried again to allocate his responsibilities in the
matter.  This was hard going with Josephine's insistent dark and
ivory youth pressed up against him.  As they got in the car he
tried to dominate the situation with a masculine stare, but her
eyes, shining as if with fever, melted down his bogus austerity in
a whittled second.

Idly he patted her hand--then suddenly he was inside the radius of
her perfume and kissing her breathlessly. . . .

"So that's that," she whispered after a moment.  Startled, he
wondered if he had forgotten something--something he had said to
her before.

"What a cruel remark," he said, "just when I was getting
interested."

"I only meant that any minute with you may be the last one," she
said miserably.  "The family are going to send me away to school--
they think I haven't found that out yet."

"Too bad."

"--and today they got together--and tried to tell me that you
didn't know I was al-IVE!"

After a long pause, Anthony contributed feebly.  "I hope you didn't
let them convince you."

She laughed shortly.  "I just laughed and came down here."

Her hand burrowed its way into his; when he pressed it, her eyes,
bright now, not dark, rose until they were as high as his, and came
toward him.  A minute later he thought to himself:  "This is a
rotten trick I'm doing."

He was sure he was doing it.

"You're so sweet," she said.

"You're a dear child."

"I hate jealousy worse than anything in the world," Josephine broke
forth, "and _I_ have to suffer from it.  And my own sister worse
than all the rest."

"Oh, no," he protested.

"I couldn't help it if I fell in love with you.  I tried to help
it.  I used to go out of the house when I knew you were coming."

The force of her lies came from her sincerity and from her simple
and superb confidence that whomsoever she loved must love her in
return.  Josephine was never either ashamed or plaintive.  She was
in the world of being alone with a male, a world through which she
had moved surely since she was eight years old.  She did not plan;
she merely let herself go, and the overwhelming life in her did the
rest.  It is only when youth is gone and experience has given us a
sort of cheap courage that most of us realize how simple such
things are.

"But you couldn't be in love with me," Anthony wanted to say, and
couldn't.  He fought with a desire to kiss her again, even
tenderly, and began to tell her that she was being unwise, but
before he got really started at this handsome project, she was in
his arms again, and whispering something that he had to accept,
since it was wrapped up in a kiss.  Then he was alone, driving away
from her door.

What had he agreed to?  All they had said rang and beat in his ear
like an unexpected temperature--tomorrow at four o'clock on that
corner.

"Good God!" he thought uneasily.  "All that stuff about giving me
up.  She's a crazy kid, she'll get into trouble if somebody looking
for trouble comes along.  BIG chance of my meeting her tomorrow!"

But neither at dinner nor the dance that he went to that night
could Anthony get the episode out of his mind; he kept looking
around the ballroom regretfully, as if he missed someone who should
be there.



III


Two weeks later, waiting for Marice Whaley in a meager, indefinable
down-stairs "sitting room," Anthony reached in his pocket for some
half-forgotten mail.  Three letters he replaced; the other--after a
moment of listening--he opened quickly and read with his back to
the door.  It was the third of a series--for one had followed each
of his meetings with Josephine--and it was exactly like the others--
the letter of a child.  Whatever maturity of emotion could
accumulate in her expression, when once she set pen to paper was
snowed under by ineptitude.  There was much about "your feeling for
me" and "my feeling for you," and sentences began, "Yes, I know I
am sentimental," or more gawkily, "I have always been sort of pash,
and I can't help that," and inevitably much quoting of lines from
current popular songs, as if they expressed the writer's state of
mind more fully than verbal struggles of her own.

The letter disturbed Anthony.  As he reached the postscript, which
coolly made a rendezvous for five o'clock this afternoon, he heard
Marice coming down-stairs, and put it back in his pocket.

Marice hummed and moved about the room.  Anthony smoked.

"I saw you Tuesday afternoon," she said suddenly.  "You seemed to
be having a fine time."

"Tuesday," he repeated, as if thinking.  "Oh, yeah.  I ran into
some kids and we went to a tea dance.  It was amusing."

"You were AL-most alone when I saw you."

"What are you getting at?"

Marice hummed again.  "Let's go out.  Let's go to a matinée."

On the way Anthony explained how he had happened to be with
Connie's little sister; the necessity of the explanation somehow
angered him.  When he had done, Marice said crisply:

"If you wanted to rob the cradle, why did you have to pick out that
little devil?  Her reputation's so bad already that Mrs. McRae
didn't want to invite her to dancing class this year--she only did
it on account of Constance."

"Why is she so awful?" asked Anthony, disturbed.

"I'd rather not discuss it."

His five-o'clock engagement was on his mind throughout the matinée.
Though Marice's remarks served only to make him dangerously sorry
for Josephine, he was nevertheless determined that this meeting
should be the last.  It was embarrassing to have been remarked in
her company, even though he had tried honestly to avoid it.  The
matter could very easily develop into a rather dangerous little
mess, with no benefit either to Josephine or to himself.  About
Marice's indignation he did not care; she had been his for the
asking all autumn, but Anthony did not want to get married; did not
want to get involved with anybody at all.

It was dark when he was free at 5:30, and turned his car toward the
new Philanthrophilogical Building in the maze of reconstruction in
Grant Park.  The bleakness of place and time depressed him, gave a
further painfulness to the affair.  Getting out of his car, he
walked past a young man in a waiting roadster--a young man whom he
seemed to recognize--and found Josephine in the half darkness of
the little chamber that the storm doors formed.

With an indefinable sound of greeting, she walked determinedly into
his arms, putting up her face.

"I can only stay for a sec," she protested, just as if he had
begged her to come.  "I'm supposed to go to a wedding with sister,
but I had to see you."

When Anthony spoke, his voice froze into a white mist, obvious in
the darkness.  He said things he had said to her before but this
time firmly and finally.  It was easier, because he could scarcely
see her face and because somewhere in the middle she irritated him
by starting to cry.

"I knew you were supposed to be fickle," she whispered, "but I
didn't expect this.  Anyhow, I've got enough pride not to bother
you any further."  She hesitated.  "But I wish we could meet just
once more to try and arrive at a more different settlement."

"No."

"Some jealous girl has been talking to you about me."

"No."  Then, in despair, he struck at her heart.  "I'm NOT fickle.
I've never loved you and I NEVER told you I did."

Guessing at the forlorn expression that would come into her face,
Anthony turned away and took a purposeless step; when he wheeled
nervously about, the storm door had just shut--she was gone.

"Josephine!" he shouted in helpless pity, but there was no answer.
He waited, heart in his boots, until presently he heard a car drive
away.

At home, Josephine thanked Ed Bement, whom she had used, with a
tartlet of hope, went in by a side door and up to her room.  The
window was open and, as she dressed hurriedly for the wedding she
stood close to it so that she would catch cold and die.

Seeing her face in the bathroom mirror, she broke down and sat on
the edge of the tub, making a small choking sound like a struggle
with a cough, and cleaning her finger nails.  Later she could cry
all night in bed when every one else was asleep, but now it was
still afternoon.

The two sisters and their mother stood side by side at the wedding
of Mary Jackson and Jackson Dillon.  It was a sad and sentimental
wedding--an end to the fine, glamorous youth of a girl who was
universally admired and loved.  Perhaps to no onlooker there were
its details symbolical of the end of a period, yet from the vantage
point of a decade, certain things that happened are already
powdered with yesterday's ridiculousness, and even tinted with the
lavender of the day before.  The bride raised her veil, smiling
that grave sweet smile that made her "adored," but with tears
pouring down her cheeks, and faced dozens of friends hands outheld
as if embracing all of them for the last time.  Then she turned to
a husband as serious and immaculate as herself, and looked at him
as if to say, "That's done.  All this that I am is yours forever
and ever."

In her pew, Constance, who had been at school with Mary Jackson,
was frankly weeping, from a heart that was a ringing vault.  But
the face of Josephine beside her was a more intricate study; it
watched intently.  Once or twice, though her eyes lost none of
their level straight intensity, an isolated tear escaped, and, as
if startled by the feel of it, the face hardened slightly and the
mouth remained in defiant immobility, like a child well warned
against making a disturbance.  Only once did she move; hearing a
voice behind her say:  "That's the little Perry girl.  Isn't she
lovely looking?" she turned presently and gazed at a stained-glass
window lest her unknown admirers miss the sight of the side face.

Josephine's family went on to the reception, so she dined alone--or
rather with her little brother and his nurse, which was the same
thing.

She felt all empty.  Tonight Anthony Harker, "so deeply lovable--so
sweetly lovable--so deeply, sweetly lovable" was making love to
someone new, kissing her ugly, jealous face; soon he would have
disappeared forever, together with all the men of his generation,
into a loveless matrimony, leaving only a world of Travis de
Coppets and Ed Bements--people so easy as to scarcely be worth the
effort of a smile.

Up in her room, she was excited again by the sight of herself in
the bathroom mirror.  Oh, what if she should die in her sleep
tonight?

"Oh, what a shame," she whispered.

She opened the window, and holding her only souvenir of Anthony, a
big initialed linen handkerchief, crept desolately into bed.  While
the sheets were still cold, there was a knock at the door.

"Special-delivery letter," said the maid.

Putting on the light, Josephine opened it, turned to the signature,
then back again, her breast rising and falling quickly under her
nightgown.


DARLING LITTLE JOSEPHINE:  It's no use, I can't help it, I can't
lie about it.  I'm desperately, terribly in love with you.  When
you went away this afternoon, it all rushed over me, and I knew I
couldn't give you up.  I drove home, and I couldn't eat or sit
still, but only walk up and down thinking of your darling face and
your darling tears, there in that vestibule.  And now I sit writing
this letter--


It was four pages long.  Somewhere it disposed of their disparate
ages as unimportant, and the last words were:


I know how miserable you must be, and I would give ten years of my
life to be there to kiss your sweet lips good night.


When she had read it through, Josephine sat motionless for some
minutes; grief was suddenly gone, and for a moment she was so
overwhelmed that she supposed joy had come in its stead.  On her
face was a twinkling frown.

"Gosh!" she said to herself.  She read over the letter once more.

Her first instinct was to call up Lillian, but she thought better
of it.  The image of the bride at the wedding popped out at her--
the reproachless bride, unsullied, beloved and holy with a sweet
glow.  An adolescence of uprightness, a host of friends, then the
appearance of the perfect lover, the Ideal.  With an effort, she
recalled her drifting mind to the present occasion.  Certainly Mary
Jackson would never have kept such a letter.  Getting out of bed,
Josephine tore it into little pieces and, with some difficulty,
caused by an unexpected amount of smoke, burned it on a glass-
topped table.  No well-brought-up girl would have answered such a
letter; the proper thing was to simply ignore it.

She wiped up the table top with the man's linen handkerchief she
held in her hand, threw it absently into a laundry basket and crept
into bed.  She suddenly was very sleepy.


IV


For what ensued, no one, not even Constance, blamed Josephine.  If
a man of twenty-two should so debase himself as to pay frantic
court to a girl of sixteen against the wishes of her parents and
herself, there was only one answer--he was a person who shouldn't
be received by decent people.  When Travis de Coppet made a
controversial remark on the affair at a dance, Ed Bement beat him
into what was described as "a pulp," down in the washroom, and
Josephine's reputation rose to normal and stayed there.  Accounts
of how Anthony had called time and time again at the house, each
time denied admittance, how he had threatened Mr. Perry, how he had
tried to bribe a maid to deliver letters, how he had attempted to
waylay Josephine on her way back from school--these things pointed
to the fact that he was a little mad.  It was Anthony Harker's own
family who insisted that he should go West.

All this was a trying time for Josephine.  She saw how close she
had come to disaster, and by constant consideration and implicit
obedience, tried to make up to her parents for the trouble she had
unwittingly caused.  At first she decided she didn't want to go to
any Christmas dances, but she was persuaded by her mother, who
hoped she would be distracted by boys and girls home from school
for the holidays.  Mrs. Perry was taking her East to the Breerly
School early in January, and in the buying of clothes and uniforms,
mother and daughter were much together, and Mrs. Perry was
delighted at Josephine's new feeling of responsibility and
maturity.

As a matter of fact, it was sincere, and only once did Josephine do
anything that she could not have told the world.  The day after New
Year's she put on her new travelling suit and her new fur coat and
went out by her familiar egress, the side door, and walked down the
block to the waiting car of Ed Bement.  Downtown she left Ed
waiting at a corner and entered a drug store opposite the old Union
Station on LaSalle Street.  A man with an unhappy mouth and
desperate, baffled eyes was waiting for her there.

"Thank you for coming," he said miserably.

She didn't answer.  Her face was grave and polite.

"Here's what I want--just one thing," he said quickly:  "Why did
you change?  What did I do that made you change so suddenly?  Was
it something that happened, something I did?  Was it what I said in
the vestibule that night?"

Still looking at him, she tried to think, but she could only think
how unattractive and rather terrible she found him now, and try not
to let him see it.  There would have been no use saying the simple
truth--that she could not help what she had done, that great beauty
has a need, almost an obligation, of trying itself, that her ample
cup of emotion had spilled over on its own accord, and it was an
accident that it had destroyed him and not her.  The eyes of pity
might follow Anthony Harker in his journey West, but most certainly
the eyes of destiny followed Josephine as she crossed the street
through the falling snow to Ed Bement's car.

She sat quiet for a minute as they drove away, relieved and yet
full of awe.  Anthony Harker was twenty-two, handsome, popular and
sought after--and how he had loved her--so much that he had to go
away.  She was as impressed as if they had been two other people.

Taking her silence for depression, Ed Bement said:

"Well, it did one thing anyhow--it stopped that other story they
had around about you."

She turned to him quickly.  "What story?"

"Oh, just some crazy story."

"What was it?" she demanded.

"Oh, nothing much," he said hesitantly, "but there was a story
around last August that you and Travis de Coppet were married."

"Why, how perfectly terrible!" she exclaimed.  "Why, I never heard
of such a lie.  It--"  She stopped herself short of saying the
truth--that though she and Travis had adventurously driven twenty
miles to New Ulm, they had been unable to find a minister willing
to marry them.  It all seemed ages behind her, childish, forgotten.

"Oh, how perfectly terrible!" she repeated.  "That's the kind of
story that gets started by jealous girls."

"I know," agreed Ed.  "I'd just like to hear any boy try to repeat
it to me.  Nobody believed it anyhow."

It was the work of ugly and jealous girls.  Ed Bement, aware of her
body next to him, and of her face shining like fire through the
half darkness, knew that nobody so beautiful could ever do anything
really wrong.





FORGING AHEAD


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (March 30, 1929)



Basil Duke Lee and Riply Buckner, Jr., sat on the Lees' front steps
in the regretful gold of a late summer afternoon.  Inside the house
the telephone sang out with mysterious promise.

"I thought you were going home," Basil said.

"I thought you were."

"I am."

"So am I."

"Well, why don't you go, then?"

"Why don't you, then?"

"I am."

They laughed, ending with yawning gurgles that were not laughed out
but sucked in.  As the telephone rang again, Basil got to his feet.

"I've got to study trig before dinner."

"Are you honestly going to Yale this fall?" demanded Riply
skeptically.

"Yes."

"Everybody says you're foolish to go at sixteen."

"I'll be seventeen in September.  So long.  I'll call you up
tonight."

Basil heard his mother at the upstairs telephone and he was
immediately aware of distress in her voice.

"Yes. . . .  Isn't that awful, Everett! . . .  Yes. . . .  Oh-h
my!"  After a minute he gathered that it was only the usual worry
about business and went on into the kitchen for refreshments.
Returning, he met his mother hurrying downstairs.  She was blinking
rapidly and her hat was on backward--characteristic testimony to
her excitement.

"I've got to go over to your grandfather's."

"What's the matter, mother?"

"Uncle Everett thinks we've lost a lot of money."

"How much?" he asked, startled.

"Twenty-two thousand dollars apiece.  But we're not sure."

She went out.

"Twenty-two thousand dollars!" he repeated in an awed whisper.

His ideas of money were vague and somewhat debonair, but he had
noticed that at family dinners the immemorial discussion as to
whether the Third Street block would be sold to the railroads had
given place to anxious talk of Western Public Utilities.  At half-
past six his mother telephoned for him to have his dinner, and with
growing uneasiness he sat alone at the table, undistracted by The
Mississippi Bubble, open beside his plate.  She came in at seven,
distraught and miserable, and dropping down at the table, gave him
his first exact information about finance--she and her father and
her brother Everett had lost something more than eighty thousand
dollars.  She was in a panic and she looked wildly around the
dining room as if money were slipping away even here, and she
wanted to retrench at once.

"I've got to stop selling securities or we won't have anything,"
she declared.  "This leaves us only three thousand a year--do you
realize that, Basil?  I don't see how I can possibly afford to send
you to Yale."

His heart tumbled into his stomach; the future, always glowing like
a comfortable beacon ahead of him, flared up in glory and went out.
His mother shivered, and then emphatically shook her head.

"You'll just have to make up your mind to go to the state
university."

"Gosh!" Basil said.

Sorry for his shocked, rigid face, she yet spoke somewhat sharply,
as people will with a bitter refusal to convey.

"I feel terribly about it--your father wanted you to go to Yale.
But everyone says that, with clothes and railroad fare, I can count
on it costing two thousand a year.  Your grandfather helped me to
send you to St. Regis School, but he always thought you ought to
finish at the state university."

After she went distractedly upstairs with a cup of tea, Basil sat
thinking in the dark parlor.  For the present the loss meant only
one thing to him--he wasn't going to Yale after all.  The sentence
itself, divorced from its meaning, overwhelmed him, so many times
had he announced casually, "I'm going to Yale," but gradually he
realized how many friendly and familiar dreams had been swept away.
Yale was the faraway East, that he had loved with a vast nostalgia
since he had first read books about great cities.  Beyond the
dreary railroad stations of Chicago and the night fires of
Pittsburgh, back in the old states, something went on that made his
heart beat fast with excitement.  He was attuned to the vast,
breathless bustle of New York, to the metropolitan days and nights
that were tense as singing wires.  Nothing needed to be imagined
there, for it was all the very stuff of romance--life was as vivid
and satisfactory as in books and dreams.

But first, as a sort of gateway to that deeper, richer life, there
was Yale.  The name evoked the memory of a heroic team backed up
against its own impassable goal in the crisp November twilight, and
later, of half a dozen immaculate noblemen with opera hats and
canes standing at the Manhattan Hotel bar.  And tangled up with its
triumphs and rewards, its struggles and glories, the vision of the
inevitable, incomparable girl.

Well, then, why not work his way through Yale?  In a moment the
idea had become a reality.  He began walking rapidly up and down
the room, declaring half aloud, "Of course, that's the thing to
do."  Rushing upstairs, he knocked at his mother's door and
announced in the inspired voice of a prophet:  "Mother, I know what
I'm going to do!  I'm going to work my way through Yale."

He sat down on her bed and she considered uncertainly.  The men in
her family had not been resourceful for several generations, and
the idea startled her.

"It doesn't seem to me you're a boy who likes to work," she said.
"Besides, boys who work their way through college have scholarships
and prizes, and you've never been much of a student."

He was annoyed.  He was ready for Yale a year ahead of his age and
her reproach seemed unfair.

"What would you work at?" she said.

"Take care of furnaces," said Basil promptly.  "And shovel snow off
sidewalks.  I think they mostly do that--and tutor people.  You
could let me have as much money as it would take to go to the state
university?"

"We'll have to think it over."

"Well, don't you worry about anything," he said emphatically,
"because my earning my way through Yale will really make up for the
money you've lost, almost."

"Why don't you start by finding something to do this summer?"

"I'll get a job tomorrow.  Maybe I can pile up enough so you won't
have to help me.  Good night, Mother."

Up in his room he paused only to thunder grimly to the mirror that
he was going to work his way through Yale, and going to his
bookcase, took down half a dozen dusty volumes of Horatio Alger,
unopened for years.  Then, much as a postwar young man might
consult the George Washington Condensed Business Course, he sat at
his desk and slowly began to turn the pages of Bound to Rise.



Two days later, after being insulted by the doorkeepers, office
boys and telephone girls of the Press, the Evening News, the
Socialist Gazette and a green scandal sheet called the Courier, and
assured that no one wanted a reporter practically seventeen, after
enduring every ignominy prepared for a young man in a free country
trying to work his way through Yale, Basil Duke Lee, too "stuck-up"
to apply to the parents of his friends, got a position with the
railroad, through Eddie Parmelee, who lived across the way.

At 6.30 the following morning, carrying his lunch, and a new suit
of overalls that had cost four dollars, he strode self-consciously
into the Great Northern car shops.  It was like entering a new
school, except that no one showed any interest in him or asked him
if he was going out for the team.  He punched a time clock, which
affected him strangely, and without even an admonition from the
foreman to "go in and win," was put to carrying boards for the top
of a car.

Twelve o'clock arrived; nothing had happened.  The sun was blazing
hot and his hands and back were sore, but no real events had
ruffled the dull surface of the morning.  The president's little
daughter had not come by, dragged by a runaway horse; not even a
superintendent had walked through the yard and singled him out with
an approving eye.  Undismayed, he toiled on--you couldn't expect
much the first morning.

He and Eddie Parmelee ate their lunches together.  For several
years Eddie had worked here in vacations; he was sending himself to
the state university this fall.  He shook his head doubtfully over
the idea of Basil's earning his way through Yale.

"Here's what you ought to do," he said:  "You borrow two thousand
dollars from your mother and buy twenty shares in Ware Plow and
Tractor.  Then go to a bank and borrow two thousand more with those
shares for collateral, and with that two thousand buy twenty more
shares.  Then you sit on your back for a year, and after that you
won't have to think about earning your way through Yale."

"I don't think mother would give me two thousand dollars."

"Well, anyhow, that's what I'd do."

If the morning had been uneventful, the afternoon was distinguished
by an incident of some unpleasantness.  Basil had risen a little,
having been requested to mount to the top of a freight car and help
nail the boards he had carried in the morning.  He found that
nailing nails into a board was more highly technical than nailing
tacks into a wall, but he considered that he was progressing
satisfactorily when an angry voice hailed him from below:

"Hey, you!  Get up!"

He looked down.  A foreman stood there, unpleasantly red in the
face.

"Yes, you in the new suit.  Get up!"

Basil looked about to see if someone was lying down, but the two
sullen hunyaks seemed to be hard at work and it grew on him that he
was indeed being addressed.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he said.

"Get up on your knees or get out!  What the h-- do you think this
is?"

He had been sitting down as he nailed, and apparently the foreman
thought that he was loafing.  After another look at the foreman, he
suppressed the explanation that he felt steadier sitting down and
decided to just let it go.  There were probably no railroad shops
at Yale; yet, he remembered with a pang the ominous name, New York,
New Haven and Hartford.

The third morning, just as he had become aware that his overalls
were not where he had hung them in the shop, it was announced that
all men of less than six months' service were to be laid off.
Basil received four dollars and lost his overalls.  Learning that
nails are driven from a kneeling position had cost him only
carfare.

In a large old-fashioned house in the old section of the city lived
Basil's great-uncle, Benjamin Reilly, and there Basil presented
himself that evening.  It was a last resort--Benjamin Reilly and
Basil's grandfather were brothers and they had not spoken for
twenty years.

He was received in the living room by the small, dumpy old man
whose inscrutable face was hidden behind a white poodle beard.
Behind him stood a woman of forty, his wife of six months, and her
daughter, a girl of fifteen.  Basil's branch of the family had not
been invited to the wedding, and he had never seen these two
additions before.

"I thought I'd come down and see you, Uncle Ben," he said with some
embarrassment.

There was a certain amount of silence.

"Your mother well?" asked the old man.

"Oh, yes, thank you."

Mr. Reilly waited.  Mrs. Reilly spoke to her daughter, who threw a
curious glance at Basil and reluctantly left the room.  Her mother
made the old man sit down.

Out of sheer embarrassment Basil came to the point.  He wanted a
summer job in the Reilly Wholesale Drug Company.

His uncle fidgeted for a minute and then replied that there were no
positions open.

"Oh."

"It might be different if you wanted a permanent place, but you say
you want to go to Yale."  He said this with some irony of his own,
and glanced at his wife.

"Why, yes," said Basil.  "That's really why I want the job."

"Your mother can't afford to send you, eh?"  The note of pleasure
in his voice was unmistakable.  "Spent all her money?"

"Oh, no," answered Basil quickly.  "She's going to help me."

To his surprise, aid came from an unpromising quarter.  Mrs. Reilly
suddenly bent and whispered in her husband's ear, whereupon the old
man nodded and said aloud:

"I'll think about it, Basil.  You go in there."

And his wife repeated:  "We'll think about it.  You go in the
library with Rhoda while Mr. Reilly looks up and sees."

The door of the library closed behind him and he was alone with
Rhoda, a square-chinned, decided girl with fleshy white arms and a
white dress that reminded Basil domestically of the lacy pants that
blew among the laundry in the yard.  Puzzled by his uncle's change
of front, he eyed her abstractedly for a moment.

"I guess you're my cousin," said Rhoda, closing her book, which he
saw was The Little Colonel, Maid of Honor.

"Yes," he admitted.

"I heard about you from somebody."  The implication was that her
information was not flattering.

"From who?"

"A girl named Elaine Washmer."

"Elaine Washmer!"  His tone dismissed the name scornfully.  "That
girl!"

"She's my best friend."  He made no reply.  "She said you thought
you were wonderful."

Young people do not perceive at once that the giver of wounds is
the enemy and the quoted tattle merely the arrow.  His heart
smoldered with wrath at Elaine Washmer.

"I don't know many kids here," said the girl, in a less aggressive
key.  "We've only been here six months.  I never saw such a stuck-
up bunch."

"Oh, I don't think so," he protested.  "Where did you live before?"

"Sioux City.  All the kids have much more fun in Sioux City."

Mrs. Reilly opened the door and called Basil back into the living
room.  The old man was again on his feet.

"Come down tomorrow morning and I'll find you something," he said.

"And why don't you have dinner with us tomorrow night?" added Mrs.
Reilly, with a cordiality wherein an adult might have detected
disingenuous purpose.

"Why, thank you very much."

His heart, buoyant with gratitude, had scarcely carried him out the
door before Mrs. Reilly laughed shortly and called in her daughter.

"Now we'll see if you don't get around a little more," she
announced.  "When was it you said they had those dances?"

"Thursdays at the College Club and Saturdays at the Lake Club,"
said Rhoda promptly.

"Well, if this young man wants to hold the position your father has
given him, you'll go to them all the rest of the summer."



Arbitrary groups formed by the hazards of money or geography may be
sufficiently quarrelsome and dull, but for sheer unpleasantness the
condition of young people who have been thrust together by a common
unpopularity can be compared only with that of prisoners herded in
a cell.  In Basil's eyes the guests at the little dinner the
following night were a collection of cripples.  Lewis and Hector
Crum, dullard cousins who were tolerable only to each other; Sidney
Rosen, rich but awful; ugly Mary Haupt, Elaine Washmer, and Betty
Geer, who reminded Basil of a cruel parody they had once sung to
the tune of Jungle Town:


     Down below the hill
     There lives a pill
     That makes me ill,
       And her name is Betty Geer.
       We had better stop right here. . . .
     She's so fat,
     She looks just like a cat,
     And she's the queen of pills.


Moreover, they resented Basil, who was presumed to be "stuck-up,"
and walking home afterward, he felt dreary and vaguely exploited.
Of course, he was grateful to Mrs. Reilly for her kindness, yet he
couldn't help wondering if a cleverer boy couldn't have got out of
taking Rhoda to the Lake Club next Saturday night.  The proposal
had caught him unaware; but when he was similarly trapped the
following week, and the week after that, he began to realize the
situation.  It was a part of his job, and he accepted it grimly,
unable, nevertheless, to understand how such a bad dancer and so
unsociable a person should want to go where she was obviously a
burden.  "Why doesn't she just sit at home and read a book," he
thought disgustedly, "or go away somewhere--or sew?"

It was one Saturday afternoon while he watched a tennis tournament
and felt the unwelcome duty of the evening creep up on him, that he
found himself suddenly fascinated by a girl's face a few yards
away.  His heart leaped into his throat and the blood in his pulse
beat with excitement; and then, when the crowd rose to go, he saw
to his astonishment that he had been staring at a child ten years
old.  He looked away, oddly disappointed; after a moment he looked
back again.  The lovely, self-conscious face suggested a train of
thought and sensation that he could not identify.  As he passed on,
forgoing a vague intention of discovering the child's identity,
there was beauty suddenly all around him in the afternoon; he could
hear its unmistakable whisper, its never-inadequate, never-failing
promise of happiness.  "Tomorrow--one day soon now--this fall--
maybe tonight."  Irresistibly compelled to express himself, he sat
down and tried to write to a girl in New York.  His words were
stilted and the girl seemed cold and far away.  The real image on
his mind, the force that had propelled him into this state of
yearning, was the face of the little girl seen that afternoon.

When he arrived with Rhoda Sinclair at the Lake Club that night, he
immediately cast a quick look around to see what boys were present
who were indebted to Rhoda or else within his own sphere of
influence.  This was just before cutting-in arrived, and ordinarily
he was able to dispose of half a dozen dances in advance, but
tonight an older crowd was in evidence and the situation was
unpromising.  However, as Rhoda emerged from the dressing room he
saw Bill Kampf and thankfully bore down upon him.

"Hello, old boy," he said, exuding personal good will.  "How about
dancing once with Rhoda tonight?"

"Can't," Bill answered briskly.  "We've got people visiting us.
Didn't you know?"

"Well, why couldn't we swap a dance anyhow?"

Bill looked at him in surprise.

"I thought you knew," he exclaimed.  "Erminie's here.  She's been
talking about you all afternoon."

"Erminie Bibble!"

"Yes.  And her father and mother and her kid sister.  Got here this
morning."

Now, indeed, the emotion of two hours before bubbled up in Basil's
blood, but this time he knew why.  It was the little sister of
Erminie Gilbert Labouisse Bibble whose strangely familiar face had
so attracted him.  As his mind swung sharply back to a long
afternoon on the Kampfs' veranda at the lake, ages ago, a year ago,
a real voice rang in his ear, "Basil!" and a sparkling little
beauty of fifteen came up to him with a fine burst of hurry, taking
his hand as though she was stepping into the circle of his arm.

"Basil, I'm so glad!"  Her voice was husky with pleasure, though
she was at the age when pleasure usually hides behind grins and
mumbles.  It was Basil who was awkward and embarrassed, despite the
intention of his heart.  He was a little relieved when Bill Kampf,
more conscious of his lovely cousin than he had been a year ago,
led her out on the floor.

"Who was that?" Rhoda demanded, as he returned in a daze.  "I never
saw her around."

"Just a girl."  He scarcely knew what he was saying.

"Well, I know that.  What's her name?"

"Minnie Bibble, from New Orleans."

"She certainly looks conceited.  I never saw anybody so affected in
my life."

"Hush!" Basil protested involuntarily.  "Let's dance."

It was a long hour before Basil was relieved by Hector Crum, and
then several dances passed before he could get possession of
Minnie, who was now the center of a moving whirl.  But she made it
up to him by pressing his hand and drawing him out to a veranda
which overhung the dark lake.

"It's about time," she whispered.  With a sort of instinct she
found the darkest corner.  "I might have known you'd have another
crush."

"I haven't," he insisted in horror.  "That's a sort of a cousin of
mine."

"I always knew you were fickle.  But I didn't think you'd forget me
so soon."

She had wriggled up until she was touching him.  Her eyes, floating
into his, said, What does it matter?  We're alone.

In a curious panic he jumped to his feet.  He couldn't possibly
kiss her like this--right at once.  It was all so different and
older than a year ago.  He was too excited to do more than walk up
and down and say, "Gosh, I certainly am glad to see you,"
supplementing this unoriginal statement with an artificial laugh.

Already mature in poise, she tried to soothe him: "Basil, come and
sit down!"

"I'll be all right," he gasped, as if he had just fainted.  "I'm a
little fussed, that's all."

Again he contributed what, even to his pounding ears, sounded like
a silly laugh.

"I'll be here three weeks.  Won't it be fun?"  And she added, with
warm emphasis:  "Do you remember on Bill's veranda that afternoon?"

All he could find to answer was:  "I work now in the afternoon."

"You can come out in the evenings, Basil.  It's only half an hour
in a car."

"I haven't got a car."

"I mean you can get your family's car."

"It's an electric."

She waited patiently.  He was still romantic to her--handsome,
incalculable, a little sad.

"I saw your sister," he blurted out.  Beginning with that, he might
bridge this perverse and intolerable reverence she inspired.  "She
certainly looks like you."

"Does she?"

"It was wonderful," he said.  "Wonderful!  Let me tell you--"

"Yes, do."  She folded her hands expectantly in her lap.

"Well, this afternoon--"

The music had stopped and started several times.  Now, in an
intermission, there was the sound of determined footsteps on the
veranda, and Basil looked up to find Rhoda and Hector Crum.

"I got to go home, Basil," squeaked Hector in his changing voice.
"Here's Rhoda."

Take Rhoda out to the dock and push her in the lake.  But only
Basil's mind said this; his body stood up politely.

"I didn't know where you were, Basil," said Rhoda in an aggrieved
tone.  "Why didn't you come back?"

"I was just coming."  His voice trembled a little as he turned to
Minnie.  "Shall I find your partner for you?"

"Oh, don't bother," said Minnie.  She was not angry, but she was
somewhat astonished.  She could not be expected to guess that the
young man walking away from her so submissively was at the moment
employed in working his way through Yale.



From the first, Basil's grandfather, who had once been a regent at
the state university, wanted him to give up the idea of Yale, and
now his mother, picturing him hungry and ragged in a garret,
adjoined her persuasions.  The sum on which he could count from her
was far below the necessary minimum, and although he stubbornly
refused to consider defeat, he consented, "just in case anything
happened," to register at the university for the coming year.

In the administration building he ran into Eddie Parmelee, who
introduced his companion, a small, enthusiastic Japanese.

"Well, well," said Eddie.  "So you've given up Yale!"

"I given up Yale," put in Mr. Utsonomia, surprisingly.  "Oh, yes,
long time I given up Yale."  He broke into enthusiastic laughter.
"Oh, sure.  Oh, yes."

"Mr. Utsonomia's a Japanese," explained Eddie, winking.  "He's a
sub-freshman too."

"Yes, I given up Harvard, Princeton too," continued Mr. Utsonomia.
"They give me choice back in my country.  I choose here."

"You did?" said Basil, almost indignantly.

"Sure, more strong here.  More peasants come, with strength and
odor of ground."

Basil stared at him.  "You like that?" he asked incredulously.

Utsonomia nodded.  "Here I get to know real American peoples.
Girls too.  Yale got only boys."

"But they haven't got college spirit here," explained Basil
patiently.

Utsonomia looked blankly at Eddie.

"Rah-rah!" elucidated Eddie, waving his arms.  "Rah-rah-rah!  You
know."

"Besides, the girls here--" began Basil, and stopped.

"You know girls here?" grinned Utsonomia.

"No, I don't know them," said Basil firmly.  "But I know they're
not like the girls that you'd meet down at the Yale proms.  I don't
think they even have proms here.  I don't mean the girls aren't all
right, but they're just not like the ones at Yale.  They're just
coeds."

"I hear you got a crush on Rhoda Sinclair," said Eddie.

"Yes, I have!" said Basil ironically.

"They used to invite me to dinner sometimes last spring, but since
you take her around to all the club dances--"

"Good-bye," said Basil hastily.  He exchanged a jerky bow for Mr.
Utsonomia's more formal dip, and departed.

From the moment of Minnie's arrival the question of Rhoda had begun
to assume enormous proportions.  At first he had been merely
indifferent to her person and a little ashamed of her lacy, oddly
reminiscent clothes, but now, as he saw how relentlessly his
services were commandeered, he began to hate her.  When she
complained of a headache, his imagination would eagerly convert it
into a long, lingering illness from which she would recover only
after college opened in the fall.  But the eight dollars a week
which he received from his great-uncle would pay his fare to New
Haven, and he knew that if he failed to hold this position his
mother would refuse to let him go.

Not suspecting the truth, Minnie Bibble found the fact that he only
danced with her once or twice at each hop, and was then strangely
moody and silent, somehow intriguing.  Temporarily, at least, she
was fascinated by his indifference, and even a little unhappy.  But
her precociously emotional temperament would not long stand
neglect, and it was agony for Basil to watch several rivals
beginning to emerge.  There were moments when it seemed too big a
price to pay even for Yale.

All his hopes centered upon one event.  That was a farewell party
in her honor for which the Kampfs had engaged the College Club and
to which Rhoda was not invited.  Given the mood and the moment, he
might speed her departure knowing that he had stamped himself
indelibly on her heart.

Three days before the party he came home from work at six to find
the Kampfs' car before his door and Minnie sitting alone on the
front porch.

"Basil, I had to see you," she said.  "You've been so funny and
distant to me."

Intoxicated by her presence on his familiar porch, he found no
words to answer.

"I'm meeting the family in town for dinner and I've got an hour.
Can't we go somewhere?  I've been frightened to death your mother
would come home and think it was fresh for me to call on you."  She
spoke in a whisper, though there was no one close enough to hear.
"I wish we didn't have the old chauffeur.  He listens."

"Listens to what?" Basil asked, with a flash of jealousy.

"He just listens."

"I'll tell you," he proposed:  "We'll have him drop us by grampa's
house and I'll borrow the electric."

The hot wind blew the brown curls around her forehead as they
glided along Crest Avenue.

That he contributed the car made him feel more triumphantly astride
the moment.  There was a place he had saved for such a time as this--
a little pigtail of a road left from the excavations of Prospect
Park, where Crest Avenue ran obliviously above them and the late
sun glinted on the Mississippi flats a mile away.

The end of summer was in the afternoon; it had turned a corner, and
what was left must be used while there was yet time.

Suddenly she was whispering in his arms, "You're first, Basil--
nobody but you."

"You just admitted you were a flirt."

"I know, but that was years ago.  I used to like to be called fast
when I was thirteen or fourteen, because I didn't care what people
said; but about a year ago I began to see there was something
better in life--honestly, Basil--and I've tried to act properly.
But I'm afraid I'll never be an angel."

The river flowed in a thin scarlet gleam between the public baths
and the massed tracks upon the other side.  Booming, whistling,
faraway railroad sounds reached them from down there; the voices of
children playing tennis in Prospect Park sailed frailly overhead.

"I really haven't got such a line as everybody thinks, Basil, for I
mean a lot of what I say way down deep, and nobody believes me.
You know how much alike we are, and in a boy it doesn't matter, but
a girl has to control her feelings, and that's hard for me, because
I'm emotional."

"Haven't you kissed anybody since you've been in St. Paul?"

"No."

He saw she was lying, but it was a brave lie.  They talked from
their hearts--with the half truths and evasions peculiar to that
organ, which has never been famed as an instrument of precision.
They pieced together all the shreds of romance they knew and made
garments for each other no less warm than their childish passion,
no less wonderful than their sense of wonder.

He held her away suddenly, looked at her, made a strained sound of
delight.  There it was, in her face touched by sun--that promise--
in the curve of her mouth, the tilted shadow of her nose on her
cheek, the point of dull fire in her eyes--the promise that she
could lead him into a world in which he would always be happy.

"Say I love you," he whispered.

"I'm in love with you."

"Oh, no; that's not the same."

She hesitated.  "I've never said the other to anybody."

"Please say it."

She blushed the color of the sunset.

"At my party," she whispered.  "It'd be easier at night."

When she dropped him in front of his house she spoke from the
window of the car:

"This is my excuse for coming to see you.  My uncle couldn't get
the club Thursday, so we're having the party at the regular dance
Saturday night."



Basil walked thoughtfully into the house; Rhoda Sinclair was also
giving a dinner at the College Club dance Saturday night.

It was put up to him frankly.  Mrs. Reilly listened to his
tentative excuses in silence and then said:

"Rhoda invited you first for Saturday night, and she already has
one girl too many.  Of course, if you choose to simply turn your
back on your engagement and go to another party, I don't know how
Rhoda will feel, but I know how I should feel."

And the next day his great-uncle, passing through the stock room,
stopped and said:  "What's all this trouble about parties?"

Basil started to explain, but Mr. Reilly cut him short.  "I don't
see the use of hurting a young girl's feelings.  You better think
it over."

Basil had thought it over; on Saturday afternoon he was still
expected at both dinners and he had hit upon no solution at all.

Yale was only a month away now, but in four days Erminie Bibble
would be gone, uncommitted, unsecured, grievously offended, lost
forever.  Not yet delivered from adolescence, Basil's moments of
foresight alternated with those when the future was measured by a
day.  The glory that was Yale faded beside the promise of that
incomparable hour.

On the other side loomed up the gaunt specter of the university,
with phantoms flitting in and out its portals that presently
disclosed themselves as peasants and girls.  At five o'clock, in a
burst of contempt for his weakness, he went to the phone and left
word with a maid at the Kampfs' house that he was sick and couldn't
come tonight.  Nor would he sit with the dull left-overs of his
generation--too sick for one party, he was too sick for the other.
The Reillys could have no complaint as to that.

Rhoda answered the phone and Basil tried to reduce his voice to a
weak murmur:

"Rhoda, I've been taken sick.  I'm in bed now," he murmured feebly,
and then added:  "The phone's right next to the bed, you see; so I
thought I'd call you up myself."

"You mean to say you can't come?"  Dismay and anger were in her
voice.

"I'm sick in bed," he repeated doggedly.  "I've got chills and a
pain and a cold."

"Well, can't you come anyhow?" she asked, with what to the invalid
seemed a remarkable lack of consideration.  "You've just got to.
Otherwise there'll be two extra girls."

"I'll send someone to take my place," he said desperately.  His
glance, roving wildly out the window, fell on a house over the way.
"I'll send Eddie Parmelee."

Rhoda considered.  Then she asked with quick suspicion:  "You're
not going to that other party?"

"Oh, no; I told them I was sick too."

Again Rhoda considered.  Eddie Parmelee was mad at her.

"I'll fix it up," Basil promised.  "I know he'll come.  He hasn't
got anything to do tonight."

A few minutes later he dashed across the street.  Eddie himself,
tying a bow on his collar, came to the door.  With certain
reservations, Basil hastily outlined the situation.  Would Eddie go
in his place?

"Can't do it, old boy, even if I wanted to.  Got a date with my
real girl tonight."

"Eddie, I'd make it worth your while," he said recklessly.  "I'd
pay you for your time--say, five dollars."

Eddie considered, there was hesitation in his eyes, but he shook
his head.

"It isn't worth it, Basil.  You ought to see what I'm going out
with tonight."

"You could see her afterward.  They only want you--I mean me--
because they've got more girls than men for dinner--and listen,
Eddie, I'll make it ten dollars."

Eddie clapped him on the shoulder.

"All right, old boy, I'll do it for an old friend.  Where's the
pay?"

More than a week's salary melted into Eddie's palm, but another
sort of emptiness accompanied Basil back across the street--the
emptiness of the coming night.  In an hour or so the Kampfs'
limousine would draw up at the College Club and--time and time
again his imagination halted miserably before that single picture,
unable to endure any more.

In despair he wandered about the dark house.  His mother had let
the maid go out and was at his grandfather's for dinner, and
momentarily Basil considered finding some rake like Elwood Leaming
and going down to Carling's Restaurant to drink whiskey, wines and
beer.  Perhaps on her way back to the lake after the dance, Minnie,
passing by, would see his face among the wildest of the revelers
and understand.

"I'm going to Maxim's," he hummed to himself desperately; then he
added impatiently:  "Oh, to heck with Maxim's!"

He sat in the parlor and watched a pale moon come up over the
Lindsays' fence at McKubben Street.  Some young people came by,
heading for the trolley that went to Como Park.  He pitied their
horrible dreariness--they were not going to dance with Minnie at
the College Club tonight.

Eight-thirty--she was there now.  Nine--they were dancing between
courses to "Peg of My Heart" or doing the Castle Walk that Andy
Lockheart brought home from Yale.

At ten o'clock he heard his mother come in, and almost immediately
the phone rang.  For a moment he listened without interest to her
voice; then abruptly he sat up in his chair.

"Why, yes; how do you do, Mrs. Reilly. . . .  Oh, I see. . . .  Oh.
. . .  Are you sure it isn't Basil you want to speak to? . . .
Well, frankly, Mrs. Reilly, I don't see that it's my affair."

Basil got up and took a step toward the door; his mother's voice
was growing thin and annoyed:  "I wasn't here at the time and I
don't know who he promised to send."

Eddie Parmelee hadn't gone after all--well, that was the end.

". . . Of course not.  It must be a mistake.  I don't think Basil
would possibly do that; I don't think he even knows any Japanese."

Basil's brain reeled.  For a moment he was about to dash across the
street after Eddie Parmelee.  Then he heard a definitely angry note
come into his mother's voice:

"Very well, Mrs. Reilly.  I'll tell my son.  But his going to Yale
is scarcely a matter I care to discuss with you.  In any case, he
no longer needs anyone's assistance."

He had lost his position and his mother was trying to put a proud
face on it.  But her voice continued, soaring a little:

"Uncle Ben might be interested to know that this afternoon we sold
the Third Street block to the Union Depot Company for four hundred
thousand dollars."

Mr. Utsonomia was enjoying himself.  In the whole six months in
America he had never felt so caught up in its inner life before.
At first it had been a little hard to make plain to the lady just
whose place it was he was taking, but Eddie Parmelee had assured
him that such substitutions were an American custom, and he was
spending the evening collecting as much data upon American customs
as possible.

He did not dance, so he sat with the elderly lady until both the
ladies went home, early and apparently a little agitated, shortly
after dinner.  But Mr. Utsonomia stayed on.  He watched and he
wandered.  He was not lonesome; he had grown accustomed to being
alone.

About eleven he sat on the veranda pretending to be blowing the
smoke of a cigarette--which he hated--out over the city, but really
listening to a conversation which was taking place just behind.  It
had been going on for half an hour, and it puzzled him, for
apparently it was a proposal, and it was not refused.  Yet, if his
eyes did not deceive him, the contracting parties were of an age
that Americans did not associate with such serious affairs.
Another thing puzzled him even more: obviously, if one substituted
for an absent guest, the absent guest should not be among those
present, and he was almost sure that the young man who had just
engaged himself for marriage was Mr. Basil Lee.  It would be bad
manners to intrude now, but he would urbanely ask him about a
solution of this puzzle when the state university opened in the
fall.






GRETCHEN'S FORTY WINKS


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (15 March 1924)



I


The sidewalks were scratched with brittle leaves, and the bad
little boy next door froze his tongue to the iron mail-box.  Snow
before night, sure.  Autumn was over.  This, of course, raised the
coal question and the Christmas question; but Roger Halsey,
standing on his own front porch, assured the dead suburban sky that
he hadn't time for worrying about the weather.  Then he let himself
hurriedly into the house, and shut the subject out into the cold
twilight.

The hall was dark, but from above he heard the voices of his wife
and the nursemaid and the baby in one of their interminable
conversations, which consisted chiefly of 'Don't!' and 'Look out,
Maxy!' and 'Oh, there he GOES!' punctuated by wild threats and
vague bumpings and the recurrent sound of small, venturing feet.

Roger turned on the hall-light and walked into the living-room and
turned on the red silk lamp.  He put his bulging portfolio on the
table, and sitting down rested his intense young face in his hand
for a few minutes, shading his eyes carefully from the light.  Then
he lit a cigarette, squashed it out, and going to the foot of the
stairs called for his wife.

'Gretchen!'

'Hello, dear.'  Her voice was full of laughter.  'Come see baby.'

He swore softly.

'I can't see baby now,' he said aloud.  'How long 'fore you'll be
down?'

There was a mysterious pause, and then a succession of 'Don'ts' and
'Look outs, Maxy' evidently meant to avert some threatened
catastrophe.

'How long 'fore you'll be down?' repeated Roger, slightly
irritated.

'Oh, I'll be right down.'

'How soon?' he shouted.

He had trouble every day at this hour in adapting his voice from
the urgent key of the city to the proper casualness for a model
home.  But tonight he was deliberately impatient.  It almost
disappointed him when Gretchen came running down the stairs, three
at a time, crying 'What is it?' in a rather surprised voice.

They kissed--lingered over it some moments.  They had been married
three years, and they were much more in love than that implies.  It
was seldom that they hated each other with that violent hate of
which only young couples are capable, for Roger was still actively
sensitive to her beauty.

'Come in here,' he said abruptly.  'I want to talk to you.'

His wife, a bright-coloured, Titian-haired girl, vivid as a French
rag doll, followed him into the living room.

'Listen, Gretchen'--he sat down at the end of the sofa--'beginning
with tonight I'm going to--What's the matter?'

'Nothing.  I'm just looking for a cigarette.  Go on.'

She tiptoed breathlessly back to the sofa and settled at the other
end.

'Gretchen--'  Again he broke off.  Her hand, palm upward, was
extended towards him.  'Well, what is it?' he asked wildly.

'Matches.'

'What?'

In his impatience it seemed incredible that she should ask for
matches, but he fumbled automatically in his pocket.

'Thank you,' she whispered.  'I didn't mean to interrupt you.  Go
on.'

'Gretch--'

Scratch!  The match flared.  They exchanged a tense look.

Her fawn's eyes apologized mutely this time, and he laughed.  After
all, she had done no more than light a cigarette; but when he was
in this mood her slightest positive action irritated him beyond
measure.

'When you've got time to listen,' he said crossly, 'you might be
interested in discussing the poorhouse question with me.'

'What poorhouse?'  Her eyes were wide, startled; she sat quiet as a
mouse.

'That was just to get your attention.  But, beginning tonight, I
start on what'll probably be the most important six weeks of my
life--the six weeks that'll decide whether we're going on forever
in this rotten little house in this rotten little suburban town.'

Boredom replaced alarm in Gretchen's black eyes.  She was a
Southern girl, and any question that had to do with getting ahead
in the world always tended to give her a headache.

'Six months ago I left the New York Lithographic Company,'
announced Roger, 'and went in the advertising business for myself.'

'I know,' interrupted Gretchen resentfully; 'and now instead of
getting six hundred a month sure, we're living on a risky five
hundred.'

'Gretchen,' said Roger sharply, 'if you'll just believe in me as
hard an you can for six weeks more we'll be rich.  I've got a
chance now to get some of the biggest accounts in the country.'  He
hesitated.  'And for these six weeks we won't go out at all, and we
won't have anyone here.  I'm going to bring home work every night,
and we'll pull down all the blinds and if anyone rings the doorbell
we won't answer.'

He smiled airily as if it were a new game they were going to play.
Then, as Gretchen was silent, his smile faded, and he looked at her
uncertainly.

'Well, what's the matter?' she broke out finally.  'Do you expect
me to jump up and sing?  You do enough work as it is.  If you try
to do any more you'll end up with a nervous breakdown.  I read
about a--'

'Don't worry about me,' he interrupted; 'I'm all right.  But you're
going to be bored to death sitting here every evening.'

'No, I won't,' she said without conviction--'except tonight.'

'What about tonight?'

'George Tompkins asked us to dinner.'

'Did you accept?'

'Of course I did,' she said impatiently.  'Why not?  You're always
talking about what a terrible neighbourhood this is, and I thought
maybe you'd like to go to a nicer one for a change.'

'When I go to a nicer neighbourhood I want to go for good,' he said
grimly.

'Well, can we go?'

'I suppose we'll have to if you've accepted.'

Somewhat to his annoyance the conversation abruptly ended.
Gretchen jumped up and kissed him sketchily and rushed into the
kitchen to light the hot water for a bath.  With a sigh he
carefully deposited his portfolio behind the bookcase--it contained
only sketches and layouts for display advertising, but it seemed to
him the first thing a burglar would look for.  Then he went
abstractedly upstairs, dropping into the baby's room for a casual
moist kiss, and began dressing for dinner.

They had no automobile, so George Tompkins called for them at 6.30.
Tompkins was a successful interior decorator, a broad, rosy man
with a handsome moustache and a strong odour of jasmine.  He and
Roger had once roomed side by side in a boarding-house in New York,
but they had met only intermittently in the past five years.

'We ought to see each other more,' he told Roger tonight.  'You
ought to go out more often, old boy.  Cocktail?'

'No, thanks.'

'No?  Well, your fair wife will--won't you, Gretchen?'

'I love this house,' she exclaimed, taking the glass and looking
admiringly at ship models.  Colonial whisky bottles, and other
fashionable débris of 1925.

'I like it,' said Tompkins with satisfaction.  'I did it to please
myself, and I succeeded.'

Roger stared moodily around the stiff, plain room, wondering if
they could have blundered into the kitchen by mistake.

'You look like the devil, Roger,' said his host.  'Have a cocktail
and cheer up.'

'Have one,' urged Gretchen.

'What?'  Roger turned around absently.  'Oh, no, thanks.  I've got
to work after I get home.'

'Work!'  Tompkins smiled.  'Listen, Roger, you'll kill yourself
with work.  Why don't you bring a little balance into your life--
work a little, then play a little?'

'That's what I tell him,' said Gretchen.

'Do you know an average business man's day?' demanded Tompkins as
they went in to dinner.  'Coffee in the morning, eight hours' work
interrupted by a bolted luncheon, and then home again with
dyspepsia and a bad temper to give the wife a pleasant evening.'

Roger laughed shortly.

'You've been going to the movies too much,' he said dryly.

'What?'  Tompkins looked at him with some irritation.  'Movies?
I've hardly ever been to the movies in my life.  I think the movies
are atrocious.  My opinions on life are drawn from my own
observations.  I believe in a balanced life.'

'What's that?' demanded Roger.

'Well'--he hesitated--'probably the best way to tell you would be
to describe my own day.  Would that seem horribly egotistic?'

'Oh, no!'  Gretchen looked at him with interest.  'I'd love to hear
about it.'

'Well, in the morning I get up and go through a series of
exercises.  I've got one room fitted up as a little gymnasium, and
I punch the bag and do shadow-boxing and weight-pulling for an
hour.  Then after a cold bath--There's a thing now!  Do you take a
daily cold bath?'

'No,' admitted Roger, 'I take a hot bath in the evening three or
four times a week.'

A horrified silence fell.  Tompkins and Gretchen exchanged a glance
as if something obscene had been said.

'What's the matter?' broke out Roger, glancing from one to the
other in some irritation.  'You know I don't take a bath every day--
I haven't got the time.'

Tompkins gave a prolonged sigh.

'After my bath,' he continued, drawing a merciful veil of silence
over the matter, 'I have breakfast and drive to my office in New
York, where I work until four.  Then I lay off, and if it's summer
I hurry out here for nine holes of golf, or if it's winter I play
squash for an hour at my club.  Then a good snappy game of bridge
until dinner.  Dinner is liable to have something to do with
business, but in a pleasant way.  Perhaps I've just finished a
house for some customer, and he wants me to be on hand for his
first party to see that the lighting is soft enough and all that
sort of thing.  Or maybe I sit down with a good book of poetry and
spend the evening alone.  At any rate, I do something every night
to get me out of myself.'

'It must be wonderful,' said Gretchen enthusiastically.  'I wish we
lived like that.'

Tompkins bent forward earnestly over the table.

'You can,' he said impressively.  'There's no reason why you
shouldn't.  Look here, if Roger'll play nine holes of golf every
day it'll do wonders for him.  He won't know himself.  He'll do his
work better, never get that tired, nervous feeling--What's the
matter?'

He broke off.  Roger had perceptibly yawned.

'Roger,' cried Gretchen sharply, 'there's no need to be so rude.
If you did what George said, you'd be a lot better off.'  She
turned indignantly to their host.  'The latest is that he's going
to work at night for the next six weeks.  He says he's going to
pull down the blinds and shut us up like hermits in a cave.  He's
been doing it every Sunday for the last year; now he's going to do
it every night for six weeks.'

Tompkins shook his head sadly.

'At the end of six weeks,' he remarked, 'he'll be starting for the
sanatorium.  Let me tell you, every private hospital in New York is
full of cases like yours.  You just strain the human nervous system
a little too far, and bang!--you've broken something.  And in order
to save sixty hours you're laid up sixty weeks for repairs.'  He
broke off, changed his tone, and turned to Gretchen with a smile.
'Not to mention what happens to you.  It seems to me it's the wife
rather than the husband who bears the brunt of these insane periods
of overwork.'

'I don't mind,' protested Gretchen loyally.

'Yes, she does,' said Roger grimly; 'she minds like the devil.
She's a shortsighted little egg, and she thinks it's going to be
forever until I get started and she can have some new clothes.  But
it can't be helped.  The saddest thing about women is that, after
all, their best trick is to sit down and fold their hands.'

'Your ideas on women are about twenty years out of date,' said
Tompkins pityingly.  'Women won't sit down and wait any more.'

'Then they'd better marry men of forty,' insisted Roger stubbornly.
'If a girl marries a young man for love she ought to be willing to
make any sacrifice within reason, so long as her husband keeps
going ahead.'

'Let's not talk about it,' said Gretchen impatiently.  'Please,
Roger, let's have a good time just this once.'

When Tompkins dropped them in front of their house at eleven Roger
and Gretchen stood for a moment on the sidewalk looking at the
winter moon.  There was a fine, damp, dusty snow in the air, and
Roger drew a long breath of it and put his arm around Gretchen
exultantly.

'I can make more money than he can,' he said tensely.  'And I'll be
doing it in just forty days.'

'Forty days,' she sighed.  'It seems such a long time--when
everybody else is always having fun.  If I could only sleep for
forty days.'

'Why don't you, honey?  Just take forty winks, and when you wake up
everything'll be fine.'

She was silent for a moment.

'Roger,' she asked thoughtfully, 'do you think George meant what he
said about taking me horseback riding on Sunday?'

Roger frowned.

'I don't know.  Probably not--I hope to Heaven he didn't.'  He
hesitated.  'As a matter of fact, he made me sort of sore tonight--
all that junk about his cold bath.'

With their arms about each other, they started up the walk to the
house.

'I'll bet he doesn't take a cold bath every morning,' continued
Roger ruminatively; 'or three times a week, either.'  He fumbled in
his pocket for the key and inserted it in the lock with savage
precision.  Then he turned around defiantly.  'I'll bet he hasn't
had a bath for a month.'


II


After a fortnight of intensive work, Roger Halsey's days blurred
into each other and passed by in blocks of twos and threes and
fours.  From eight until 5.30 he was in his office.  Then a half-
hour on the commuting train, where he scrawled notes on the backs
of envelopes under the dull yellow light.  By 7.30 his crayons,
shears, and sheets of white cardboard were spread over the living-
room table, and he laboured there with much grunting and sighing
until midnight, while Gretchen lay on the sofa with a book, and the
doorbell tinkled occasionally behind the drawn blinds.  At twelve
there was always an argument as to whether he would come to bed.
He would agree to come after he had cleared up everything; but as
he was invariably sidetracked by half a dozen new ideas, he usually
found Gretchen sound asleep when he tiptoed upstairs.

Sometimes it was three o'clock before Roger squashed his last
cigarette into the overloaded ash-tray, and he would undress in the
dark, disembodied with fatigue, but with a sense of triumph that he
had lasted out another day.

Christmas came and went and he scarcely noticed that it was gone.
He remembered it afterwards as the day he completed the window-
cards for Garrod's shoes.  This was one of the eight large accounts
for which he was pointing in January--if he got half of them he was
assured a quarter of a million dollars' worth of business during
the year.

But the world outside his business became a chaotic dream.  He was
aware that on two cool December Sundays George Tompkins had taken
Gretchen horseback riding, and that another time she had gone out
with him in his automobile to spend the afternoon skiing on the
country-club hill.  A picture of Tompkins, in an expensive frame,
had appeared one morning on their bedroom wall.  And one night he
was shocked into a startled protest when Gretchen went to the
theatre with Tompkins in town.

But his work was almost done.  Daily now his layouts arrived from
the printers until seven of them were piled and docketed in his
office safe.  He knew how good they were.  Money alone couldn't buy
such work; more than he realized himself, it had been a labour of
love.

December tumbled like a dead leaf from the calendar.  There was an
agonizing week when he had to give up coffee because it made his
heart pound so.  If he could hold on now for four days--three days--

On Thursday afternoon H. G. Garrod was to arrive in New York.  On
Wednesday evening Roger came home at seven to find Gretchen poring
over the December bills with a strange expression in her eyes.

'What's the matter?'

She nodded at the bills.  He ran through them, his brow wrinkling
in a frown.

'Gosh!'

'I can't help it,' she burst out suddenly.  'They're terrible.'

'Well, I didn't marry you because you were a wonderful housekeeper.
I'll manage about the bills some way.  Don't worry your little head
over it.'

She regarded him coldly.

'You talk as if I were a child.'

'I have to,' he said with sudden irritation.

'Well, at least I'm not a piece of bric-à-brac that you can just
put somewhere and forget.'

He knelt down by her quickly, and took her arms in his hands.

'Gretchen, listen!' he said breathlessly.  'For God's sake, don't
go to pieces now!  We're both all stored up with malice and
reproach, and if we had a quarrel it'd be terrible.  I love you,
Gretchen.  Say you love me--quick!'

'You know I love you.'

The quarrel was averted, but there was an unnatural tenseness all
through dinner.  It came to a climax afterwards when he began to
spread his working materials on the table.

'Oh, Roger,' she protested, 'I thought you didn't have to work
tonight.'

'I didn't think I'd have to, but something came up.'

'I've invited George Tompkins over.'

'Oh, gosh!' he exclaimed.  'Well, I'm sorry, honey, but you'll have
to phone him not to come.'

'He's left,' she said.  'He's coming straight from town.  He'll be
here any minute now.'

Roger groaned.  It occurred to him to send them both to the movies,
but somehow the suggestion stuck on his lips.  He did not want her
at the movies; he wanted her here, where he could look up and know
she was by his side.

George Tompkins arrived breezily at eight o'clock.  'Aha!' he cried
reprovingly, coming into the room.  'Still at it.'

Roger agreed coolly that he was.

'Better quit--better quit before you have to.'  He sat down with a
long sigh of physical comfort and lit a cigarette.  'Take it from a
fellow who's looked into the question scientifically.  We can stand
so much, and then--bang!'

'If you'll excuse me'--Roger made his voice as polite as possible--
'I'm going upstairs and finish this work.'

'Just as you like, Roger.'  George waved his hand carelessly.  'It
isn't that I mind.  I'm the friend of the family and I'd just as
soon see the missus as the mister.'  He smiled playfully.  'But if
I were you, old boy, I'd put away my work and get a good night's
sleep.'

When Roger had spread out his materials on the bed upstairs he
found that he could still hear the rumble and murmur of their
voices through the thin floor.  He began wondering what they found
to talk about.  As he plunged deeper into his work his mind had a
tendency to revert sharply to his question, and several times he
arose and paced nervously up and down the room.

The bed was ill adapted to his work.  Several times the paper
slipped from the board on which it rested, and the pencil punched
through.  Everything was wrong tonight.  Letters and figures
blurred before his eyes, and as an accompaniment to the beating of
his temples came those persistent murmuring voices.

At ten he realized that he had done nothing for more than an hour,
and with a sudden exclamation he gathered together his papers,
replaced them in his portfolio, and went downstairs.  They were
sitting together on the sofa when he came in.

'Oh, hello!' cried Gretchen, rather unnecessarily, he thought.  'We
were just discussing you.'

'Thank you,' he answered ironically.  'What particular part of my
anatomy was under the scalpel?'

'Your health,' said Tompkins jovially.

'My health's all right,' answered Roger shortly.

'But you look at it so selfishly, old fella,' cried Tompkins.  'You
only consider yourself in the matter.  Don't you think Gretchen has
any rights?  If you were working on a wonderful sonnet or a--a
portrait of some madonna or something'--he glanced at Gretchen's
Titian hair--'why, then I'd say go ahead.  But you're not.  It's
just some silly advertisement about how to sell Nobald's hair
tonic, and if all the hair tonic ever made was dumped into the
ocean tomorrow the world wouldn't be one bit the worse for it.'

'Wait a minute,' said Roger angrily: 'that's not quite fair.  I'm
not kidding myself about the importance of my work--it's just as
useless as the stuff you do.  But to Gretchen and me it's just
about the most important thing in the world.'

'Are you implying that my work is useless?' demanded Tompkins
incredulously.

'No; not if it brings happiness to some poor sucker of a pants
manufacturer who doesn't know how to spend his money.'

Tompkins and Gretchen exchanged a glance.

'Oh-h-h!' exclaimed Tompkins ironically.  'I didn't realize that
all these years I've just been wasting my time.'

'You're a loafer,' said Roger rudely.

'Me?' cried Tompkins angrily.  'You call me a loafer because I have
a little balance in my life and find time to do interesting things?
Because I play hard as well as work hard and don't let myself get
to be a dull, tiresome drudge?'

Both men were angry now, and their voices had risen, though on
Tompkins' face there still remained the semblance of a smile.

'What I object to,' said Roger steadily, 'is that for the last six
weeks you seem to have done all your playing around here.'

'Roger!' cried Gretchen.  'What do you mean by talking like that?'

'Just what I said.'

'You've just lost your temper.'  Tompkins lit a cigarette with
ostentatious coolness.  'You're so nervous from overwork you don't
know what you're saying.  You're on the verge of a nervous break--'

'You get out of here!' cried Roger fiercely.  'You get out of here
right now--before I throw you out!'

Tompkins got angrily to his feet.

'You--you throw me out?' he cried incredulously.

They were actually moving towards each other when Gretchen stepped
between them, and grabbing Tompkins' arm urged him towards the
door.

'He's acting like a fool, George, but you better get out,' she
cried, groping in the hall for his hat.

'He insulted me!' shouted Tompkins.  'He threatened to throw me
out!'

'Never mind, George,' pleaded Gretchen.  'He doesn't know what he's
saying.  Please go!  I'll see you at ten o'clock tomorrow.'

She opened the door.

'You won't see him at ten o'clock tomorrow,' said Roger steadily.
'He's not coming to this house any more.'

Tompkins turned to Gretchen.

'It's his house,' he suggested.  'Perhaps we'd better meet at
mine.'

Then he was gone, and Gretchen had shut the door behind him.  Her
eyes were full of angry tears.

'See what you've done!' she sobbed.  'The only friend I had, the
only person in the world who liked me enough to treat me decently,
is insulted by my husband in my own house.'

She threw herself on the sofa and began to cry passionately into
the pillows.

'He brought it on himself,' said Roger stubbornly, 'I've stood as
much as my self-respect will allow.  I don't want you going out
with him any more.'

'I will go out with him!' cried Gretchen wildly.  'I'll go out with
him all I want!  Do you think it's any fun living here with you?'

'Gretchen,' he said coldly, 'get up and put on your hat and coat
and go out that door and never come back!'

Her mouth fell slightly ajar.

'But I don't want to get out,' she said dazedly.

'Well, then, behave yourself.'  And he added in a gentler voice:
'I thought you were going to sleep for this forty days.'

'Oh, yes,' she cried bitterly, 'easy enough to say!  But I'm tired
of sleeping.'  She got up, faced him defiantly.  'And what's more,
I'm going riding with George Tompkins tomorrow.'

'You won't go out with him if I have to take you to New York and
sit you down in my office until I get through.'

She looked at him with rage in her eyes.

'I hate you,' she said slowly.  'And I'd like to take all the work
you've done and tear it up and throw it in the fire.  And just to
give you something to worry about tomorrow, I probably won't be
here when you get back.'

She got up from the sofa, and very deliberately looked at her
flushed, tear-stained face in the mirror.  Then she ran upstairs
and slammed herself into the bedroom.

Automatically Roger spread out his work on the living-room table.
The bright colours of the designs, the vivid ladies--Gretchen had
posed for one of them--holding orange ginger ale or glistening silk
hosiery, dazzled his mind into a sort of coma.  His restless crayon
moved here and there over the pictures, shifting a block of letters
half an inch to the right, trying a dozen blues for a cool blue,
and eliminating the word that made a phrase anaemic and pale.  Half
an hour passed--he was deep in the work now; there was no sound in
the room but the velvety scratch of the crayon over the glossy
board.

After a long while he looked at his watch--it was after three.  The
wind had come up outside and was rushing by the house corners in
loud, alarming swoops, like a heavy body falling through space.  He
stopped his work and listened.  He was not tired now, but his head
felt as if it was covered with bulging veins like those pictures
that hang in doctors' offices showing a body stripped of decent
skin.  He put his hands to his head and felt it all over.  It
seemed to him that on his temple the veins were knotty and brittle
around an old scar.

Suddenly he began to be afraid.  A hundred warnings he had heard
swept into his mind.  People did wreck themselves with overwork,
and his body and brain were of the same vulnerable and perishable
stuff.  For the first time he found himself envying George
Tompkins' calm nerves and healthy routine.  He arose and began
pacing the room in a panic.

'I've got to sleep,' he whispered to himself tensely.  'Otherwise
I'm going crazy.'

He rubbed his hand over his eyes, and returned to the table to put
up his work, but his fingers were shaking so that he could scarcely
grasp the board.  The sway of a bare branch against the window made
him start and cry out.  He sat down on the sofa and tried to think.

'Stop!  Stop!  Stop!' the clock said.  'Stop!  Stop!  Stop!'

'I can't stop,' he answered aloud.  'I can't afford to stop.'

Listen!  Why, there was the wolf at the door now!  He could hear
its sharp claws scrape along the varnished woodwork.  He jumped up,
and running to the front door flung it open; then started back with
a ghastly cry.  An enormous wolf was standing on the porch, glaring
at him with red, malignant eyes.  As he watched it the hair
bristled on its neck; it gave a low growl and disappeared in the
darkness.  Then Roger realized with a silent, mirthless laugh that
it was the police dog from over the way.

Dragging his limbs wearily into the kitchen, he brought the alarm-
clock into the living-room and set it for seven.  Then he wrapped
himself in his overcoat, lay down on the sofa and fell immediately
into a heavy, dreamless sleep.

When he awoke the light was still shining feebly, but the room was
the grey colour of a winter morning.  He got up, and looking
anxiously at his hands found to his relief that they no longer
trembled.  He felt much better.  Then he began to remember in
detail the events of the night before, and his brow drew up again
in three shallow wrinkles.  There was work ahead of him, twenty-
four hours of work; and Gretchen, whether she wanted to or not,
must sleep for one more day.

Roger's mind glowed suddenly as if he had just thought of a new
advertising idea.  A few minutes later he was hurrying through the
sharp morning air to Kingsley's drug-store.

'Is Mr Kingsley down yet?'

The druggist's head appeared around the corner of the prescription-
room.

'I wonder if I can talk to you alone.'

At 7.30, back home again, Roger walked into his own kitchen.  The
general housework girl had just arrived and was taking off her hat.

'Bebé'--he was not on familiar terms with her; this was her name--
'I want you to cook Mrs Halsey's breakfast right away.  I'll take
it up myself.'

It struck Bebé that this was an unusual service for so busy a man
to render his wife, but if she had seen his conduct when he had
carried the tray from the kitchen she would have been even more
surprised.  For he set it down on the dining room table and put
into the coffee half a teaspoonful of a white substance that was
not powdered sugar.  Then he mounted the stairs and opened the door
of the bedroom.

Gretchen woke up with a start, glanced at the twin bed which had
not been slept in, and bent on Roger a glance of astonishment,
which changed to contempt when she saw the breakfast in his hand.
She thought he was bringing it as a capitulation.

'I don't want any breakfast,' she said coldly, and his heart sank,
'except some coffee.'

'No breakfast?'  Roger's voice expressed disappointment

'I said I'd take some coffee.'

Roger discreetly deposited the tray on a table beside the bed and
returned quickly to the kitchen.

'We're going away until tomorrow afternoon,' he told Bebé, 'and I
want to close up the house right now.  So you just put on your hat
and go home.'

He looked at his watch.  It was ten minutes to eight, and he wanted
to catch the 8.10 train.  He waited five minutes and then tiptoed
softly upstairs and into Gretchen's room.  She was sound asleep.
The coffee cup was empty save for black dregs and a film of thin
brown paste on the bottom.  He looked at her rather anxiously, but
her breathing was regular and clear.

From the closet he took a suitcase and very quickly began filling
it with her shoes--street shoes, evening slippers, rubber-soled
oxfords--he had not realized that she owned so many pairs.  When he
closed the suitcase it was bulging.

He hesitated a minute, took a pair of sewing scissors from a box,
and following the telephone-wire until it went out of sight behind
the dresser, severed it in one neat clip.  He jumped as there was a
soft knock at the door.  It was the nursemaid.  He had forgotten
her existence.

'Mrs Halsey and I are going up to the city till tomorrow,' he said
glibly.  'Take Maxy to the beach and have lunch there.  Stay all
day.'

Back in the room, a wave of pity passed over him.  Gretchen seemed
suddenly lovely and helpless, sleeping there.  It was somehow
terrible to rob her young life of a day.  He touched her hair with
his fingers, and as she murmured something in her dream he leaned
over and kissed her bright cheek.  Then he picked up the suitcase
full of shoes, locked the door, and ran briskly down the stairs.


III


By five o'clock that afternoon the last package of cards for
Garrod's shoes had been sent by messenger to H. G. Garrod at the
Biltmore Hotel.  He was to give a decision next morning.  At 5.30
Roger's stenographer tapped him on the shoulder.

'Mr Golden, the superintendent of the building, to see you.'

Roger turned around dazedly.

'Oh, how do?'

Mr Golden came directly to the point.  If Mr Halsey intended to
keep the office any longer, the little oversight about the rent had
better be remedied right away.

'Mr Golden,' said Roger wearily, 'everything'll be all right
tomorrow.  If you worry me now maybe you'll never get your money.
After tomorrow nothing'll matter.'

Mr Golden looked at the tenant uneasily.  Young men sometimes did
away with themselves when business went wrong.  Then his eye fell
unpleasantly on the initialled suitcase beside the desk.

'Going on a trip?' he asked pointedly.

'What?  Oh, no.  That's just some clothes.'

'Clothes, eh?  Well, Mr Halsey, just to prove that you mean what
you say, suppose you let me keep that suitcase until tomorrow
noon.'

'Help yourself.'

Mr Golden picked it up with a deprecatory gesture.

'Just a matter of form,' he remarked.

'I understand,' said Roger, swinging around to his desk.  'Good
afternoon.'

Mr Golden seemed to feel that the conversation should close on a
softer key.

'And don't work too hard, Mr Halsey.  You don't want to have a
nervous break--'

'No,' shouted Roger, 'I don't.  But I will if you don't leave me
alone.'

As the door closed behind Mr Golden, Roger's stenographer turned
sympathetically around.

'You shouldn't have let him get away with that,' she said.  'What's
in there?  Clothes?'

'No,' answered Roger absently.  'Just all my wife's shoes.'

He slept in the office that night on a sofa beside his desk.  At
dawn he awoke with a nervous start, rushed out into the street for
coffee, and returned in ten minutes in a panic--afraid that he
might have missed Mr Garrod's telephone call.  It was then 6.30.

By eight o'clock his whole body seemed to be on fire.  When his two
artists arrived he was stretched on the couch in almost physical
pain.  The phone rang imperatively at 9.30, and he picked up the
receiver with trembling hands.

'Hello.'

'Is this the Halsey agency?'

'Yes, this is Mr Halsey speaking.'

'This is Mr H. G. Garrod.'

Roger's heart stopped beating.

'I called up, young fellow, to say that this is wonderful work
you've given us here.  We want all of it and as much more as your
office can do.'

'Oh, God!' cried Roger into the transmitter.

'What?'  Mr H. G. Garrod was considerably startled.  'Say, wait a
minute there!'

But he was talking to nobody.  The phone had clattered to the
floor, and Roger, stretched full length on the couch, was sobbing
as if his heart would break.


IV


Three hours later, his face somewhat pale, but his eyes calm as a
child's, Roger opened the door of his wife's bedroom with the
morning paper under his arm.  At the sound of his footsteps she
started awake.

'What time is it?' she demanded.

He looked at his watch.

'Twelve o'clock.'

Suddenly she began to cry.

'Roger,' she said brokenly, 'I'm sorry I was so bad last night.'

He nodded coolly.

'Everything's all right now,' he answered.  Then, after a pause:
'I've got the account--the biggest one.'

She turned towards him quickly.

'You have?'  Then, after a minute's silence:  'Can I get a new
dress?'

'Dress?'  He laughed shortly.  'You can get a dozen.  This account
alone will bring us in forty thousand a year.  It's one of the
biggest in the West.'

She looked at him, startled.

'Forty thousand a year!'

'Yes.'

'Gosh'--and then faintly--'I didn't know it'd really be anything
like that.'  Again she thought a minute.  'We can have a house like
George Tompkins'.'

'I don't want an interior-decoration shop.'

'Forty thousand a year!' she repeated again, and then added softly:
'Oh, Roger--'

'Yes?'

'I'm not going out with George Tompkins.'

'I wouldn't let you, even if you wanted to,' he said shortly.

She made a show of indignation.

'Why, I've had a date with him for this Thursday for weeks.'

'It isn't Thursday.'

'It is.'

'It's Friday.'

'Why, Roger, you must be crazy!  Don't you think I know what day it
is?'

'It isn't Thursday,' he said stubbornly.  'Look!'  And he held out
the morning paper.

'Friday!' she exclaimed.  'Why, this is a mistake!  This must be
last week's paper.  Today's Thursday.'

She closed her eyes and thought for a moment.

'Yesterday was Wednesday,' she said decisively.  'The laundress
came yesterday.  I guess I know.'

'Well,' he said smugly, 'look at the paper.  There isn't any
question about it.'

With a bewildered look on her face she got out of bed and began
searching for her clothes.  Roger went into the bathroom to shave.
A minute later he heard the springs creak again.  Gretchen was
getting back into bed.

'What's the matter?' he inquired, putting his head around the
corner of the bathroom.

'I'm scared,' she said in a trembling voice.  'I think my nerves
are giving way.  I can't find any of my shoes.'

'Your shoes?  Why, the closet's full of them.'

'I know, but I can't see one.'  Her face was pale with fear.  'Oh,
Roger!'

Roger came to her bedside and put his arm around her.

'Oh, Roger,' she cried, 'what's the matter with me?  First that
newspaper, and now all my shoes.  Take care of me, Roger.'

'I'll get the doctor,' he said.

He walked remorselessly to the telephone and took up the receiver.

'Phone seems to be out of order,' he remarked after a minute; 'I'll
send Bebé.'

The doctor arrived in ten minutes.

'I think I'm on the verge of a collapse,' Gretchen told him in a
strained voice.

Doctor Gregory sat down on the edge of the bed and took her wrist
in his hand.

'It seems to be in the air this morning.'

'I got up,' said Gretchen in an awed voice, 'and I found that I'd
lost a whole day.  I had an engagement to go riding with George
Tompkins--'

'What?' exclaimed the doctor in surprise.  Then he laughed.

'George Tompkins won't go riding with anyone for many days to
come.'

'Has he gone away?' asked Gretchen curiously.

'He's going West.'

'Why?' demanded Roger.  'Is he running away with somebody's wife?'

'No,' said Doctor Gregory.  'He's had a nervous breakdown.'

'What?' they exclaimed in unison.

'He just collapsed like an opera-hat in his cold shower.'

'But he was always talking about his--his balanced life,' gasped
Gretchen.  'He had it on his mind.'

'I know,' said the doctor.  'He's been babbling about it all
morning.  I think it's driven him a little mad.  He worked pretty
hard at it, you know.'

'At what?' demanded Roger in bewilderment.

'At keeping his life balanced.'  He turned to Gretchen.  'Now all
I'll prescribe for this lady here is a good rest.  If she'll just
stay around the house for a few days and take forty winks of sleep
she'll be as fit as ever.  She's been under some strain.'

'Doctor,' exclaimed Roger hoarsely, 'don't you think I'd better
have a rest or something?  I've been working pretty hard lately.'

'You!'  Doctor Gregory laughed, slapped him violently on the back.
'My boy, I never saw you looking better in your life.'

Roger turned away quickly to conceal his smile--winked forty times,
or almost forty times, at the autographed picture of Mr George
Tompkins, which hung slightly askew on the bedroom wall.



HE THINKS HE'S WONDERFUL


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)



The Saturday Evening Post (29 September, 1928)



I


After the college-board examinations in June, Basil Duke Lee and
five other boys from St. Regis School boarded the train for the
West.  Two got out at Pittsburgh, one slanted south toward St.
Louis and two stayed in Chicago; from then on Basil was alone.  It
was the first time in his life that he had ever felt the need of
tranquillity, but now he took long breaths of it; for, though
things had gone better toward the end, he had had an unhappy year
at school.

He wore one of those extremely flat derbies in vogue during the
twelfth year of the century, and a blue business suit become a
little too short for his constantly lengthening body.  Within he
was by turns a disembodied spirit, almost unconscious of his person
and moving in a mist of impressions and emotions, and a fiercely
competitive individual trying desperately to control the rush of
events that were the steps in his own evolution from child to man.
He believed that everything was a matter of effort--the current
principle of American education--and his fantastic ambition was
continually leading him to expect too much.  He wanted to be a
great athlete, popular, brilliant and always happy.  During this
year at school, where he had been punished for his "freshness," for
fifteen years of thorough spoiling at home, he had grown uselessly
introspective, and this interfered with that observation of others
which is the beginning of wisdom.  It was apparent that before he
obtained much success in dealing with the world he would know that
he'd been in a fight.

He spent the afternoon in Chicago, walking the streets and avoiding
members of the underworld.  He bought a detective story called "In
the Dead of the Night," and at five o'clock recovered his suitcase
from the station check room and boarded the Chicago, Milwaukee and
St. Paul.  Immediately he encountered a contemporary, also bound
home from school.

Margaret Torrence was fourteen; a serious girl, considered
beautiful by a sort of tradition, for she had been beautiful as a
little girl.  A year and a half before, after a breathless
struggle, Basil had succeeded in kissing her on the forehead.  They
met now with extraordinary joy; for a moment each of them to the
other represented home, the blue skies of the past, the summer
afternoons ahead.

He sat with Margaret and her mother in the dining car that night.
Margaret saw that he was no longer the ultraconfident boy of a year
before; his brightness was subdued, and the air of consideration in
his face--a mark of his recent discovery that others had wills as
strong as his, and more power--appeared to Margaret as a charming
sadness.  The spell of peace after a struggle was still upon him.
Margaret had always liked him--she was of the grave, conscientious
type who sometimes loved him and whose love he could never return--
and now she could scarcely wait to tell people how attractive he
had grown.

After dinner they went back to the observation car and sat on the
deserted rear platform while the train pulled them visibly westward
between the dark wide farms.  They talked of people they knew, of
where they had gone for Easter vacation, of the plays they had seen
in New York.

"Basil, we're going to get an automobile," she said, "and I'm going
to learn to drive."

"That's fine."  He wondered if his grandfather would let him drive
the electric sometimes this summer.

The light from inside the car fell on her young face, and he spoke
impetuously, borne on by the rush of happiness that he was going
home:  "You know something?  You know you're the prettiest girl in
the city?"

At the moment when the remark blurred with the thrilling night in
Margaret's heart, Mrs. Torrence appeared to fetch her to bed.

Basil sat alone on the platform for a while, scarcely realizing
that she was gone, at peace with himself for another hour and
content that everything should remain patternless and shapeless
until tomorrow.


II


Fifteen is of all ages the most difficult to locate--to put one's
fingers on and say, "That's the way I was."  The melancholy Jacques
does not select it for mention, and all one can know is that
somewhere between thirteen, boyhood's majority, and seventeen, when
one is a sort of counterfeit young man, there is a time when youth
fluctuates hourly between one world and another--pushed ceaselessly
forward into unprecedented experiences and vainly trying to
struggle back to the days when nothing had to be paid for.
Fortunately none of our contemporaries remember much more than we
do of how we behaved in those days; nevertheless the curtain is
about to be drawn aside for an inspection of Basil's madness that
summer.

To begin with, Margaret Torrence, in one of those moods of idealism
which overcome the most matter-of-fact girls, gave it as her rapt
opinion that Basil was wonderful.  Having practised believing
things all year at school, and having nothing much to believe at
that moment, her friends accepted the fact.  Basil suddenly became
a legend.  There were outbreaks of giggling when girls encountered
him on the street, but he suspected nothing at all.

One night, when he had been home a week, he and Riply Buckner went
on to an after-dinner gathering on Imogene Bissel's veranda.  As
they came up the walk Margaret and two other girls suddenly clung
together, whispered convulsively and pursued one another around the
yard, uttering strange cries--an inexplicable business that ended
only when Gladys Van Schellinger, tenderly and impressively
accompanied by her mother's maid, arrived in a limousine.

All of them were a little strange to one another.  Those who had
been East at school felt a certain superiority, which, however, was
more than counterbalanced by the fact that romantic pairings and
quarrels and jealousies and adventures, of which they were
lamentably ignorant, had gone on while they had been away.

After the ice cream at nine they sat together on the warm stone
steps in a quiet confusion that was halfway between childish
teasing and adolescent coquetry.  Last year the boys would have
ridden their bicycles around the yard; now they had all begun to
wait for something to happen.

They knew it was going to happen, the plainest girls, the shyest
boys; they had begun to associate with others the romantic world of
summer night that pressed deeply and sweetly on their senses.
Their voices drifted in a sort of broken harmony in to Mrs. Bissel,
who sat reading beside an open window.

"No, look out.  You'll break it.  Bay-zil!"

"Rip-lee!"

"Sure I did!"

Laughter.


     "--on Moonlight Bay
     We could hear their voices call--"


"Did you see--"

"Connie, don't--don't!  You tickle.  Look out!"

Laughter.

"Going to the lake tomorrow?"

"Going Friday."

"Elwood's home."

"Is Elwood home?"


     "--you have broken my heart--"


"Look out now!"

"Look out!"

Basil sat beside Riply on the balustrade, listening to Joe Gorman
singing.  It was one of the griefs of his life that he could not
sing "so people could stand it," and he conceived a sudden
admiration for Joe Gorman, reading into his personality the
thrilling clearness of those sounds that moved so confidently
through the dark air.

They evoked for Basil a more dazzling night than this, and other
more remote and enchanted girls.  He was sorry when the voice died
away, and there was a rearranging of seats and a businesslike quiet--
the ancient game of Truth had begun.

"What's your favorite color, Bill?"

"Green," supplies a friend.

"Sh-h-h!  Let him alone."

Bill says, "Blue."

"What's your favorite girl's name?"

"Mary," says Bill.

"Mary Haupt!  Bill's got a crush on Mary Haupt!"

She was a cross-eyed girl, a familiar personification of
repulsiveness.

"Who would you rather kiss than anybody?"

Across the pause a snicker stabbed the darkness.

"My mother."

"No, but what girl?"

"Nobody."

"That's not fair.  Forfeit!  Come on, Margaret."

"Tell the truth, Margaret."

She told the truth and a moment later Basil looked down in surprise
from his perch; he had just learned that he was her favorite boy.

"Oh, yes-s!" he exclaimed sceptically.  "Oh, yes-s!  How about
Hubert Blair?"

He renewed a casual struggle with Riply Buckner and presently they
both fell off the balustrade.  The game became an inquisition into
Gladys Van Schellinger's carefully chaperoned heart.

"What's your favorite sport?"

"Croquet."

The admission was greeted by a mild titter.

"Favorite boy."

"Thurston Kohler."

A murmur of disappointment.

"Who's he?"

"A boy in the East."

This was manifestly an evasion.

"Who's your favorite boy here?"

Gladys hesitated.  "Basil," she said at length.

The faces turned up to the balustrade this time were less teasing,
less jocular.  Basil depreciated the matter with "Oh, yes-s!  Sure!
Oh, yes-s!"  But he had a pleasant feeling of recognition, a
familiar delight.

Imogene Bissel, a dark little beauty and the most popular girl in
their crowd, took Gladys' place.  The interlocutors were tired of
gastronomic preferences--the first question went straight to the
point.

"Imogene, have you ever kissed a boy?"

"No."  A cry of wild unbelief.  "I have not!" she declared
indignantly.

"Well, have you ever been kissed?"

Pink but tranquil, she nodded, adding, "I couldn't help it."

"Who by?"

"I won't tell."

"Oh-h-h!  How about Hubert Blair?"

"What's your favorite book, Imogene?"

"Beverly of Graustark."

"Favorite girl?"

"Passion Johnson."

"Who's she?"

"Oh, just a girl at school."

Mrs. Bissel had fortunately left the window.

"Who's your favorite boy?"

Imogene answered steadily, "Basil Lee."

This time an impressed silence fell.  Basil was not surprised--we
are never surprised at our own popularity--but he knew that these
were not those ineffable girls, made up out of books and faces
momentarily encountered, whose voices he had heard for a moment in
Joe Gorman's song.  And when, presently, the first telephone rang
inside, calling a daughter home, and the girls, chattering like
birds, piled all together into Gladys Van Schellinger's limousine,
he lingered back in the shadow so as not to seem to be showing off.
Then, perhaps because he nourished a vague idea that if he got to
know Joe Gorman very well he would get to sing like him, he
approached him and asked him to go to Lambert's for a soda.

Joe Gorman was a tall boy with white eyebrows and a stolid face who
had only recently become one of their "crowd."  He did not like
Basil, who, he considered, had been "stuck up" with him last year,
but he was acquisitive of useful knowledge and he was momentarily
overwhelmed by Basil's success with girls.

It was cheerful in Lambert's, with great moths batting against the
screen door and languid couples in white dresses and light suits
spread about the little tables.  Over their sodas, Joe proposed
that Basil come home with him to spend the night; Basil's
permission was obtained over the telephone.

Passing from the gleaming store into the darkness, Basil was
submerged in an unreality in which he seemed to see himself from
the outside, and the pleasant events of the evening began to take
on fresh importance.

Disarmed by Joe's hospitality, he began to discuss the matter.

"That was a funny thing that happened tonight," he said, with a
disparaging little laugh.

"What was?"

"Why, all those girls saying I was their favorite boy."  The remark
jarred on Joe.  "It's a funny thing," went on Basil.  "I was sort
of unpopular at school for a while, because I was fresh, I guess.
But the thing must be that some boys are popular with boys and some
are popular with girls."

He had put himself in Joe's hands, but he was unconscious of it;
even Joe was only aware of a certain desire to change the subject.

"When I get my car," suggested Joe, up in his room, "we could take
Imogene and Margaret and go for rides."

"All right."

"You could have Imogene and I'd take Margaret, or anybody I wanted.
Of course I know they don't like me as well as they do you."

"Sure they do.  It's just because you haven't been in our crowd
very long yet."

Joe was sensitive on that point and the remark did not please him.
But Basil continued:  "You ought to be more polite to the older
people if you want to be popular.  You didn't say how do you do to
Mrs. Bissel tonight."

"I'm hungry," said Joe quickly.  "Let's go down to the pantry and
get something to eat."

Clad only in their pajamas, they went downstairs.  Principally to
dissuade Basil from pursuing the subject, Joe began to sing in a
low voice:


     "Oh, you beautiful doll,
     You great--big--"


But the evening, coming after the month of enforced humility at
school, had been too much for Basil.  He got a little awful.  In
the kitchen, under the impression that his advice had been asked,
he broke out again:

"For instance, you oughtn't to wear those white ties.  Nobody does
that that goes East to school."  Joe, a little red, turned around
from the ice box and Basil felt a slight misgiving.  But he pursued
with:  "For instance, you ought to get your family to send you East
to school.  It'd be a great thing for you.  Especially if you want
to go East to college, you ought to first go East to school.  They
take it out of you."

Feeling that he had nothing special to be taken out of him, Joe
found the implication distasteful.  Nor did Basil appear to him at
that moment to have been perfected by the process.

"Do you want cold chicken or cold ham?"  They drew up chairs to the
kitchen table.  "Have some milk?"

"Thanks."

Intoxicated by the three full meals he had had since supper, Basil
warmed to his subject.  He built up Joe's life for him little by
little, transformed him radiantly from what was little more than a
Midwestern bumpkin to an Easterner bursting with savoir-faire and
irresistible to girls.  Going into the pantry to put away the milk,
Joe paused by the open window for a breath of quiet air; Basil
followed.  "The thing is if a boy doesn't get it taken out of him
at school, he gets it taken out of him at college," he was saying.

Moved by some desperate instinct, Joe opened the door and stepped
out onto the back porch.  Basil followed.  The house abutted on the
edge of the bluff occupied by the residential section, and the two
boys stood silent for a moment, gazing at the scattered lights of
the lower city.  Before the mystery of the unknown human life
coursing through the streets below, Basil felt the purport of his
words grow thin and pale.

He wondered suddenly what he had said and why it had seemed
important to him, and when Joe began to sing again softly, the
quiet mood of the early evening, the side of him that was best,
wisest and most enduring, stole over him once more.  The flattery,
the vanity, the fatuousness of the last hour moved off, and when he
spoke it was almost in a whisper:

"Let's walk around the block."

The sidewalk was warm to their bare feet.  It was only midnight,
but the square was deserted save for their whitish figures,
inconspicuous against the starry darkness.  They snorted with glee
at their daring.  Once a shadow, with loud human shoes, crossed the
street far ahead, but the sound served only to increase their own
unsubstantiality.  Slipping quickly through the clearings made by
gas lamps among the trees, they rounded the block, hurrying when
they neared the Gorman house as though they had been really lost in
a midsummer night's dream.

Up in Joe's room, they lay awake in the darkness.

"I talked too much," Basil thought.  "I probably sounded pretty
bossy and maybe I made him sort of mad.  But probably when we
walked around the block he forgot everything I said."

Alas, Joe had forgotten nothing--except the advice by which Basil
had intended him to profit.

"I never saw anybody as stuck up," he said to himself wrathfully.
"He thinks he's wonderful.  He thinks he's so darn popular with
girls."


III


An element of vast importance had made its appearance with the
summer; suddenly the great thing in Basil's crowd was to own an
automobile.  Fun no longer seemed available save at great
distances, at suburban lakes or remote country clubs.  Walking
downtown ceased to be a legitimate pastime.  On the contrary, a
single block from one youth's house to another's must be navigated
in a car.  Dependent groups formed around owners and they began to
wield what was, to Basil at least, a disconcerting power.

On the morning of a dance at the lake he called up Riply Buckner.

"Hey, Rip, how you going out to Connie's tonight?"

"With Elwood Leaming."

"Has he got a lot of room?"

Riply seemed somewhat embarrassed.  "Why, I don't think he has.
You see, he's taking Margaret Torrence and I'm taking Imogene
Bissel."

"Oh!"

Basil frowned.  He should have arranged all this a week ago.  After
a moment he called up Joe Gorman.

"Going to the Davies' tonight, Joe?"

"Why, yes."

"Have you got room in your car--I mean, could I go with you?"

"Why, yes, I suppose so."

There was a perceptible lack of warmth in his voice.

"Sure you got plenty of room?"

"Sure.  We'll call for you quarter to eight."

Basil began preparations at five.  For the second time in his life
he shaved, completing the operation by cutting a short straight
line under his nose.  It bled profusely, but on the advice of
Hilda, the maid, he finally stanched the flow with little pieces of
toilet paper.  Quite a number of pieces were necessary; so, in
order to facilitate breathing, he trimmed it down with a scissors,
and with this somewhat awkward mustache of paper and gore clinging
to his upper lip, wandered impatiently around the house.

At six he began working on it again, soaking off the tissue paper
and dabbing at the persistently freshening crimson line.  It dried
at length, but when he rashly hailed his mother it opened once more
and the tissue paper was called back into play.

At quarter to eight, dressed in blue coat and white flannels, he
drew one last bar of powder across the blemish, dusted it carefully
with his handkerchief and hurried out to Joe Gorman's car.  Joe was
driving in person, and in front with him were Lewis Crum and Hubert
Blair.  Basil got in the big rear seat alone and they drove without
stopping out of the city onto the Black Bear Road, keeping their
backs to him and talking in low voices together.  He thought at
first that they were going to pick up other boys; now he was
shocked, and for a moment he considered getting out of the car, but
this would imply that he was hurt.  His spirit, and with it his
face, hardened a little and he sat without speaking or being spoken
to for the rest of the ride.

After half an hour the Davies' house, a huge rambling bungalow
occupying a small peninsula in the lake, floated into sight.
Lanterns outlined its shape and wavered in gleaming lines on the
gold-and-rose colored water, and as they came near, the low notes
of bass horns and drums were blown toward them from the lawn.

Inside Basil looked about for Imogene.  There was a crowd around
her seeking dances, but she saw Basil; his heart bounded at her
quick intimate smile.

"You can have the fourth, Basil, and the eleventh and the second
extra. . . .  How did you hurt your lip?"

"Cut it shaving," he said hurriedly.  "How about supper?"

"Well, I have to have supper with Riply because he brought me."

"No, you don't," Basil assured her.

"Yes, she does," insisted Riply, standing close at hand.  "Why
don't you get your own girl for supper?"

--but Basil had no girl, though he was as yet unaware of the fact.

After the fourth dance, Basil led Imogene down to the end of the
pier, where they found seats in a motorboat.

"Now what?" she said.

He did not know.  If he had really cared for her he would have
known.  When her hand rested on his knee for a moment he did not
notice it.  Instead, he talked.  He told her how he had pitched on
the second baseball team at school and had once beaten the first in
a five-inning game.  He told her that the thing was that some boys
were popular with boys and some boys were popular with girls--he,
for instance, was popular with girls.  In short, he unloaded
himself.

At length, feeling that he had perhaps dwelt disproportionately on
himself, he told her suddenly that she was his favorite girl.

Imogene sat there, sighing a little in the moonlight.  In another
boat, lost in the darkness beyond the pier, sat a party of four.
Joe Gorman was singing:


     "My little love--
       --in honey man,
     He sure has won my--"


"I thought you might want to know," said Basil to Imogene.  "I
thought maybe you thought I liked somebody else.  The truth game
didn't get around to me the other night."

"What?" asked Imogene vaguely.  She had forgotten the other night,
all nights except this, and she was thinking of the magic in Joe
Gorman's voice.  She had the next dance with him; he was going to
teach her the words of a new song.  Basil was sort of peculiar,
telling her all this stuff.  He was good-looking and attractive and
all that, but--she wanted the dance to be over.  She wasn't having
any fun.

The music began inside--"Everybody's Doing It," played with many
little nervous jerks on the violins.

"Oh, listen!" she cried, sitting up and snapping her fingers.  "Do
you know how to rag?"

"Listen, Imogene"--He half realized that something had slipped away--
"let's sit out this dance--you can tell Joe you forgot."

She rose quickly.  "Oh, no, I can't!"

Unwillingly Basil followed her inside.  It had not gone well--he
had talked too much again.  He waited moodily for the eleventh
dance so that he could behave differently.  He believed now that he
was in love with Imogene.  His self-deception created a tightness
in his throat, a counterfeit of longing and desire.

Before the eleventh dance he was aware that some party was being
organized from which he was purposely excluded.  There were
whisperings and arguings among some of the boys, and unnatural
silences when he came near.  He heard Joe Gorman say to Riply
Buckner, "We'll just be gone three days.  If Gladys can't go, why
don't you ask Connie?  The chaperons'll--" he changed his sentence
as he saw Basil--"and we'll all go to Smith's for ice-cream soda."

Later, Basil took Riply Buckner aside but failed to elicit any
information: Riply had not forgotten Basil's attempt to rob him of
Imogene tonight.

"It wasn't about anything," he insisted.  "We're going to Smith's,
honest. . . .  How'd you cut your lip?"

"Cut it shaving."

When his dance with Imogene came she was even vaguer than before,
exchanging mysterious communications with various girls as they
moved around the room, locked in the convulsive grip of the Grizzly
Bear.  He led her out to the boat again, but it was occupied, and
they walked up and down the pier while he tried to talk to her and
she hummed:


     "My little lov-in honey man--"


"Imogene, listen.  What I wanted to ask you when we were on the
boat before was about the night we played Truth.  Did you really
mean what you said?"

"Oh, what do you want to talk about that silly game for?"

It had reached her ears, not once but several times, that Basil
thought he was wonderful--news that was flying about with as much
volatility as the rumor of his graces two weeks before.  Imogene
liked to agree with everyone--and she had agreed with several
impassioned boys that Basil was terrible.  And it was difficult not
to dislike him for her own disloyalty.

But Basil thought that only ill luck ended the intermission before
he could accomplish his purpose; though what he had wanted he had
not known.

Finally, during the intermission, Margaret Torrence, whom he had
neglected, told him the truth.

"Are you going on the touring party up to the St. Croix River?" she
asked.  She knew he was not.

"What party?"

"Joe Gorman got it up.  I'm going with Elwood Leaming."

"No, I'm not going," he said gruffly.  "I couldn't go."

"Oh!"

"I don't like Joe Gorman."

"I guess he doesn't like you much either."

"Why?  What did he say?"

"Oh, nothing."

"But what?  Tell me what he said."

After a minute she told him, as if reluctantly:  "Well, he and
Hubert Blair said you thought--you thought you were wonderful."
Her heart misgave her.

But she remembered he had asked her for only one dance.  "Joe said
you told him that all the girls thought you were wonderful."

"I never said anything like that," said Basil indignantly, "never!"

He understood--Joe Gorman had done it all, taken advantage of
Basil's talking too much--an affliction which his real friends had
always allowed for--in order to ruin him.  The world was suddenly
compact of villainy.  He decided to go home.

In the coat room he was accosted by Bill Kampf:  "Hello, Basil, how
did you hurt your lip?"

"Cut it shaving."

"Say, are you going to this party they're getting up next week?"

"No."

"Well, look, I've got a cousin from Chicago coming to stay with us
and mother said I could have a boy out for the week-end.  Her name
is Minnie Bibble."

"Minnie Bibble?" repeated Basil, vaguely revolted.

"I thought maybe you were going to that party, too, but Riply
Buckner said to ask you and I thought--"

"I've got to stay home," said Basil quickly.

"Oh, come on, Basil," he pursued.  "It's only for two days, and
she's a nice girl.  You'd like her."

"I don't know," Basil considered.  "I'll tell you what I'll do,
Bill.  I've got to get the street car home.  I'll come out for the
week-end if you'll take me over to Wildwood now in your car."

"Sure I will."

Basil walked out on the veranda and approached Connie Davies.

"Good-by," he said.  Try as he might, his voice was stiff and
proud.  "I had an awfully good time."

"I'm sorry you're leaving so early, Basil."  But she said to
herself:  "He's too stuck up to have a good time.  He thinks he's
wonderful."

From the veranda he could hear Imogene's laughter down at the end
of the pier.  Silently he went down the steps and along the walk to
meet Bill Kampf, giving strollers a wide berth as though he felt
the sight of him would diminish their pleasure.

It had been an awful night.

Ten minutes later Bill dropped him beside the waiting trolley.  A
few last picnickers sauntered aboard and the car bobbed and clanged
through the night toward St. Paul.

Presently two young girls sitting opposite Basil began looking over
at him and nudging each other, but he took no notice--he was
thinking how sorry they would all be--Imogene and Margaret, Joe and
Hubert and Riply.

"Look at him now!" they would say to themselves sorrowfully.
"President of the United States at twenty-five!  Oh, if we only
hadn't been so bad to him that night!"

He thought he was wonderful!


IV


Ermine Gilberte Labouisse Bibble was in exile.  Her parents had
brought her from New Orleans to Southampton in May, hoping that the
active outdoor life proper to a girl of fifteen would take her
thoughts from love.  But North or South, a storm of sappling arrows
flew about her.  She was "engaged" before the first of June.

Let it not be gathered from the foregoing that the somewhat hard
outlines of Miss Bibble at twenty had already begun to appear.  She
was of a radiant freshness; her head had reminded otherwise not
illiterate young men of damp blue violets, pierced with blue
windows that looked into a bright soul, with today's new roses
showing through.

She was in exile.  She was going to Glacier National Park to
forget.  It was written that in passage she would come to Basil as
a sort of initiation, turning his eyes out from himself and giving
him a first dazzling glimpse into the world of love.

She saw him first as a quiet handsome boy with an air of
consideration in his face, which was the mark of his recent re-
discovery that others had wills as strong as his, and more power.
It appeared to Minnie--as a few months back it had appeared to
Margaret Torrence, like a charming sadness.  At dinner he was
polite to Mrs. Kampf in a courteous way that he had from his
father, and he listened to Mr. Bibble's discussion of the word
"Creole" with such evident interest and appreciation that Mr.
Bibble thought, "Now here's a young boy with something TO him."

After dinner, Minnie, Basil and Bill rode into Black Bear village
to the movies, and the slow diffusion of Minnie's charm and
personality presently became the charm and personality of the
affair itself.

It was thus that all Minnie's affairs for many years had a family
likeness.  She looked at Basil, a childish open look; then opened
her eyes wider as if she had some sort of comic misgivings, and
smiled--she smiled--

For all the candor of this smile, the effect--because of the
special contours of Minnie's face and independent of her mood--was
sparkling invitation.  Whenever it appeared Basil seemed to be
suddenly inflated and borne upward, a little farther each time,
only to be set down when the smile had reached a point where it
must become a grin, and chose instead to melt away.  It was like a
drug.  In a little while he wanted nothing except to watch it with
a vast buoyant delight.

Then he wanted to see how close he could get to it.

There is a certain stage of an affair between young people when the
presence of a third party is a stimulant.  Before the second day
had well begun, before Minnie and Basil had progressed beyond the
point of great gross compliments about each other's surpassing
beauty and charm, both of them had begun to think about the time
when they could get rid of their host, Bill Kampf.

In the late afternoon, when the first cool of the evening had come
down and they were fresh and thin-feeling from swimming, they sat
in a cushioned swing, piled high with pillows and shaded by the
thick veranda vines; Basil put his arm around her and leaned toward
her cheek and Minnie managed it that he touched her fresh lips
instead.  And he had always learned things quickly.

They sat there for an hour, while Bill's voice reached them, now
from the pier, now from the hall above, now from the pagoda at the
end of the garden, and three saddled horses chafed their bits in
the stable and all around them the bees worked faithfully among the
flowers.  Then Minnie reached up to reality, and they allowed
themselves to be found--

"Why, we were looking for you too."

And Basil, by simply waving his arms and wishing, floated
miraculously upstairs to brush his hair for dinner.

"She certainly is a wonderful girl.  Oh, gosh, she certainly is a
wonderful girl!"

He mustn't lose his head.  At dinner and afterward he listened with
unwavering deferential attention while Mr. Bibble talked of the
boll weevil.

"But I'm boring you.  You children want to go off by yourselves."

"Not at all, Mr. Bibble.  I was very interested--honestly."

"Well, you all go on and amuse yourselves.  I didn't realize time
was getting on.  Nowadays it's so seldom you meet a young man with
good manners and good common sense in his head, that an old man
like me is likely to go along forever."

Bill walked down with Basil and Minnie to the end of the pier.
"Hope we'll have a good sailing tomorrow.  Say, I've got to drive
over to the village and get somebody for my crew.  Do you want to
come along?"

"I reckon I'll sit here for a while and then go to bed," said
Minnie.

"All right.  You want to come, Basil?"

"Why--why, sure, if you want me, Bill."

"You'll have to sit on a sail I'm taking over to be mended."

"I don't want to crowd you."

"You won't crowd me.  I'll go get the car."

When he had gone they looked at each other in despair.  But he did
not come back for an hour--something happened about the sail or the
car that took a long time.  There was only the threat, making
everything more poignant and breathless, that at any minute he
WOULD be coming.

By and by they got into the motorboat and sat close together
murmuring:  "This fall--"  "When you come to New Orleans--"  "When
I go to Yale year after next--"  "When I come North to school--"
"When I get back from Glacier Park--"  "Kiss me once more." . . .
"You're terrible.  Do you know you're terrible? . . .  You're
absolutely terrible--"

The water lapped against the posts; sometimes the boat bumped
gently on the pier; Basil undid one rope and pushed, so that they
swung off and way from the pier, and became a little island in the
night. . .

. . . next morning, while he packed his bag, she opened the door of
his room and stood beside him.  Her face shone with excitement; her
dress was starched and white.

"Basil, listen!  I have to tell you: Father was talking after
breakfast and he told Uncle George that he'd never met such a nice,
quiet, level-headed boy as you, and Cousin Bill's got to tutor this
month, so father asked Uncle George if he thought your family would
let you go to Glacier Park with us for two weeks so I'd have some
company."  They took hands and danced excitedly around the room.
"Don't say anything about it, because I reckon he'll have to write
your mother and everything.  Basil, isn't it wonderful?"

So when Basil left at eleven, there was no misery in their parting.
Mr. Bibble, going into the village for a paper, was going to escort
Basil to his train, and till the motor-car moved away the eyes of
the two young people shone and there was a secret in their waving
hands.

Basil sank back in the seat, replete with happiness.  He relaxed--
to have made a success of the visit was so nice.  He loved her--he
loved even her father sitting beside him, her father who was
privileged to be so close to her, to fuddle himself at that smile.

Mr. Bibble lit a cigar.  "Nice weather," he said.  "Nice climate up
to the end of October."

"Wonderful," agreed Basil.  "I miss October now that I go East to
school."

"Getting ready for college?"

"Yes, sir; getting ready for Yale."  A new pleasurable thought
occurred to him.  He hesitated, but he knew that Mr. Bibble, who
liked him, would share his joy.  "I took my preliminaries this
spring and I just heard from them--I passed six out of seven."

"Good for you!"

Again Basil hesitated, then he continued:  "I got A in ancient
history and B in English history and English A.  And I got C in
algebra A and Latin A and B.  I failed French A."

"Good!" said Mr. Bibble.

"I should have passed them all," went on Basil, "but I didn't study
hard at first.  I was the youngest boy in my class and I had a sort
of swelled head about it."

It was well that Mr. Bibble should know he was taking no dullard to
Glacier National Park.  Mr. Bibble took a long puff of his cigar.

On second thought, Basil decided that his last remark didn't have
the right ring and he amended it a little.

"It wasn't exactly a swelled head, but I never had to study very
much, because in English I'd usually read most of the books before,
and in history I'd read a lot too."  He broke off and tried again:
"I mean, when you say swelled head you think of a boy just going
around with his head swelled, sort of, saying, 'Oh, look how much I
know!'  Well, I wasn't like that.  I mean, I didn't think I knew
everything, but I was sort of--"

As he searched for the elusive word, Mr. Bibble said, "H'm!" and
pointed with his cigar at a spot in the lake.

"There's a boat," he said.

"Yes," agreed Basil.  "I don't know much about sailing.  I never
cared for it.  Of course I've been out a lot, just tending boards
and all that, but most of the time you have to sit with nothing to
do.  I like football."

"H'm!" said Mr. Bibble.  "When I was your age I was out in the Gulf
in a catboat every day."

"I guess it's fun if you like it," conceded Basil.

"Happiest days of my life."

The station was in sight.  It occurred to Basil that he should make
one final friendly gesture.

"Your daughter certainly is an attractive girl, Mr. Bibble," he
said.  "I usually get along with girls all right, but I don't
usually like them very much.  But I think your daughter is the most
attractive girl I ever met."  Then, as the car stopped, a faint
misgiving overtook him and he was impelled to add with a
disparaging little laugh.  "Good-by.  I hope I didn't talk too
much."

"Not at all," said Mr. Bibble.  "Good luck to you.  Goo'-by."

A few minutes later, when Basil's train had pulled out, Mr. Bibble
stood at the newsstand buying a paper and already drying his
forehead against the hot July day.

"Yes, sir!  That was a lesson not to do anything in a hurry," he
was saying to himself vehemently.  "Imagine listening to that fresh
kid gabbling about himself all through Glacier Park!  Thank the
good Lord for that little ride!"


On his arrival home, Basil literally sat down and waited.  Under no
pretext would he leave the house save for short trips to the drug
store for refreshments, whence he returned on a full run.  The
sound of the telephone or the door-bell galvanized him into the
rigidity of the electric chair.

That afternoon he composed a wondrous geographical poem, which he
mailed to Minnie:


     Of all the fair flowers of Paris,
       Of all the red roses of Rome,
     Of all the deep tears of Vienna
       The sadness wherever you roam,
     I think of that night by the lakeside,
       The beam of the moon and stars,
     And the smell of an aching like perfume,
       The tune of the Spanish guitars.


But Monday passed and most of Tuesday and no word came.  Then, late
in the afternoon of the second day, as he moved vaguely from room
to room looking out of different windows into a barren lifeless
street, Minnie called him on the phone.

"Yes?"  His heart was beating wildly.

"Basil, we're going this afternoon."

"Going!" he repeated blankly.

"Oh, Basil, I'm so sorry.  Father changed his mind about taking
anybody West with us."

"Oh!"

"I'm so sorry, Basil."

"I probably couldn't have gone."

There was a moment's silence.  Feeling her presence over the wire,
he could scarcely breathe, much less speak.

"Basil, can you hear me?"

"Yes."

"We may come back this way.  Anyhow, remember we're going to meet
this winter in New York."

"Yes," he said, and he added suddenly:  "Perhaps we won't ever meet
again."

"Of course we will.  They're calling me, Basil.  I've got to go.
Good-by."

He sat down beside the telephone, wild with grief.  The maid found
him half an hour later bowed over the kitchen table.  He knew what
had happened as well as if Minnie had told him.  He had made the
same old error, undone the behavior of three days in half an hour.
It would have been no consolation if it had occurred to him that it
was just as well.  Somewhere on the trip he would have let go and
things might have been worse--though perhaps not so sad.  His only
thought now was that she was gone.

He lay on his bed, baffled, mistaken, miserable but not beaten.
Time after time, the same vitality that had led his spirit to a
scourging made him able to shake off the blood like water not to
forget, but to carry his wounds with him to new disasters and new
atonements--toward his unknown destiny.


Two days later his mother told him that on condition of his keeping
the batteries on charge, and washing it once a week, his
grandfather had consented to let him use the electric whenever it
was idle in the afternoon.  Two hours later he was out in it,
gliding along Crest Avenue at the maximum speed permitted by the
gears and trying to lean back as if it were a Stutz Bearcat.
Imogene Bissel waved at him from in front of her house and he came
to an uncertain stop.

"You've got a car!"

"It's grandfather's," he said modestly.  "I thought you were up on
that party at the St. Croix."

She shook her head.  "Mother wouldn't let me go--only a few girls
went.  There was a big accident over in Minneapolis and mother
won't even let me ride in a car unless there's someone over
eighteen driving."

"Listen, Imogene, do you suppose your mother meant electrics?"

"Why, I never thought--I don't know.  I could go and see."

"Tell your mother it won't go over twelve miles an hour," he called
after her.

A minute later she ran joyfully down the walk.  "I can go, Basil,"
she cried.  "Mother never heard of any wrecks in an electric.
What'll we do?"

"Anything," he said in a reckless voice.  "I didn't mean that about
this bus making only twelve miles an hour--it'll make fifteen.
Listen, let's go down to Smith's and have a claret lemonade."

"Why, Basil Lee!"







THE HOTEL CHILD


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (31 January 1931)



It is a place where one's instinct is to give a reason for being
there--"Oh, you see, I'm here because--"  Failing that, you are
faintly suspect, because this corner of Europe does not draw
people; rather, it accepts them without too many inconvenient
questions--live and let live.  Routes cross here--people bound for
private cliniques or tuberculosis resorts in the mountains, people
who are no longer persona grata in Italy or France.  And if that
were all--

Yet on a gala night at the Hotel des Trois Mondes a new arrival
would scarcely detect the current beneath the surface.  Watching
the dancing there would be a gallery of Englishwomen of a certain
age, with neckbands, dyed hair and faces powdered pinkish gray; a
gallery of American women of a certain age, with snowy-white
transformations, black dresses and lips of cherry red.  And most of
them with their eyes swinging right or left from time to time to
rest upon the ubiquitous Fifi.  The entire hotel had been made
aware that Fifi had reached the age of eighteen that night.

Fifi Schwartz.  An exquisitely, radiantly beautiful Jewess whose
fine, high forehead sloped gently up to where her hair, bordering
it like an armorial shield, burst into lovelocks and waves and
curlicues of soft dark red.  Her eyes were bright, big, clear, wet
and shining; the color of her cheeks and lips was real, breaking
close to the surface from the strong young pump of her heart.  Her
body was so assertively adequate that one cynic had been heard to
remark that she always looked as if she had nothing on underneath
her dresses; but he was probably wrong, for Fifi had been as
thoroughly equipped for beauty by man as by God.  Such dresses--
cerise for Chanel, mauve for Molyneux, pink for Patou; dozens of
them, tight at the hips, swaying, furling, folding just an eighth
of an inch off the dancing floor.  Tonight she was a woman of
thirty in dazzling black, with long white gloves dripping from her
forearms.  "Such ghastly taste," the whispers said.  "The stage,
the shop window, the manikins' parade.  What can her mother be
thinking?  But, then, look at her mother."

Her mother sat apart with a friend and thought about Fifi and
Fifi's brother, and about her other daughters, now married, whom
she considered to have been even prettier than Fifi.  Mrs. Schwartz
was a plain woman; she had been a Jewess a long time, and it was a
matter of effortless indifference to her what was said by the
groups around the room.  Another large class who did not care were
the young men--dozens of them.  They followed Fifi about all day in
and out of motorboats, night clubs, inland lakes, automobiles, tea
rooms and funiculars, and they said, "Hey, look, Fifi!" and showed
off for her, or said, "Kiss me, Fifi," or even, "Kiss me again,
Fifi," and abused her and tried to be engaged to her.

Most of them, however, were too young, since this little city,
through some illogical reasoning, is supposed to have an admirable
atmosphere as an educational center.

Fifi was not critical, nor was she aware of being criticized
herself.  Tonight the gallery in the great, crystal, horseshoe room
made observations upon her birthday party, being somewhat querulous
about Fifi's entrance.  The table had been set in the last of a
string of dining rooms, each accessible from the central hall.  But
Fifi, her black dress shouting and halloing for notice, came in by
way of the first dining room, followed by a whole platoon of young
men of all possible nationalities and crosses, and at a sort of
little run that swayed her lovely hips and tossed her lovely head,
led them bumpily through the whole vista, while old men choked on
fish bones, old women's facial muscles sagged, and the protest rose
to a roar in the procession's wake.

They need not have resented her so much.  It was a bad party,
because Fifi thought she had to entertain everybody and be a dozen
people, so she talked to the entire table and broke up every
conversation that started, no matter how far away from her.  So no
one had a good time, and the people in the hotel needn't have
minded so much that she was young and terribly happy.

Afterward, in the salon, many of the supernumerary males floated
off with a temporary air to other tables.  Among these was young
Count Stanislas Borowki, with his handsome, shining brown eyes of a
stuffed deer, and his black hair already dashed with distinguished
streaks like the keyboard of a piano.  He went to the table of some
people of position named Taylor and sat down with just a faint
sigh, which made them smile.

"Was it ghastly?" he was asked.

The blond Miss Howard who was traveling with the Taylors was almost
as pretty as Fifi and stitched up with more consideration.  She had
taken pains not to make Miss Schwartz's acquaintance, although she
shared several of the same young men.  The Taylors were career
people in the diplomatic service and were now on their way to
London, after the League Conference at Geneva.  They were
presenting Miss Howard at court this season.  They were very
Europeanized Americans; in fact, they had reached a position where
they could hardly be said to belong to any nation at all; certainly
not to any great power, but perhaps to a sort of Balkanlike state
composed of people like themselves.  They considered that Fifi was
as much of a gratuitous outrage as a new stripe in the flag.

The tall Englishwoman with the long cigarette holder and the half-
paralyzed Pekingese presently got up, announcing to the Taylors
that she had an engagement in the bar, and strolled away, carrying
her paralyzed Pekingese and causing, as she passed, a chilled lull
in the seething baby talk that raged around Fifi's table.

About midnight, Mr. Weicker, the assistant manager, looked into the
bar, where Fifi's phonograph roared new German tangoes into the
smoke and clatter.  He had a small face that looked into things
quickly, and lately he had taken a cursory glance into the bar
every night.  But he had not come to admire Fifi; he was engaged in
an inquiry as to why matters were not going well at the Hotel des
Trois Mondes this summer.

There was, of course, the continually sagging American Stock
Exchange.  With so many hotels begging to be filled, the clients
had become finicky, exigent, quick to complain, and Mr. Weicker had
had many fine decisions to make recently.  One large family had
departed because of a night-going phonograph belonging to Lady
Capps-Karr.  Also there was presumably a thief operating in the
hotel; there had been complaints about pocketbooks, cigarette
cases, watches and rings.  Guests sometimes spoke to Mr. Weicker as
if they would have liked to search his pockets.  There were empty
suites that need not have been empty this summer.

His glance fell dourly, in passing, upon Count Borowki, who was
playing pool with Fifi.  Count Borowki had not paid his bill for
three weeks.  He had told Mr. Weicker that he was expecting his
mother, who would arrange everything.  Then there was Fifi, who
attracted an undesirable crowd--young students living on pensions
who often charged drinks, but never paid for them.  Lady Capps-
Karr, on the contrary, was a grande cliente; one could count three
bottles of whisky a day for herself and entourage, and her father
in London was good for every drop of it.  Mr. Weicker decided to
issue an ultimatum about Borowki's bill this very night, and
withdrew.  His visit had lasted about ten seconds.

Count Borowki put away his cue and came close to Fifi, whispering
something.  She seized his hand and pulled him to a dark corner
near the phonograph.

"My American dream girl," he said.  "We must have you painted in
Budapest the way you are tonight.  You will hang with the portraits
of my ancestors in my castle in Transylvania."

One would suppose that a normal American girl, who had been to an
average number of moving pictures, would have detected a vague ring
of familiarity in Count Borowki's persistent wooing.  But the Hotel
des Trois Mondes was full of people who were actually rich and
noble, people who did fine embroidery or took cocaine in closed
apartments and meanwhile laid claim to European thrones and half a
dozen mediatized German principalities, and Fifi did not choose to
doubt the one who paid court to her beauty.  Tonight she was
surprised at nothing: not even his precipitate proposal that they
get married this very week.

"Mamma doesn't want that I should get married for a year.  I only
said I'd be engaged to you."

"But my mother wants me to marry.  She is hard-boiling, as you
Americans say; she brings pressure to bear that I marry Princess
This and Countess That."

Meanwhile Lady Capps-Karr was having a reunion across the room.  A
tall, stooped Englishman, dusty with travel, had just opened the
door of the bar, and Lady Capps-Karr, with a caw of "Bopes!" had
flung herself upon him:  "Bopes, I say!"

"Capps, darling.  Hi, there, Rafe--" this to her companion.  "Fancy
running into you, Capps."

"Bopes!  Bopes!"

Their exclamations and laughter filled the room, and the bartender
whispered to an inquisitive American that the new arrival was the
Marquis Kinkallow.

Bopes stretched himself out in several chairs and a sofa and called
for the barman.  He announced that he had driven from Paris without
a stop and was leaving next morning to meet the only woman he had
ever loved, in Milan.  He did not look in a condition to meet
anyone.

"Oh, Bopes, I've been so blind," said Lady Capps-Karr pathetically.
"Day after day after day.  I flew here from Cannes, meaning to stay
one day, and I ran into Rafe here and some other Americans I knew,
and it's been two weeks, and now all my tickets to Malta are void.
Stay here and save me!  Oh, Bopes!  Bopes!  Bopes!"

The Marquis Kinkallow glanced with tired eyes about the bar.

"Ah, who is that?" he demanded.  "The lovely Jewess?  And who is
that item with her?"

"She's an American," said the daughter of a hundred earls.  "The
man is a scoundrel of some sort, but apparently he's a cat of the
stripe; he's a great pal of Schenzi, in Vienna.  I sat up till five
the other night playing two-handed chemin de fer with him here in
the bar and he owes me a mille Swiss."

"Have to have a word with that wench," said Bopes twenty minutes
later.  "You arrange it for me, Rafe, that's a good chap."

Ralph Berry had met Miss Schwartz, and, as the opportunity for the
introduction now presented itself, he rose obligingly.  The
opportunity was that a chasseur had just requested Count Borowki's
presence in the office; he managed to beat two or three young men
to her side.

"The Marquis Kinkallow is so anxious to meet you.  Can't you come
and join us?"

Fifi looked across the room, her fine brow wrinkling a little.
Something warned her that her evening was full enough already.
Lady Capps-Karr had never spoken to her; Fifi believed she was
jealous of her clothes.

"Can't you bring him over here?"

A minute later Bopes sat down beside Fifi with a shadow of fine
tolerance settling on his face.  This was nothing he could help; in
fact, he constantly struggled against it, but it was something that
happened to his expression when he met Americans.  "The whole thing
is too much for me," it seemed to say.  "Compare my confidence with
your uncertainty, my sophistication with your naïveté, and yet the
whole world has slid into your power."  Of later years he found
that his tone, unless carefully guarded, held a smoldering
resentment.

Fifi eyed him brightly and told him about her glamorous future.

"Next I'm going to Paris," she said, announcing the fall of Rome,
"to, maybe, study at the Sorbonne.  Then, maybe, I'll get married;
you can't tell.  I'm only eighteen.  I had eighteen candles on my
birthday cake tonight.  I wish you could have been here. . . .
I've had marvelous offers to go on the stage, but of course a girl
on the stage gets talked about so."

"What are you doing tonight?" asked Bopes.

"Oh, lots more boys are coming in later.  Stay around and join the
party."

"I thought you and I might do something.  I'm going to Milan
tomorrow."

Across the room, Lady Capps-Karr was tense with displeasure at the
desertion.

"After all," she protested, "a chep's a chep, and a chum's a chum,
but there are certain things that one simply doesn't do.  I never
saw Bopes in such frightful condition."

She stared at the dialogue across the room.

"Come along to Milan with me," the marquis was saying.  "Come to
Tibet or Hindustan.  We'll see them crown the King of Ethiopia.
Anyhow, let's go for a drive right now."

"I got too many guests here.  Besides, I don't go out to ride with
people the first time I meet them.  I'm supposed to be engaged.  To
a Hungarian count.  He'd be furious and would probably challenge
you to a duel."

Mrs. Schwartz, with an apologetic expression, came across the room
to Fifi.

"John's gone," she announced.  "He's up there again."

Fifi gave a yelp of annoyance.  "He gave me his word of honor he
would not go."

"Anyhow, he went.  I looked in his room and his hat's gone.  It was
that champagne at dinner."  She turned to the marquis.  "John is
not a vicious boy, but vurry, vurry weak."

"I suppose I'll have to go after him," said Fifi resignedly.

"I hate to spoil your good time tonight, but I don't know what
else.  Maybe this gentleman would go with you.  You see, Fifi is
the only one that can handle him.  His father is dead and it really
takes a man to handle a boy."

"Quite," said Bopes.

"Can you take me?" Fifi asked.  "It's just up in town to a café."

He agreed with alacrity.  Out in the September night, with her
fragrance seeping through an ermine cape, she explained further:

"Some Russian woman's got hold of him; she claims to be a countess,
but she's only got one silver-fox fur, that she wears with
everything.  My brother's just nineteen, so whenever he's had a
couple glasses champagne he says he's going to marry her, and
mother worries."

Bopes' arm dropped impatiently around her shoulder as they started
up the hill to the town.

Fifteen minutes later the car stopped at a point several blocks
beyond the café and Fifi stepped out.  The marquis' face was now
decorated by a long, irregular finger-nail scratch that ran
diagonally across his cheek, traversed his nose in a few sketchy
lines and finished in a sort of grand terminal of tracks upon his
lower jaw.

"I don't like to have anybody get so foolish," Fifi explained.
"You needn't wait.  We can get a taxi."

"Wait!" cried the marquis furiously.  "For a common little person
like you?  They tell me you're the laughingstock of the hotel, and
I quite understand why."

Fifi hurried along the street and into the café, pausing in the
door until she saw her brother.  He was a reproduction of Fifi
without her high warmth; at the moment he was sitting at a table
with a frail exile from the Caucasus and two Serbian consumptives.
Fifi waited for her temper to rise to an executive pitch; then she
crossed the dance floor, conspicuous as a thundercloud in her
bright black dress.

"Mamma sent me after you, John.  Get your coat."

"Oh, what's biting her?" he demanded, with a vague eye.

"Mamma says you should come along."

He got up unwillingly.  The two Serbians rose also; the countess
never moved; her eyes, sunk deep in Mongol cheek bones, never left
Fifi's face; her head crouched in the silver-fox fur which Fifi
knew represented her brother's last month's allowance.  As John
Schwartz stood there swaying unsteadily the orchestra launched into
Ich bin von Kopf bis Fuss.  Diving into the confusion of the table,
Fifi emerged with her brother's arm, marched him to the coat room
and then out toward the taxi stand.

It was late, the evening was over, her birthday was over, and
driving back to the hotel, with John slumped against her shoulder,
Fifi felt a sudden depression.  By virtue of her fine health she
had never been a worrier, and certainly the Schwartz family had
lived so long against similar backgrounds that Fifi felt no
insufficiency in the Hotel des Trois Mondes as cloud and community--
and yet the evening was suddenly all wrong.  Didn't evenings
sometimes end on a high note and not fade out vaguely in bars?
After ten o'clock every night she felt she was the only real being
in a colony of ghosts, that she was surrounded by utterly
intangible figures who retreated whenever she stretched out her
hand.

The doorman assisted her brother to the elevator.  Stepping in,
Fifi saw, too late, that there were two other people inside.
Before she could pull John out again, they had both brushed past
her as if in fear of contamination.  Fifi heard "Mercy!" from Mrs.
Taylor and "How revolting!" from Miss Howard.  The elevator
mounted.  Fifi held her breath until it stopped at her floor.

It was, perhaps, the impact of this last encounter that caused her
to stand very still just inside the door of the dark apartment.
Then she had the sense that someone else was there in the blackness
ahead of her, and after her brother had stumbled forward and thrown
himself on a sofa, she still waited.

"Mamma," she called, but there was no answer; only a sound fainter
than a rustle, like a shoe scraped along the floor.

A few minutes later, when her mother came upstairs, they called the
valet de chambre and went through the rooms together, but there was
no one.  Then they stood side by side in the open door to their
balcony and looked out on the lake with the bright cluster of Evian
on the French shore and the white caps of snow on the mountains.

"I think we've been here long enough," said Mrs. Schwartz suddenly.
"I think I'll take John back to the States this fall."

Fifi was aghast.  "But I thought John and I were going to the
Sorbonne in Paris?"

"How can I trust him in Paris?  And how could I leave you behind
alone there?"

"But we're used to living in Europe now.  Why did I learn to talk
French?  Why, mamma, we don't even know any people back home any
more."

"We can always meet people.  We always have."

"But you know it's different; everybody is so bigoted there.  A
girl hasn't the chance to meet the same sort of men, even if there
were any.  Everybody just watches everything you do."

"So they do here," said her mother.  "That Mr. Weicker just stopped
me in the hall; he saw you come in with John, and he talked to me
about how you must keep out of the bar, you were so young.  I told
him you only took lemonade, but he said it didn't matter; scenes
like tonight made people leave the hotel."

"Oh, how perfectly mean!"

"So I think we better go back home."

The empty word rang desolately in Fifi's ears.  She put her arms
around her mother's waist, realizing that it was she and not her
mother, with her mother's clear grip on the past, who was
completely lost in the universe.  On the sofa her brother snored,
having already entered the world of the weak, of the leaners
together, and found its fetid and mercurial warmth sufficient.  But
Fifi kept looking at the alien sky, knowing that she could pierce
it and find her own way through envy and corruption.  For the first
time she seriously considered marrying Borowki immediately.

"Do you want to go downstairs and say good night to the boys?"
suggested her mother.  "There's lots of them still there asking
where you are."

But the Furies were after Fifi now--after her childish complacency
and her innocence, even after her beauty--out to break it all down
and drag it in any convenient mud.  When she shook her head and
walked sullenly into her bedroom, they had already taken something
from her forever.


II


The following morning Mrs. Schwartz went to Mr. Weicker's office to
report the loss of two hundred dollars in American money.  She had
left the sum on her chiffonier upon retiring; when she awoke, it
was gone.  The door of the apartment had been bolted, but in the
morning the bolt was found drawn, and yet neither of her children
was awake.  Fortunately, she had taken her jewels to bed with her
in a chamois sack.

Mr. Weicker decided that the situation must be handled with care.
There were not a few guests in the hotel who were in straitened
circumstances and inclined to desperate remedies, but he must move
slowly.  In America one has money or hasn't; in Europe the heir to
a fortune may be unable to stand himself a haircut until the
collapse of a fifth cousin, yet be a sure risk and not to be
lightly offended.  Opening the office copy of the Almanack de
Gotha, Mr. Weicker found Stanislas Karl Joseph Borowki hooked
firmly on to the end of a line older than the crown of St. Stephen.
This morning, in riding clothes that were smart as a hussar's
uniform, he had gone riding with the utterly correct Miss Howard.
On the other hand, there was no doubt as to who had been robbed,
and Mr. Weicker's indignation began to concentrate on Fifi and her
family, who might have saved him this trouble by taking themselves
off some time ago.  It was even conceivable that the dissipated
son, John, had nipped the money.

In all events, the Schwartzes were going home.  For three years
they had lived in hotels--in Paris, Florence, St. Raphael, Como,
Vichy, La Baule, Lucerne, Baden-Baden and Biarritz.  Everywhere
there had been schools--always new schools--and both children spoke
in perfect French and scrawny fragments of Italian.  Fifi had grown
from a large-featured child of fourteen to a beauty; John had grown
into something rather dismal and lost.  Both of them played bridge,
and somewhere Fifi had picked up tap dancing.  Mrs. Schwartz felt
that it was all somehow unsatisfactory, but she did not know why.
So, two days after Fifi's party, she announced that they would pack
their trunks, go to Paris for some new fall clothes and then go
home.

That same afternoon Fifi came to the bar to get her phonograph,
left there the night of her party.  She sat up on a high stool and
talked to the barman while she drank a ginger ale.

"Mother wants to take me back to America, but I'm not going."

"What will you do?"

"Oh, I've got a little money of my own, and then I may get
married."  She sipped her ginger ale moodily.

"I hear you had some money stolen," he remarked.  "How did it
happen?"

"Well, Count Borowki thinks the man got into the apartment early
and hid in between the two doors between us and the next apartment.
Then, when we were asleep, he took the money and walked out."

"Ha!"

Fifi sighed.  "Well, you probably won't see me in the bar any
more."

"We'll miss you, Miss Schwartz."

Mr. Weicker put his head in the door, withdrew it and then came in
slowly.

"Hello," said Fifi coldly.

"A-ha, young lady."  He waggled his finger at her with affected
facetiousness.  "Didn't you know I spoke to your mother about your
coming in to the bar?  It's merely for your own good."

"I'm just having a ginger ale," she said indignantly.

"But no one can tell what you're having.  It might be whisky or
what not.  It is the other guests who complain."

She stared at him indignantly--the picture was so different from
her own--of Fifi as the lively center of the hotel, of Fifi in
clothes that ravished the eye, standing splendid and unattainable
amid groups of adoring men.  Suddenly Mr. Weicker's obsequious, but
hostile, face infuriated her.

"We're getting out of this hotel!" she flared up.  "I never saw
such a narrow-minded bunch of people in my life; always criticizing
everybody and making up terrible things about them, no matter what
they do themselves.  I think it would be a good thing if the hotel
caught fire and burned down with all the nasty cats in it."

Banging down her glass, she seized the phonograph case and stalked
out of the bar.

In the lobby a porter sprang to help her, but she shook her head
and hurried on through the salon, where she came upon Count
Borowki.

"Oh, I'm so furious!" she cried.  "I never saw so many old cats!  I
just told Mr. Weicker what I thought of them!"

"Did someone dare to speak rudely to you?"

"Oh, it doesn't matter.  We're going away."

"Going away!"  He started.  "When?"

"Right away.  I don't want to, but mamma says we've got to."

"I must talk to you seriously about this," he said.  "I just called
your room.  I have brought you a little engagement present."

Her spirits returned as she took the handsome gold-and-ivory
cigarette case engraved with her initials.

"How lovely!"

"Now, listen; what you tell me makes it more important that I talk
to you immediately.  I have just received another letter from my
mother.  They have chosen a girl for me in Budapest--a lovely girl,
rich and beautiful and of my own rank who would be very happy at
the match, but I am in love with you.  I would never have thought
it possible, but I have lost my heart to an American."

"Well, why not?" said Fifi, indignantly.  "They call girls
beautiful here if they have one good feature.  And then, if they've
got nice eyes or hair, they're usually bow-legged or haven't got
nice teeth."

"There is no flaw or fault in you."

"Oh, yes," said Fifi modestly.  "I got a sort of big nose.  Would
you know I was Jewish?"

With a touch of impatience, Borowki came back to his argument:  "So
they are bringing pressure to bear for me to marry.  Questions of
inheritance depend on it."

"Besides, my forehead is too high," observed Fifi abstractedly.
"It's so high it's got sort of wrinkles in it.  I knew an awfully
funny boy who used to call me 'the highbrow.'"

"So the sensible thing," pursued Borowki, "is for us to marry
immediately.  I tell you frankly there are other American girls not
far from here who wouldn't hesitate."

"Mamma would be about crazy," Fifi said.

"I've thought about that too," he answered her eagerly.  "Don't
tell her.  If we drove over the border tonight we could be married
tomorrow morning.  Then we come back and you show your mother the
little gilt coronets painted on your luggage.  My own personal
opinion is that she'll be delighted.  There you are, off her hands,
with social position second to none in Europe.  In my opinion, your
mother has probably thought of it already, and may be saying to
herself:  'Why don't those two young people just take matters into
their own hands and save me all the fuss and expense of a wedding?'
I think she would like us for being so hard-boiled."

He broke off impatiently as Lady Capps-Karr, emerging from the
dining room with her Pekingese, surprised them by stopping at their
table.  Count Borowki was obliged to introduce them.  As he had not
known of the Marquis Kinkallow's defection the other evening, nor
that His Lordship had taken a wound to Milan the following morning,
he had no suspicion of what was coming.

"I've noticed Miss Schwartz," said the Englishwoman in a clear,
concise voice.  "And of course I've noticed Miss Schwartz's
clothes."

"Won't you sit down?" said Fifi.

"No, thank you."  She turned to Borowki.  "Miss Schwartz's clothes
make us all appear somewhat drab.  I always refuse to dress
elaborately in hotels.  It seems such rotten taste.  Don't you
think so?"

"I think people always ought to look nice," said Fifi, flushing.

"Naturally.  I merely said that I consider it rotten taste to dress
elaborately, save in the houses of one's friends."

She said "Good-by-e-e" to Borowki and moved on, emitting a mouthed
cloud of smoke and a faint fragrance of whisky.

The insult had been as stinging as the crack of a whip, and as
Fifi's pride of her wardrobe was swept away from her, she heard all
the comments that she had not heard, in one great resurgent
whisper.  Then they said that she wore her clothes here because she
had nowhere else to wear them.  That was why the Howard girl
considered her vulgar and did not care to know her.

For an instant her anger flamed up against her mother for not
telling her, but she saw that her mother did not know either.

"I think she's so dowdy," she forced herself to say aloud, but
inside she was quivering.  "What is she, anyhow?  I mean, how high
is her title?  Very high?"

"She's the widow of a baronet."

"Is that high?"  Fifi's face was rigid.  "Higher than a countess?"

"No.  A countess is much higher--infinitely higher."  He moved his
chair closer and began to talk intently.

Half an hour later Fifi got up with indecision on her face.

"At seven you'll let me know definitely," Borowki said, "and I'll
be ready with a car at ten."

Fifi nodded.  He escorted her across the room and saw her vanish
into a dark hall mirror in the direction of the lift.

As he turned away, Lady Capps-Karr, sitting alone over her coffee,
spoke to him:

"I want a word with you.  Did you, by some slip of the tongue,
suggest to Weicker that in case of difficulties I would guarantee
your bills?"

Borowki flushed.  "I may have said something like that, but--"

"Well, I told him the truth--that I never laid eyes on you until a
fortnight ago."

"I, naturally, turned to a person of equal rank--"

"Equal rank!  What cheek!  The only titles left are English titles.
I must ask you not to make use of my name again."

He bowed.  "Such inconveniences will soon be for me a thing of the
past."

"Are you getting off with that vulgar little American?"

"I beg your pardon," he said stiffly.

"Don't be angry.  I'll stand you a whisky-and-soda.  I'm getting in
shape for Bopes Kinkallow, who's just telephoned he's tottering
back here."

Meanwhile, upstairs, Mrs. Schwartz was saying to Fifi:  "Now that I
know we're going away I'm getting excited about it.  It will be so
nice seeing the Hirsts and Mrs. Bell and Amy and Marjorie and
Gladys again, and the new baby.  You'll be happy, too; you've
forgotten how they're like.  You and Gladys used to be great
friends.  And Marjorie--"

"Oh, mamma, don't talk about it," cried Fifi miserably.  "I can't
go back."

"We needn't stay.  If John was in a college like his father wanted,
we could, maybe, go to California."

But for Fifi all the romance of life was rolled up into the last
three impressionable years in Europe.  She remembered the tall
guardsmen in Rome and the old Spaniard who had first made her
conscious of her beauty at the Villa d'Este at Como, and the French
naval aviator at St. Raphael who had dropped her a note from his
plane into their garden, and the feeling that she had sometimes,
when she danced with Borowki, that he was dressed in gleaming boots
and a white-furred dolman.

She had seen many American moving pictures and she knew that the
girls there always married the faithful boy from the old home town,
and after that there was nothing.

"I won't go," she said aloud.

Her mother turned with a pile of clothes in her arms.  "What talk
is that from you, Fifi?  You think I could leave you here alone?"
As Fifi didn't answer, she continued, with an air of finality:
"That talk doesn't sound nice from you.  Now you stop fretting and
saying such things, and get me this list of things uptown."

But Fifi had decided.  It was Borowki, then, and the chance of
living fully and adventurously.  He could go into the diplomatic
service, and then one day when they encountered Lady Capps-Karr and
Miss Howard at a legation ball, she could make audible the
observation that for the moment seemed so necessary to her:  "I
hate people who always look as if they were going to or from a
funeral."

"So run along," her mother continued.  "And look in at that café
and see if John is up there, and take him to tea."

Fifi accepted the shopping list mechanically.  Then she went into
her room and wrote a little note to Borowki which she would leave
with the concierge on the way out.

Coming out, she saw her mother struggling with a trunk, and felt
terribly sorry for her.  But there were Amy and Gladys in America,
and Fifi hardened herself.

She walked out and down the stairs, remembering halfway that in her
distraction she had omitted an official glance in the mirror; but
there was a large mirror on the wall just outside the grand salon,
and she stopped in front of that instead.

She was beautiful--she learned that once more, but now it made her
sad.  She wondered whether the dress she wore this afternoon was in
bad taste, whether it would minister to the superiority of Miss
Howard or Lady Capps-Karr.  It seemed to her a lovely dress, soft
and gentle in cut, but in color a hard, bright, metallic powder
blue.

Then a sudden sound broke the stillness of the gloomy hall and Fifi
stood suddenly breathless and motionless.


III


At eleven o'clock Mr. Weicker was tired, but the bar was in one of
its periodical riots and he was waiting for it to quiet down.
There was nothing to do in the stale office or the empty lobby; and
the salon, where all day he held long conversations with lonely
English and American women, was deserted; so he went out the front
door and began to make the circuit of the hotel.  Whether due to
his circumambient course or to his frequent glances up at the
twinkling bedroom lights and into the humble, grilled windows of
the kitchen floor, the promenade gave him a sense of being in
control of the hotel, of being adequately responsible, as though it
were a ship and he was surveying it from a quarterdeck.

He went past a flood of noise and song from the bar, past a window
where two bus boys sat on a bunk and played cards over a bottle of
Spanish wine.  There was a phonograph somewhere above, and a
woman's form blocked out a window; then there was the quiet wing,
and turning the corner, he arrived back at his point of departure.
And in front of the hotel, under the dim porte-cochère light, he
saw Count Borowki.

Something made him stop and watch--something incongruous--Borowki,
who couldn't pay his bill, had a car and a chauffeur.  He was
giving the chauffeur some sort of detailed instructions, and then
Mr. Weicker perceived that there was a bag in the front seat, and
came forward into the light.

"You are leaving us, Count Borowki?"

Borowki started at the voice.  "For the night only," he answered.
"I'm going to meet my mother."

"I see."

Borowki looked at him reproachfully.  "My trunk and hat box are in
my room, you'll discover.  Did you think I was running away from my
bill?"

"Certainly not.  I hope you will have a pleasant journey and find
your mother well."

But inside he took the precaution of dispatching a valet de chambre
to see if the baggage was indeed there, and even to give it a
thoughtful heft, lest its kernel were departed.

He dozed for perhaps an hour.  When he woke up, the night concierge
was pulling at his arm and there was a strong smell of smoke in the
lobby.  It was some moments before he could get it through his head
that one wing of the hotel was on fire.

Setting the concierge at the alarms, he rushed down the hall to the
bar, and through the smoke that poured from the door he caught
sight of the burning billiard table and the flames licking along
the floor and flaring up in alcoholic ecstasy every time a bottle
on the shelves cracked with the heat.  As he hastily retreated he
met a line of half-dressed chasseurs and bus boys already
struggling up from the lower depths with buckets of water.  The
concierge shouted that the fire department was on its way.  He put
two men at the telephones to awaken the guests, and as he ran back
to form a bucket line at the danger point, he thought for the first
time of Fifi.

Blind rage consumed him--with a precocious Indianlike cruelty she
had carried out her threat.  Ah, he would deal with that later;
there was still law in the country.  Meanwhile a clangor outdoors
announced that the engines had arrived, and he made his way back
through the lobby, filled now with men in pajamas carrying brief
cases, and women in bedclothes carrying jewel boxes and small dogs;
the number swelling every minute and the talk rising from a cadence
heavy with sleep to the full staccato buzz of an afternoon soirée.

A chasseur called Mr. Weicker to the phone, but the manager shook
him off impatiently.

"It's the commissionaire of police," the boy persisted.  "He says
you must speak to him."

With an exclamation, Mr. Weicker hurried into the office.  "'Allo!"

"I'm calling from the station.  Is this the manager?"

"Yes, but there's a fire here."

"Have you among your guests a man calling himself Count Borowki?"

"Why, yes--"

"We're bringing him there for identification.  He was picked up on
the road on some information we received."

"But--"

"We picked up a girl with him.  We're bringing them both down there
immediately."

"I tell you--"

The receiver clicked briskly in his ear and Mr. Weicker hurried
back to the lobby, where the smoke was diminishing.  The reassuring
pumps had been at work for five minutes and the bar was a wet
charred ruin.  Mr. Weicker began passing here and there among the
guests, tranquilizing and persuading; the phone operators began
calling the rooms again, advising such guests as had not appeared
that it was safe to go back to bed; and then, at the continued
demands for an explanation, he thought again of Fifi, and this time
of his own accord he hurried to the phone.

Mrs. Schwartz's anxious voice answered; Fifi wasn't there.  That
was what he wanted to know.  He rang off brusquely.  There was the
story, and he could not have wished for anything more sordidly
complete--an incendiary blaze and an attempted elopement with a man
wanted by the police.  It was time for paying, and all the money of
America couldn't make any difference.  If the season was ruined, at
least Fifi would have no more seasons at all.  She would go to a
girls' institution where the prescribed uniform was rather plainer
than any clothing she had ever worn.

As the last of the guests departed into the elevators, leaving only
a few curious rummagers among the soaked débris, another procession
came in by the front door.  There was a man in civilian clothes and
a little wall of policemen with two people behind.  The
commissionaire spoke and the screen of policemen parted.

"I want you to identify these two people.  Has this man been
staying here under the name of Borowki?"

Mr. Weicker looked.  "He has."

"He's been wanted for a year in Italy, France and Spain.  And this
girl?"

She was half hidden behind Borowki, her head hanging, her face in
shadow.  Mr. Weicker craned toward her eagerly.  He was looking at
Miss Howard.

A wave of horror swept over Mr. Weicker.  Again he craned his head
forward, as if by the intensity of his astonishment he could
convert her into Fifi, or look through her and find Fifi.  But this
would have been difficult, for Fifi was far away.  She was in front
of the café, assisting the stumbling and reluctant John Schwartz
into a taxi.  "I should say you can't go back.  Mother says you
should come right home."


IV


Count Borowki took his incarceration with a certain grace, as
though, having lived so long by his own wits, there was a certain
relief in having his days planned by an external agency.  But he
resented the lack of intercourse with the outer world, and was
overjoyed when, on the fourth day of his imprisonment, he was led
forth to find Lady Capps-Karr.

"After all," she said, "a chep's a chep and a chum's a chum,
whatever happens.  Luckily, our consul here is a friend of my
father's, or they wouldn't have let me see you.  I even tried to
get you out on bail, because I told them you went to Oxford for a
year and spoke English perfectly, but the brutes wouldn't listen."

"I'm afraid there's no use," said Count Borowki gloomily.  "When
they've finished trying me I'll have had a free journey all over
Europe."

"But that's not the only outrageous thing," she continued.  "Those
idiots have thrown Bopes and me out of the Trois Mondes, and the
authorities are trying to get us to leave the city."

"What for?"

"They're trying to put the full blame of that tiresome fire on us."

"Did you start it?"

"We did set some brandy on fire because we wanted to cook some
potato chips in alcohol, and the bartender had gone to bed and left
us there.  But you'd think, from the way the swine talk, that we'd
come there with the sole idea of burning everyone in their beds.
The whole thing's an outrage and Bopes is furious.  He says he'll
never come here again.  I went to the consulate and they agreed
that the whole affair was perfectly disgraceful, and they've wired
the Foreign Office."

Borowki considered for a moment.  "If I could be born over again,"
he said slowly, "I think without any doubt I should choose to be
born an Englishman."

"I could choose to be anything but an American!  By the way, the
Taylors are not presenting Miss Howard at court because of the
disgraceful way the newspapers played up the matter."

"What puzzles me is what made Fifi suspicious," said Borowki.

"Then it was Miss Schwartz who blabbed?"

"Yes.  I thought I had convinced her to come with me, and I knew
that if she didn't, I had only to snap my fingers to the other
girl. . . .  That very afternoon Fifi visited the jeweler's and
discovered I'd paid for the cigarette case with a hundred-dollar
American note I'd lifted from her mother's chiffonier.  She went
straight to the police."

"Without coming to you first!  After all, a chep's a chep--"

"But what I want to know is what made her suspicious enough to
investigate, what turned her against me."

Fifi, at that moment sitting on a high stool in a hotel bar in
Paris and sipping a lemonade, was answering that very question to
an interested bartender.

"I was standing in the hall looking in the mirror," she said, "and
I heard him talking to the English lady--the one who set the hotel
on fire.  And I heard him say, 'After all, my one nightmare is that
she'll turn out to look like her mother.'"  Fifi's voice blazed
with indignation.  "Well, you've seen my mother, haven't you?"

"Yes, and a very fine woman she is."

"After that I knew there was something the matter with him, and I
wondered how much he'd paid for the cigarette case.  So I went up
to see.  They showed me the bill he paid with."

"And you will go to America now?" the barman asked.

Fifi finished her glass; the straw made a gurgling sound in the
sugar at the bottom.

"We've got to go back and testify, and we'll stay a few months
anyhow."  She stood up.  "Bye-bye; I've got a fitting."

They had not got her--not yet.  The Furies had withdrawn a little
and stood in the background with a certain gnashing of teeth.  But
there was plenty of time.

Yet, as Fifi tottered out through the lobby, her face gentle with
new hopes, as she went out looking for completion under the
impression that she was going to the couturier, there was a certain
doubt among the eldest and most experienced of the Furies if they
would get her, after all.






"I DIDN'T GET OVER"


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Esquire (October, 1936)



I was 'sixteen in college and it was our twentieth reunion this
year.  We always called ourselves the "War Babies"--anyhow we were
all in the damn thing and this time there was more talk about the
war than at any previous reunion; perhaps because war's in the air
once more.

Three of us were being talkative on the subject in Pete's back room
the night after commencement, when a classmate came in and sat down
with us.  We knew he was a classmate because we remembered his face
and name vaguely, and he marched with us in the alumni parade, but
he'd left college as a junior and had not been back these twenty
years.

"Hello there--ah--Hib," I said after a moment's hesitation.  The
others took the cue and we ordered a round of beer and went on with
what we were talking about.

"I tell you it was kind of moving when we laid that wreath this
afternoon."  He referred to a bronze plaque commemorating the
'sixteeners who died in the war, "--to read the names of Abe Danzer
and Pop McGowan and those fellows and to think they've been dead
for twenty years and we've only been getting old."

"To be that young again I'd take a chance on another war," I said,
and to the new arrival, "Did you get over, Hib?"

"I was in the army but I didn't get over."

The war and the beer and the hours flowed along.  Each of us shot
off our mouths about something amusing, or unique, or terrible--all
except Hib.  Only when a pause came he said almost apologetically:

"I would have gotten over except that I was supposed to have
slapped a little boy."

We looked at him inquiringly.

"Of course I didn't," he added.  "But there was a row about it."
His voice died away but we encouraged him--we had talked a lot and
he seemed to rate a hearing.

"Nothing much to tell.  The little boy, downtown with his father,
said some officer with a blue M. P. band slapped him in the crowd
and he picked me!  A month afterwards they found he was always
accusing soldiers of slapping, so they let me go.  What made me
think of it was Abe Danzer's name on that plaque this afternoon.
They put me in Leavenworth for a couple of weeks while they
investigated me, and he was in the next cell to mine."

"Abe DANZER!"

He had been sort of a class hero and we all exclaimed aloud in the
same breath.  "Why he was recommended for the D. S. C!"

"I know it."

"What on earth was Abe Danzer doing in Leavenworth?"

Again Hibbing became apologetic.

"Oddly enough I was the man who arrested him.  But he didn't blame
me because it was all in line of duty, and when I turned up in the
next cell a few months later he even laughed about it."

We were all interested now.

"What did you have to arrest him for?"

"Well, I'd been put on Military Police in Kansas City and almost
the first call I got was to take a detail of men with fixed
bayonets to the big hotel there--I forget the name--and go to a
certain room.  When I tapped on the door I never saw so many
shoulder stars and shoulder leaves in my life; there were at least
a brace apiece of generals and colonels.  And in the center stood
Abe Danzer and a girl--a tart--both of them drunk as monkeys.  But
it took me a minute's blinking before I realized what else was the
matter: the girl had on Abe's uniform overcoat and cap and Abe had
on her dress and hat.  They'd gone down in the lobby like that and
run straight into the divisional commander."

We three looked at him, first incredulous, then shocked, finally
believing.  We started to laugh but couldn't quite laugh, only
looked at Hibbing with silly half-smiles on our faces, imagining
ourselves in Abe's position.

"Did he recognize you?" I asked finally.

"Vaguely."

"Then what happened?"

"It was short and sweet.  We changed the clothes on them, put their
heads in cold water, then I stood them between two files of
bayonets and said, forward march."

"And marched old Abe off to prison!" we exclaimed.  "It must have
been a crazy feeling."

"It was.  From the expression in that general's face I thought
they'd probably shoot him.  When they put me in Leavenworth a
couple of months later I was relieved to find he was still alive."

"I can't understand it," Joe Boone said.  "He never drank in
college."

"That all goes back to his D. S. C," said Hibbing.

"You know about that too?"

"Oh yes, we were in the same division--we were from the same
state."

"I thought you didn't get overseas."

"I didn't.  Neither did Abe.  But things seemed to happen to him.
Of course nothing like what you fellows must have seen--"

"How did he get recommended for the D. S. C," I interrupted, "--and
what did it have to do with his taking to drink?"

"Well, those drownings used to get on his nerves and he used to
dream about it--"

"What drownings?  For God's sake, man, you're driving us crazy.
It's like that story about 'what killed the dog.'"

"A lot of people thought he had nothing to do with the drownings.
They blamed the trench mortar."

We groaned--but there was nothing to do but let him tell it his own
way.

"Just what trench mortar?" I asked patiently.

"Rather I mean a Stokes mortar.  Remember those old stove-pipes,
set at forty-five degrees?  You dropped a shell down the mouth."

We remembered.

"Well, the day this happened Abe was in command of what they called
the 'fourth battalion,' marching it out fifteen miles to the rifle
range.  It wasn't really a battalion--it was the machine gun
company, supply company, medical detachment and Headquarters
Company.  The H. Q. Company had the trench mortars and the one-
pounder and the signal corps, band and mounted orderlies--a whole
menagerie in itself.  Abe commanded that company but on this day
most of the medical and supply officers had to go ahead with the
advance, so as ranking first lieutenant he commanded the other
companies besides.  I tell you he must have been proud that day--
twenty-one and commanding a battalion; he rode a horse at the head
of it and probably pretended to himself that he was Stonewall
Jackson.  Say, all this must bore you--it happened on the safe side
of the ocean."

"Go on."

"Well, we were in Georgia then, and they have a lot of those little
muddy rivers with big old rafts they pull across on a slow cable.
You could carry about a hundred men if you packed them in.  When
Abe's 'battalion' got to this river about noon he saw that the
third battalion just ahead wasn't even half over, and he figured it
would be a full hour at the rate that boat was going to and fro.
So he marched the men a little down the shore to get some shade and
was just about to let them have chow when an officer came riding up
all covered with dust and said he was Captain Brown and where was
the officer commanding Headquarters Company.

"'That's me, sir,' said Abe.

"'Well, I just got in to camp and I'm taking command,' the officer
said.  And then, as if it was Abe's fault, 'I had to ride like hell
to catch up with you.  Where's the company?'

"'Right here, sir--and next is the supply, and next is the medical--
I was just going to let them eat--'

"At the look in his eye Abe shut up.  The captain wasn't going to
let them eat yet and probably for no more reason than to show off
his authority.  He wasn't going to let them rest either--he wanted
to see what his company looked like (he'd never seen a Headquarters
Company except on paper).  He thought for a long time and then he
decided that he'd have the trench mortar platoon throw some shells
across the river for practice.  He gave Abe the evil eye again when
Abe told him he only had live shells along; he accepted the
suggestion of sending over a couple of signal men to wigwag if any
farmers were being bumped off.  The signal men crossed on the barge
and when they had wigwagged all clear, ran for cover themselves
because a Stokes mortar wasn't the most accurate thing in the
world.  Then the fun began.

"The shells worked on a time fuse and the river was too wide so the
first one only made a nice little geyser under water.  But the
second one just hit the shore with a crash and a couple of horses
began to stampede on the ferry boat in midstream only fifty yards
down.  Abe thought this might hold his majesty the captain but he
only said they'd have to get used to shell fire--and ordered
another shot.  He was like a spoiled kid with an annoying toy.

"Then it happened, as it did once in a while with those mortars no
matter what you did--the shell stuck in the gun.  About a dozen
people yelled, 'Scatter!' all at once and I scattered as far as
anybody and lay down flat, and what did that damn fool Abe do but
go up and tilt the barrel and spill out the shell.  He'd saved the
mortar but there were just five seconds between him and eternity
and how he got away before the explosion is a mystery to me."



At this point I interrupted Hibbing.

"I thought you said there were some people killed."

"Oh yes--oh but that was later.  The third battalion had crossed by
now so Captain Brown formed the companies and we marched off to the
ferry boat and began embarking.  The second lieutenant in charge of
the embarking spoke to the captain:

"'This old tub's kind of tired--been over-worked all day.  Don't
try to pack them in too tight.'

"But the captain wouldn't listen.  He sent them over like sardines
and each time Abe stood on the rail and shouted:

"'Unbuckle your belts and sling your packs light on your shoulders--'
(this without looking at the captain because he'd realized that
the captain didn't like orders except his own).  But the embarking
officer spoke up once more:

"'That raft's low in the water,' he said.  'I don't like it.  When
you started shooting off that cannon the horses began jumping and
the men ran around and unbalanced it.'

"'Tell the captain,' Abe said.  'He knows everything.'

"The captain overheard this.  'There's just one more load,' he
said.  'And I don't want any more discussion about it.'

"It was a big load, even according to Captain Brown's ideas.  Abe
got up on the side to make his announcement.

"'They ought to know that by this time,' Captain Brown snapped.
'They've heard it often enough.'

"'Not this bunch.'  Abe rattled it off anyhow and the men
unloosened their belts, except a few at the far end who weren't
paying attention.  Or maybe it was so jammed that they couldn't
hear.

"We began to sink when we were half way over, very slowly at first,
just a little water around the shoes, but we officers didn't say
anything for fear of a panic.  It had looked like a small river
from the bank but here in the middle and at the rate we were going,
it began to look like the widest river in the world.

"In two minutes the water was a yard high in the old soup plate and
there wasn't any use concealing things any longer.  For once the
captain was tongue-tied.  Abe got up on the side again and said to
stay calm, and not rock the boat and we'd get there, and made his
speech one last time about slipping off the packs, and told the
ones that could swim to jump off when it got to their hips.  The
men took it well but you could almost tell from their faces which
ones could swim and which couldn't.

"She went down with a big whush! just twenty yards from shore; her
nose grounded in a mud bank five feet under water.

"I don't remember much about the next fifteen minutes.  I dove and
swam out into the river a few yards for a view but it all looked
like a mass of khaki and water with some sound over it that I
remember as a sustained monotone but was composed, I suppose, of
cussing, and a few yells of fright, and even a little kidding and
laughter.  I swam in and helped pull people to shore, but it was a
slow business in our shoes . . .

"When there was nothing more in sight in the river (except one
corner of the barge which had perversely decided to bob up) Captain
Brown and Abe met.  The captain was weak and shaking and his
arrogance was gone.

"'Oh God,' he said.  'What'll I do?'

"Abe took control of things--he fell the men in and got squad
reports to see if anyone was missing.

"There were three missing in the first squad alone and we didn't
wait for the rest--we called for twenty good swimmers to strip and
start diving and as fast as they pulled in a body we started a
medico working on it.  We pulled out twenty-eight bodies and
revived seven.  And one of the divers didn't come up--he was found
floating down the river next day and they gave a medal and a
pension to his widow."

Hibbing paused and then added:  "But I know that's small potatoes
to you fellows in the big time."

"Sounds exciting enough to me," said Joe Boone.  "I had a good time
in France but I spent most of it guarding prisoners at Brest."

"But how about finishing this?" I demanded.  "Why did this drive
Abe hell-raising?"

"That was the captain," said Hibbing slowly.  "A couple of officers
tried to get Abe a citation or something for the trench mortar
thing.  The captain didn't like that, and he began going around
saying that when Abe jumped up on the side of the barge to give the
unsling order, he'd hung on to the ferry cable and pulled it out of
whack.  The captain found a couple of people who agreed with him
but there were others who thought it was overloading and the
commotion the horses made at the shell bursts.  But Abe was never
very happy in the army after that."

There was an emphatic interruption in the person of Pete himself
who said in no uncertain words:

"Mr. Tomlinson and Mr. Boone.  Your wives say they're calling for
the last time.  They say this has been one night too often, and if
you don't get back to the Inn in ten minutes they driving to
Philadelphia."

Tommy and Joe Boone arose reluctantly.

"I'm afraid I've monopolized the evening," said Hibbing.  "And
after what you fellows must have seen."

When they had gone I lingered.

"So Abe wasn't killed in France."

"No--you'll notice all that tablet says is 'died in service.'"

"What did he die of?"

Hibbing hesitated.

"He was shot by a guard trying to escape from Leavenworth.  They'd
given him ten years."

"God!  And what a great guy he was in college."

"I suppose he was to his friends.  But he was a good deal of a snob
wasn't he?"

"Maybe to some people."

"He didn't seem to even recognize a lot of his classmates when he
met them in the army."

"What do you mean?"

"Just what I say.  I told you something that wasn't true tonight.
That captain's name wasn't Brown."

Again I asked him what he meant.

"The captain's name was Hibbing," he said.  "I was that captain,
and when I rode up to join my company he acted as if he'd never
seen me before.  It kind of threw me off--because I used to love
this place.  Well--good night."







JACOB'S LADDER


by
 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)
 

Saturday Evening Post (20 August 1927)



It was a particularly sordid and degraded murder trial, and Jacob
Booth, writhing quietly on a spectators' bench, felt that he had
childishly gobbled something without being hungry, simply because
it was there.  The newspapers had humanized the case, made a cheap,
neat problem play out of an affair of the jungle, so passes that
actually admitted one to the court room were hard to get.  Such a
pass had been tendered him the evening before.

Jacob looked around at the doors, where a hundred people, inhaling
and exhaling with difficulty, generated excitement by their
eagerness, their breathless escape from their own private lives.
The day was hot and there was sweat upon the crowd--obvious sweat
in large dewy beads that would shake off on Jacob if he fought his
way through to the doors.  Someone behind him guessed that the jury
wouldn't be out half an hour.

With the inevitability of a compass needle, his head swung toward
the prisoner's table and he stared once more at the murderess' huge
blank face garnished with red button eyes.  She was Mrs. Choynski,
née Delehanty, and fate had ordained that she should one day seize
a meat ax and divide her sailor lover.  The puffy hands that had
swung the weapon turned an ink bottle about endlessly; several
times she glanced at the crowd with a nervous smile.

Jacob frowned and looked around quickly; he had found a pretty face
and lost it again.  The face had edged sideways into his
consciousness when he was absorbed in a mental picture of Mrs.
Choynski in action; now it was faded back into the anonymity of the
crowd.  It was the face of a dark saint with tender, luminous eyes
and a skin pale and fair.  Twice he searched the room, then he
forgot and sat stiffly and uncomfortably, waiting.

The jury brought in a verdict of murder in the first degree; Mrs.
Choynski squeaked, "Oh, my God!"  The sentence was postponed until
next day.  With a slow rhythmic roll, the crowd pushed out into the
August afternoon.

Jacob saw the face again, realizing why he hadn't seen it before.
It belonged to a young girl beside the prisoner's table and it had
been hidden by the full moon of Mrs. Choynski's head.  Now the
clear, luminous eyes were bright with tears, and an impatient young
man with a squashed nose was trying to attract the attention of the
shoulder.

"Oh, get out!" said the girl, shaking the hand off impatiently.
"Le' me alone, will you?  Le' me alone.  Geeze!"

The man sighed profoundly and stepped back.  The girl embraced the
dazed Mrs. Choynski and another lingerer remarked to Jacob that
they were sisters.  Then Mrs. Choynski was taken off the scene--her
expression absurdly implied an important appointment--and the girl
sat down at the desk and began to powder her face.  Jacob waited;
so did the young man with the squashed nose.  The sergeant came up
brusquely and Jacob gave him five dollars.

"Geeze!" cried the girl to the young man.  "Can't you le' me
alone?"  She stood up.  Her presence, the obscure vibrations of her
impatience, filled the court room.  "Every day itsa same!"

Jacob moved nearer.  The other man spoke to her rapidly:

"Miss Delehanty, we've been more than liberal with you and your
sister and I'm only asking you to carry out your share of the
contract.  Our paper goes to press at--"

Miss Delehanty turned despairingly to Jacob.  "Can you beat it?"
she demanded.  "Now he wants a pitcher of my sister when she was a
baby, and it's got my mother in it too."

"We'll take your mother out."

"I want my mother though.  It's the only one I got of her."

"I'll promise to give you the picture back tomorrow."

"Oh, I'm sicka the whole thing."  Again she was speaking to Jacob,
but without seeing him except as some element of the vague,
omnipresent public.  "It gives me a pain in the eye."  She made a
clicking sound in her teeth that comprised the essence of all human
scorn.

"I have a car outside, Miss Delehanty," said Jacob suddenly.
"Don't you want me to run you home?"

"All right," she answered indifferently.

The newspaper man assumed a previous acquaintance between them; he
began to argue in a low voice as the three moved toward the door.

"Every day it's like this," said Miss Delehanty bitterly.  "These
newspaper guys!"  Outside, Jacob signaled for his car and as it
drove up, large, open and bright, and the chauffeur jumped out and
opened the door, the reporter, on the verge of tears, saw the
picture slipping away and launched into a peroration of pleading.

"Go jump in the river!" said Miss Delehanty, sitting in Jacob's
car.  "Go--jump--in--the--river!"

The extraordinary force of her advice was such that Jacob regretted
the limitations of her vocabulary.  Not only did it evoke an image
of the unhappy journalist hurling himself into the Hudson but it
convinced Jacob that it was the only fitting and adequate way of
disposing of the man.  Leaving him to face his watery destiny, the
car moved off down the street.

"You dealt with him pretty well," Jacob said.

"Sure," she admitted.  "I get sore after a while and then I can
deal with anybody no matter who.  How old would you think I was?"

"How old are you?"

"Sixteen."

She looked at him gravely, inviting him to wonder.  Her face, the
face of a saint, an intense little Madonna, was lifted fragilely
out of the mortal dust of the afternoon.  On the pure parting of
her lips no breath hovered; he had never seen a texture pale and
immaculate as her skin, lustrous and garish as her eyes.  His own
well-ordered person seemed for the first time in his life gross and
well worn to him as he knelt suddenly at the heart of freshness.

"Where do you live?" he asked.  The Bronx, perhaps Yonkers, Albany--
Baffin's Bay.  They could curve over the top of the world, drive
on forever.

Then she spoke, and as the toad words vibrated with life in her
voice, the moment passed:  "Eas' Hun'erd thuyty-thuyd.  Stayin'
with a girl friend there."

They were waiting for a traffic light to change and she exchanged a
haughty glance with a flushed man peering from a flanking taxi.
The man took off his hat hilariously.  "Somebody's stenog," he
cried.  "And oh, what a stenog!"

An arm and hand appeared in the taxi window and pulled him back
into the darkness of the cab.

Miss Delehanty turned to Jacob, a frown, the shadow of a hair in
breadth, appearing between her eyes.  "A lot of 'em know me," she
said.  "We got a lot of publicity and pictures in the paper."

"I'm sorry it turned out badly."

She remembered the event of the afternoon, apparently for the first
time in half an hour.  "She had it comin' to her, mister.  She
never had a chance.  But they'll never send no woman to the chair
in New York State."

"No; that's sure."

"She'll get life."  Surely it was not she who had spoken.  The
tranquillity of her face made her words separate themselves from
her as soon as they were uttered and take on a corporate existence
of their own.

"Did you use to live with her?"

"Me?  Say, read the papers!  I didn't even know she was my sister
till they come and told me.  I hadn't seen her since I was a baby."
She pointed suddenly at one of the world's largest department
stores.  "There's where I work.  Back to the old pick and shovel
day after tomorrow."

"It's going to be a hot night," said Jacob.  "Why don't we ride out
into the country and have dinner?"

She looked at him.  His eyes were polite and kind.  "All right,"
she said.

Jacob was thirty-three.  Once he had possessed a tenor voice with
destiny in it, but laryngitis had despoiled him of it in one
feverish week ten years before.  In despair that concealed not a
little relief, he bought a plantation in Florida and spent five
years turning it into a golf course.  When the land boom came in
1924 he sold his real estate for eight hundred thousand dollars.

Like so many Americans, he valued things rather than cared about
them.  His apathy was neither fear of life nor was it an
affectation; it was the racial violence grown tired.  It was a
humorous apathy.  With no need for money, he had tried--tried
hard--for a year and a half to marry one of the richest women in
America.  If he had loved her, or pretended to, he could have had
her; but he had never been able to work himself up to more than the
formal lie.

In person, he was short, trim and handsome.  Except when he was
overcome by a desperate attack of apathy, he was unusually
charming; he went with a crowd of men who were sure that they were
the best of New York and had by far the best time.  During a
desperate attack of apathy he was like a gruff white bird, ruffled
and annoyed, and disliking mankind with all his heart.

He liked mankind that night under the summer moonshine of the
Borghese Gardens.  The moon was a radiant egg, smooth and bright as
Jenny Delehanty's face across the table; a salt wind blew in over
the big estates collecting flower scents from their gardens and
bearing them to the road-house lawn.  The waiters hopped here and
there like pixies through the hot night, their black backs
disappearing into the gloom, their white shirt fronts gleaming
startlingly out of an unfamiliar patch of darkness.

They drank a bottle of champagne and he told Jenny Delehanty a
story.  "You are the most beautiful thing I have ever seen," he
said, "but as it happens you are not my type and I have no designs
on you at all.  Nevertheless, you can't go back to that store.
Tomorrow I'm going to arrange a meeting between you and Billy
Farrelly, who's directing a picture on Long Island.  Whether he'll
see how beautiful you are I don't know, because I've never
introduced anybody to him before."

There was no shadow, no ripple of a change in her expression, but
there was irony in her eyes.  Things like that had been said to her
before, but the movie director was never available next day.  Or
else she had been tactful enough not to remind men of what they had
promised last night.

"Not only are you beautiful," continued Jacob, "but you are somehow
on the grand scale.  Everything you do--yes, like reaching for that
glass, or pretending to be self-conscious, or pretending to despair
of me--gets across.  If somebody's smart enough to see it, you
might be something of an actress."

"I like Norma Shearer the best.  Do you?"

Driving homeward through the soft night, she put up her face
quietly to be kissed.  Holding her in the hollow of his arm, Jacob
rubbed his cheek against her cheek's softness and then looked down
at her for a long moment.

"Such a lovely child," he said gravely.

She smiled back at him; her hands played conventionally with the
lapels of his coat.  "I had a wonderful time," she whispered.
"Geeze!  I hope I never have to go to court again."

"I hope you don't."

"Aren't you going to kiss me good night?"

"This is Great Neck," he said, "that we're passing through.  A lot
of moving-picture stars live here."

"You're a card, handsome."

"Why?"

She shook her head from side to side and smiled.  "You're a card."

She saw then that he was a type with which she was not acquainted.
He was surprised, not flattered, that she thought him droll.  She
saw that whatever his eventual purpose he wanted nothing of her
now.  Jenny Delehanty learned quickly; she let herself become grave
and sweet and quiet as the night, and as they rolled over
Queensboro Bridge into the city she was half asleep against his
shoulder.


II


He called up Billy Farrelly next day.  "I want to see you," he
said.  "I found a girl I wish you'd take a look at."

"My gosh!" said Farrelly.  "You're the third today."

"Not the third of this kind."

"All right.  If she's white, she can have the lead in a picture I'm
starting Friday."

"Joking aside, will you give her a test?"

"I'm not joking.  She can have the lead, I tell you.  I'm sick of
these lousy actresses.  I'm going out to the Coast next month.  I'd
rather be Constance Talmadge's water boy than own most of these
young--"  His voice was bitter with Irish disgust.  "Sure, bring
her over, Jake.  I'll take a look at her."

Four days later, when Mrs. Choynski, accompanied by two deputy
sheriffs, had gone to Auburn to pass the remainder of her life,
Jacob drove Jenny over the bridge to Astoria, Long Island.

"You've got to have a new name," he said; "and remember you never
had a sister."

"I thought of that," she answered.  "I thought of a name too--
Tootsie Defoe."

"That's rotten," he laughed; "just rotten."

"Well, you think of one if you're so smart."

"How about Jenny--Jenny--oh, anything--Jenny Prince?"

"All right, handsome."

Jenny Prince walked up the steps of the motion-picture studio, and
Billy Farrelly, in a bitter Irish humor, in contempt for himself
and his profession, engaged her for one of the three leads in his
picture.

"They're all the same," he said to Jacob.  "Shucks!  Pick 'em up
out of the gutter today and they want gold plates tomorrow.  I'd
rather be Constance Talmadge's water boy than own a harem full of
them."

"Do you like this girl?"

"She's all right.  She's got a good side face.  But they're all the
same."

Jacob bought Jenny Prince an evening dress for a hundred and eighty
dollars and took her to the Lido that night.  He was pleased with
himself, and excited.  They both laughed a lot and were happy.

"Can you believe you're in the movies?" he demanded.

"They'll probably kick me out tomorrow.  It was too easy."

"No, it wasn't.  It was very good--psychologically.  Billy Farrelly
was in just the one mood--"

"I liked him."

"He's fine," agreed Jacob.  But he was reminded that already
another man was helping to open doors for her success.  "He's a
wild Irishman, look out for him."

"I know.  You can tell when a guy wants to make you."

"What?"

"I don't mean he wanted to make me, handsome.  But he's got that
look about him, if you know what I mean."  She distorted her lovely
face with a wise smile.  "He likes 'em; you could tell that this
afternoon."

They drank a bottle of charged and very alcoholic grape juice.

Presently the head waiter came over to their table.

"This is Miss Jenny Prince," said Jacob.  "You'll see a lot of her,
Lorenzo, because she's just signed a big contract with the
pictures.  Always treat her with the greatest possible respect."

When Lorenzo had withdrawn, Jenny said, "You got the nicest eyes I
ever seen."  It was her effort, the best she could do.  Her face
was serious and sad.  "Honest," she repeated herself, "the nicest
eyes I ever seen.  Any girl would be glad to have eyes like yours."

He laughed, but he was touched.  His hand covered her arm lightly.
"Be good," he said.  "Work hard and I'll be so proud of you--and
we'll have some good times together."

"I always have a good time with you."  Her eyes were full on his,
in his, held there like hands.  Her voice was clear and dry.
"Honest, I'm not kidding about your eyes.  You always think I'm
kidding.  I want to thank you for all you've done for me."

"I haven't done anything, you lunatic.  I saw your face and I was--
I was beholden to it--everybody ought to be beholden to it."

Entertainers appeared and her eyes wandered hungrily away from him.

She was so young--Jacob had never been so conscious of youth
before.  He had always considered himself on the young side until
tonight.

Afterward, in the dark cave of the taxicab, fragrant with the
perfume he had bought for her that day, Jenny came close to him,
clung to him.  He kissed her, without enjoying it.  There was no
shadow of passion in her eyes or on her mouth; there was a faint
spray of champagne on her breath.  She clung nearer, desperately.
He took her hands and put them in her lap.

She leaned away from him resentfully.

"What's the matter?  Don't you like me?"

"I shouldn't have let you have so much champagne."

"Why not?  I've had a drink before.  I was tight once."

"Well, you ought to be ashamed of yourself.  And if I hear of your
taking any more drinks, you'll hear from me."

"You sure have got your nerve, haven't you?"

"What do you do?  Let all the corner soda jerkers maul you around
whenever they want?"

"Oh, shut up!"

For a moment they rode in silence.  Then her hand crept across to
his.  "I like you better than any guy I ever met, and I can't help
that, can I?"

"Dear little Jenny."  He put his arm around her again.

Hesitating tentatively, he kissed her and again he was chilled by
the innocence of her kiss, the eyes that at the moment of contact
looked beyond him out into the darkness of the night, the darkness
of the world.  She did not know yet that splendor was something in
the heart; at the moment when she should realize that and melt into
the passion of the universe he could take her without question or
regret.

"I like you enormously," he said; "better than almost anyone I
know.  I mean that about drinking though.  You mustn't drink."

"I'll do anything you want," she said; and she repeated, looking at
him directly, "Anything."

The car drew up in front of her flat and he kissed her good night.

He rode away in a mood of exultation, living more deeply in her
youth and future than he had lived in himself for years.  Thus,
leaning forward a little on his cane, rich, young and happy, he was
borne along dark streets and light toward a future of his own which
he could not foretell.


III


A month later, climbing into a taxicab with Farrelly one night, he
gave the latter's address to the driver.  "So you're in love with
this baby," said Farrelly pleasantly.  "Very well, I'll get out of
your way."

Jacob experienced a vast displeasure.  "I'm not in love with her,"
he said slowly.  "Billy, I want you to leave her alone."

"Sure!  I'll leave her alone," agreed Farrelly readily.  "I didn't
know you were interested--she told me she couldn't make you."

"The point is you're not interested either," said Jacob.  "If I
thought that you two really cared about each other, do you think
I'd be fool enough to try to stand in the way?  But you don't give
a darn about her, and she's impressed and a little fascinated."

"Sure," agreed Farrelly, bored.  "I wouldn't touch her for
anything."

Jacob laughed.  "Yes, you would.  Just for something to do.  That's
what I object to--anything--anything casual happening to her."

"I see what you mean.  I'll let her alone."

Jacob was forced to be content with that.  He had no faith in Billy
Farrelly, but he guessed that Farrelly liked him and wouldn't
offend him unless stronger feelings were involved.  But the holding
hands under the table tonight had annoyed him.  Jenny lied about it
when he reproached her; she offered to let him take her home
immediately, offered not to speak to Farrelly again all evening.
Then he had seemed silly and pointless to himself.  It would have
been easier, when Farrelly said "So you're in love with this baby,"
to have been able to answer simply, "I am."

But he wasn't.  He valued her now more than he had ever thought
possible.  He watched in her the awakening of a sharply individual
temperament.  She liked quiet and simple things.  She was
developing the capacity to discriminate and shut the trivial and
the unessential out of her life.  He tried giving her books; then
wisely he gave up that and brought her into contact with a variety
of men.  He made situations and then explained them to her, and he
was pleased, as appreciation and politeness began to blossom before
his eyes.  He valued, too, her utter trust in him and the fact that
she used him as a standard for judgments on other men.

Before the Farrelly picture was released, she was offered a two-
year contract on the strength of her work in it--four hundred a
week for six months and an increase on a sliding scale.  But she
would have to go to the Coast.

"Wouldn't you rather have me wait?" she said, as they drove in from
the country one afternoon.  "Wouldn't you rather have me stay here
in New York--near you?"

"You've got to go where your work takes you.  You ought to be able
to look out for yourself.  You're seventeen."

Seventeen--she was as old as he; she was ageless.  Her dark eyes
under a yellow straw hat were as full of destiny as though she had
not just offered to toss destiny away.

"I wonder if you hadn't come along, someone else would of," she
said--"to make me do things, I mean."

"You'd have done them yourself.  Get it out of your head that
you're dependent on me."

"I am.  Everything is, thanks to you."

"It isn't, though," he said emphatically, but he brought no
reasons; he liked her to think that.

"I don't know what I'll do without you.  You're my only friend"--
and she added--"that I care about.  You see?  You understand what I
mean?"

He laughed at her, enjoying the birth of her egotism implied in her
right to be understood.  She was lovelier that afternoon than he
had ever seen her, delicate, resonant and, for him, undesirable.
But sometimes he wondered if that sexlessness wasn't for him alone,
wasn't a side that, perhaps purposely, she turned toward him.  She
was happiest of all with younger men, though she pretended to
despise them.  Billy Farrelly, obligingly and somewhat to her mild
chagrin, had left her alone.

"When will you come out to Hollywood?"

"Soon," he promised.  "And you'll be coming back to New York."

She began to cry.  "Oh, I'll miss you so much!  I'll miss you so
much!"  Large tears of distress ran down her warm ivory cheeks.
"Oh, geeze!" she cried softly.  "You been good to me!  Where's your
hand?  Where's your hand?  You been the best friend anybody ever
had.  Where am I ever going to find a friend like you?"

She was acting now, but a lump arose in his throat and for a moment
a wild idea ran back and forth in his mind, like a blind man,
knocking over its solid furniture--to marry her.  He had only to
make the suggestion, he knew, and she would become close to him and
know no one else, because he would understand her forever.

Next day, in the station, she was pleased with her flowers, her
compartment, with the prospect of a longer trip than she had ever
taken before.  When she kissed him good-by her deep eyes came close
to his again and she pressed against him as if in protest against
the separation.  Again she cried, but he knew that behind her tears
lay the happiness of adventure in new fields.  As he walked out of
the station, New York was curiously empty.  Through her eyes he had
seen old colors once more; now they had faded back into the gray
tapestry of the past.  The next day he went to an office high in a
building on Park Avenue and talked to a famous specialist he had
not visited for a decade.

"I want you to examine the larynx again," he said.  "There's not
much hope, but something might have changed the situation."

He swallowed a complicated system of mirrors.  He breathed in and
out, made high and low sounds, coughed at a word of command.  The
specialist fussed and touched.  Then he sat back and took out his
eyeglass.  "There's no change," he said.  "The cords are not
diseased--they're simply worn out.  It isn't anything that can be
treated."

"I thought so," said Jacob, humbly, as if he had been guilty of an
impertinence.  "That's practically what you told me before.  I
wasn't sure how permanent it was."

He had lost something when he came out of the building on Park
Avenue--a half hope, the love child of a wish, that some day--

"New York desolate," he wired her.  "The night clubs all closed.
Black wreaths on the Statue of Civic Virtue.  Please work hard and
be remarkably happy."

"Dear Jacob," she wired back, "miss you so.  You are the nicest man
that ever lived and I mean it, dear.  Please don't forget me.  Love
from Jenny."

Winter came.  The picture Jenny had made in the East was released,
together with preliminary interviews and articles in the fan
magazines.  Jacob sat in his apartment, playing the Kreutzer Sonata
over and over on his new phonograph, and read her meager and
stilted but affectionate letters and the articles which said she
was a discovery of Billy Farrelly's.  In February he became engaged
to an old friend, now a widow.

They went to Florida and were suddenly snarling at each other in
hotel corridors and over bridge games, so they decided not to go
through with it after all.  In the spring he took a stateroom on
the Paris, but three days before sailing he disposed of it and went
to California.


IV


Jenny met him at the station, kissed him and clung to his arm in
the car all the way to the Ambassador Hotel.  "Well, the man came,"
she cried.  "I never thought I'd get him to come.  I never did."

Her accent betrayed an effort at control.  The emphatic "Geeze!"
with all the wonder, horror, disgust or admiration she could put in
it was gone, but there was no mild substitute, no "swell" or
"grand."  If her mood required expletives outside her repertoire,
she kept silent.

But at seventeen, months are years and Jacob perceived a change in
her; in no sense was she a child any longer.  There were fixed
things in her mind--not distractions, for she was instinctively too
polite for that, but simply things there.  No longer was the studio
a lark and a wonder and a divine accident; no longer "for a nickel
I wouldn't turn up tomorrow."  It was part of her life.
Circumstances were stiffening into a career which went on
independently of her casual hours.

"If this picture is as good as the other--I mean if I make a
personal hit again, Hecksher'll break the contract.  Everybody
that's seen the rushes says it's the first one I've had sex appeal
in."

"What are the rushes?"

"When they run off what they took the day before.  They say it's
the first time I've had sex appeal."

"I don't notice it," he teased her.

"You wouldn't.  But I have."

"I know you have," he said, and, moved by an ill-considered
impulse, he took her hand.

She glanced quickly at him.  He smiled--half a second too late.
Then she smiled and her glowing warmth veiled his mistake.

"Jake," she cried, "I could bawl, I'm so glad you're here!  I got
you a room at the Ambassador.  They were full, but they kicked out
somebody because I said I had to have a room.  I'll send my car
back for you in half an hour.  It's good you came on Sunday,
because I got all day free."

They had luncheon in the furnished apartment she had leased for the
winter.  It was 1920 Moorish, taken over complete from a favorite
of yesterday.  Someone had told her it was horrible, for she joked
about it; but when he pursued the matter he found that she didn't
know why.

"I wish they had more nice men out here," she said once during
luncheon.  "Of course there's a lot of nice ones, but I mean--Oh,
you know, like in New York--men that know even more than a girl
does, like you."

After luncheon he learned that they were going to tea.  "Not
today," he objected.  "I want to see you alone."

"All right," she agreed doubtfully.  "I suppose I could telephone.
I thought--It's a lady that writes for a lot of newspapers and I've
never been asked there before.  Still, if you don't want to--"

Her face had fallen a little and Jacob assured her that he couldn't
be more willing.  Gradually he found that they were going not to
one party but to three.

"In my position, it's sort of the thing to do," she explained.
"Otherwise you don't see anybody except the people on your own lot,
and that's narrow."  He smiled.  "Well, anyhow," she finished--
"anyhow, you smart Aleck, that's what everybody does on Sunday
afternoon."

At the first tea, Jacob noticed that there was an enormous
preponderance of women over men, and of supernumeraries--lady
journalists, cameramen's daughters, cutters' wives--over people of
importance.  A young Latin named Raffino appeared for a brief
moment, spoke to Jenny and departed; several stars passed through,
asking about children's health with a domesticity that was somewhat
overpowering.  Another group of celebrities posed immobile, statue-
like, in a corner.  There was a somewhat inebriated and very much
excited author apparently trying to make engagements with one girl
after another.  As the afternoon waned, more people were suddenly a
little tight; the communal voice was higher in pitch and greater in
volume as Jacob and Jenny went out the door.

At the second tea, young Raffino--he was an actor, one of
innumerable hopeful Valentinos--appeared again for a minute, talked
to Jenny a little longer, a little more attentively this time, and
went out.  Jacob gathered that this party was not considered to
have quite the swagger of the other.  There was a bigger crowd
around the cocktail table.  There was more sitting down.

Jenny, he saw, drank only lemonade.  He was surprised and pleased
at her distinction and good manners.  She talked to one person,
never to everyone within hearing; then she listened, without
finding it necessary to shift her eyes about.  Deliberate or not on
her part, he noticed that at both teas she was sooner or later
talking to the guest of most consequence.  Her seriousness, her air
of saying "This is my opportunity of learning something," beckoned
their egotism imperatively near.

When they left to drive to the last party, a buffet supper, it was
dark and the electric legends of hopeful real-estate brokers were
gleaming to some vague purpose on Beverly Hills.  Outside Grauman's
Theater a crowd was already gathered in the thin, warm rain.

"Look!  Look!" she cried.  It was the picture she had finished a
month before.

They slid out of the thin Rialto of Hollywood Boulevard and into
the deep gloom of a side street; he put his arm about her and
kissed her.

"Dear Jake."  She smiled up at him.

"Jenny, you're so lovely; I didn't know you were so lovely."

She looked straight ahead, her face mild and quiet.  A wave of
annoyance passed over him and he pulled her toward him urgently,
just as the car stopped at a lighted door.

They went into a bungalow crowded with people and smoke.  The
impetus of the formality which had begun the afternoon was long
exhausted; everything had become at once vague and strident.

"This is Hollywood," explained an alert talkative lady who had been
in his vicinity all day.  "No airs on Sunday afternoon."  She
indicated the hostess.  "Just a plain, simple, sweet girl."  She
raised her voice:  "Isn't that so, darling--just a plain, simple,
sweet girl?"

The hostess said, "Yeah.  Who is?"  And Jacob's informant lowered
her voice again:  "But that little girl of yours is the wisest one
of the lot."

The totality of the cocktails Jacob had swallowed was affecting him
pleasantly, but try as he might, the plot of the party--the key on
which he could find ease and tranquillity--eluded him.  There was
something tense in the air--something competitive and insecure.
Conversations with the men had a way of becoming empty and
overjovial or else melting off into a sort of suspicion.  The women
were nicer.  At eleven o'clock, in the pantry, he suddenly realized
that he hadn't seen Jenny for an hour.  Returning to the living
room, he saw her come in, evidently from outside, for she tossed a
raincoat from her shoulders.  She was with Raffino.  When she came
up, Jacob saw that she was out of breath and her eyes were very
bright.  Raffino smiled at Jacob pleasantly and negligently; a few
moments later, as he turned to go, he bent and whispered in Jenny's
ear and she looked at him without smiling as she said good night.

"I got to be on the lot at eight o'clock," she told Jacob
presently.  "I'll look like an old umbrella unless I go home.  Do
you mind, dear?"

"Heavens, no!"

Their car drove over one of the interminable distances of the thin,
stretched city.

"Jenny," he said, "you've never looked like you were tonight.  Put
your head on my shoulder."

"I'd like to.  I'm tired."

"I can't tell you how radiant you've got to be."

"I'm just the same."

"No, you're not."  His voice suddenly became a whisper, trembling
with emotion.  "Jenny, I'm in love with you."

"Jacob, don't be silly."

"I'm in love with you.  Isn't it strange, Jenny?  It happened just
like that."

"You're not in love with me."

"You mean the fact doesn't interest you."  He was conscious of a
faint twinge of fear.

She sat up out of the circle of his arm.  "Of course it interests
me; you know I care more about you than anything in the world."

"More than about Mr. Raffino?"

"Oh--my--gosh!" she protested scornfully.  "Raffino's nothing but a
baby."

"I love you, Jenny."

"No, you don't."

He tightened his arm.  Was it his imagination or was there a small
instinctive resistance in her body?  But she came close to him and
he kissed her.

"You know that's crazy about Raffino."

"I suppose I'm jealous."  Feeling insistent and unattractive, he
released her.  But the twinge of fear had become an ache.  Though
he knew that she was tired and that she felt strange at this new
mood in him, he was unable to let the matter alone.  "I didn't
realize how much a part of my life you were.  I didn't know what it
was I missed--but I know now.  I wanted you near."

"Well, here I am."

He took her words as an invitation, but this time she relaxed
wearily in his arms.  He held her thus for the rest of the way, her
eyes closed, her short hair falling straight back, like a girl
drowned.

"The car'll take you to the hotel," she said when they reached the
apartment.  "Remember, you're having lunch with me at the studio
tomorrow."

Suddenly they were in a discussion that was almost an argument, as
to whether it was too late for him to come in.  Neither could yet
appreciate the change that his declaration had made in the other.
Abruptly they had become like different people, as Jacob tried
desperately to turn back the clock to that night in New York six
months before, and Jenny watched this mood, which was more than
jealousy and less than love, snow under, one by one, the qualities
of consideration and understanding which she knew in him and with
which she felt at home.

"But I don't love you like that," she cried.  "How can you come to
me all at once and ask me to love you like that?"

"You love Raffino like that!"

"I swear I don't!  I never even kissed him--not really!"

"H'm!"  He was a gruff white bird now.  He could scarcely credit
his own unpleasantness, but something illogical as love itself
urged him on.  "An actor!"

"Oh, Jake," she cried, "please lemme go.  I never felt so terrible
and mixed up in my life."

"I'll go," he said suddenly.  "I don't know what's the matter,
except that I'm so mad about you that I don't know what I'm saying.
I love you and you don't love me.  Once you did, or thought you
did, but that's evidently over."

"But I do love you."  She thought for a moment; the red-and-green
glow of a filling station on the corner lit up the struggle in her
face.  "If you love me that much, I'll marry you tomorrow."

"Marry me!" he exclaimed.  She was so absorbed in what she had just
said that she did not notice.

"I'll marry you tomorrow," she repeated.  "I like you better than
anybody in the world and I guess I'll get to love you the way you
want me to."  She uttered a single half-broken sob.  "But--I didn't
know this was going to happen.  Please let me alone tonight."

Jacob didn't sleep.  There was music from the Ambassador grill till
late and a fringe of working girls hung about the carriage entrance
waiting for their favorites to come out.  Then a long-protracted
quarrel between a man and a woman began in the hall outside, moved
into the next room and continued as a low two-toned mumble through
the intervening door.  He went to the window sometime toward three
o'clock and stared out into the clear splendor of the California
night.  Her beauty rested outside on the grass, on the damp,
gleaming roofs of the bungalows, all around him, borne up like
music on the night.  It was in the room, on the white pillow, it
rustled ghostlike in the curtains.  His desire recreated her until
she lost all vestiges of the old Jenny, even of the girl who had
met him at the train that morning.  Silently, as the night hours
went by, he molded her over into an image of love--an image that
would endure as long as love itself, or even longer--not to perish
till he could say, "I never really loved her."  Slowly he created
it with this and that illusion from his youth, this and that sad
old yearning, until she stood before him identical with her old
self only by name.

Later, when he drifted off into a few hours' sleep, the image he
had made stood near him, lingering in the room, joined in mystic
marriage to his heart.


V


"I won't marry you unless you love me," he said, driving back from
the studio.  She waited, her hands folded tranquilly in her lap.
"Do you think I'd want you if you were unhappy and unresponsive,
Jenny--knowing all the time you didn't love me?"

"I do love you.  But not that way."

"What's 'that way'?"

She hesitated, her eyes were far off.  "You don't--thrill me, Jake.
I don't know--there have been some men that sort of thrilled me
when they touched me, dancing or anything.  I know it's crazy,
but--"

"Does Raffino thrill you?"

"Sort of, but not so much."

"And I don't at all?"

"I just feel comfortable and happy with you."

He should have urged her that that was best, but he couldn't say
it, whether it was an old truth or an old lie.

"Anyhow, I told you I'll marry you; perhaps you might thrill me
later."

He laughed, stopped suddenly.  "If I didn't thrill you, as you call
it, why did you seem to care so much last summer?"

"I don't know.  I guess I was young.  You never know how you once
felt, do you?"

She had become elusive to him, with that elusiveness that gives a
hidden significance to the least significant remarks.  And with the
clumsy tools of jealousy and desire, he was trying to create the
spell that is ethereal and delicate as the dust on a moth's wing.

"Listen, Jake," she said suddenly.  "That lawyer my sister had--
that Scharnhorst--called up the studio this afternoon."

"Your sister's all right," he said absently, and he added:  "So a
lot of men thrill you."

"Well, if I've felt it with a lot of men, it couldn't have anything
to do with real love, could it?" she said hopefully.

"But your theory is that love couldn't come without it."

"I haven't got any theories or anything.  I just told you how I
felt.  You know more than me."

"I don't know anything at all."

There was a man waiting in the lower hall of the apartment house.
Jenny went up and spoke to him; then, turning back to Jake, said in
a low voice:  "It's Scharnhorst.  Would you mind waiting downstairs
while he talks to me?  He says it won't take half an hour."

He waited, smoking innumerable cigarettes.  Ten minutes passed.
Then the telephone operator beckoned him.

"Quick!" she said.  "Miss Prince wants you on the telephone."

Jenny's voice was tense and frightened.  "Don't let Scharnhorst get
out," she said.  "He's on the stairs, maybe in the elevator.  Make
him come back here."

Jacob put down the receiver just as the elevator clicked.  He stood
in front of the elevator door, barring the man inside.  "Mr.
Scharnhorst?"

"Yeah."  The face was keen and suspicious.

"Will you come up to Miss Prince's apartment again?  There's
something she forgot to say."

"I can see her later."  He attempted to push past Jacob.  Seizing
him by the shoulders, Jacob shoved him back into the cage, slammed
the door and pressed the button for the eighth floor.

"I'll have you arrested for this!" Scharnhorst remarked.  "Put into
jail for assault!"

Jacob held him firmly by the arms.  Upstairs, Jenny, with panic in
her eyes, was holding open her door.  After a slight struggle, the
lawyer went inside.

"What is it?" demanded Jacob.

"Tell him, you," she said.  "Oh, Jake, he wants twenty thousand
dollars!"

"What for?"

"To get my sister a new trial."

"But she hasn't a chance!" exclaimed Jacob.  He turned to
Scharnhorst.  "You ought to know she hasn't a chance."

"There are some technicalities," said the lawyer uneasily--"things
that nobody but an attorney would understand.  She's very unhappy
there, and her sister so rich and successful.  Mrs. Choynski
thought she ought to get another chance."

"You've been up there working on her, heh?"

"She sent for me."

"But the blackmail idea was your own.  I suppose if Miss Prince
doesn't feel like supplying twenty thousand to retain your firm,
it'll come out that she's the sister of the notorious murderess."

Jenny nodded.  "That's what he said."

"Just a minute!"  Jacob walked to the phone.  "Western Union,
please.  Western Union?  Please take a telegram."  He gave the name
and address of a man high in the political world of New York.
"Here's the message:


The convict Choynski threatening her sister, who is a picture
actress, with exposure of relationship stop Can you arrange it with
warden that she be cut off from visitors until I can get East and
explain the situation stop Also wire me if two witnesses to an
attempted blackmailing scene are enough to disbar a lawyer in New
York if charges proceed from such a quarter as Read, Van Tyne,
Biggs & Company, or my uncle the surrogate stop Answer Ambassador
Hotel, Los Angeles.

Jacob C. K. Booth"


He waited until the clerk had repeated the message.  "Now, Mr.
Scharnhorst," he said, "the pursuit of art should not be
interrupted by such alarms and excursions.  Miss Prince, as you
see, is considerably upset.  It will show in her work tomorrow and
a million people will be just a little disappointed.  So we won't
ask her for any decisions.  In fact you and I will leave Los
Angeles on the same train tonight."


VI


The summer passed.  Jacob went about his useless life, sustained by
the knowledge that Jenny was coming East in the fall.  By fall
there would have been many Raffinos, he supposed, and she would
find that the thrill of their hands and eyes--and lips--was much
the same.  They were the equivalent, in a different world, of the
affairs at a college house party, the undergraduates of a casual
summer.  And if it was still true that her feeling for him was less
than romantic, then he would take her anyway, letting romance come
after marriage as--so he had always heard--it had come to many
wives before.

Her letters fascinated and baffled him.  Through the ineptitude of
expression he caught gleams of emotion--an ever-present gratitude,
a longing to talk to him, and a quick, almost frightened reaction
toward him, from--he could only imagine--some other man.  In August
she went on location; there were only post cards from some lost
desert in Arizona, then for a while nothing at all.  He was glad of
the break.  He had thought over all the things that might have
repelled her--of his portentousness, his jealousy, his manifest
misery.  This time it would be different.  He would keep control of
the situation.  She would at least admire him again, see in him the
incomparably dignified and well adjusted life.

Two nights before her arrival Jacob went to see her latest picture
in a huge nightbound vault on Broadway.  It was a college story.
She walked into it with her hair knotted on the crown of her head--
a familiar symbol for dowdiness--inspired the hero to a feat of
athletic success and faded out of it, always subsidiary to him, in
the shadow of the cheering stands.  But there was something new in
her performance; for the first time the arresting quality he had
noticed in her voice a year before had begun to get over on the
screen.  Every move she made, every gesture, was poignant and
important.  Others in the audience saw it too.  He fancied he could
tell this by some change in the quality of their breathing, by a
reflection of her clear, precise expression in their casual and
indifferent faces.  Reviewers, too, were aware of it, though most
of them were incapable of any precise definition of a personality.

But his first real consciousness of her public existence came from
the attitude of her fellow passengers disembarking from the train.
Busy as they were with friends or baggage, they found time to stare
at her, to call their friends' attention, to repeat her name.

She was radiant.  A communicative joy flowed from her and around
her, as though her perfumer had managed to imprison ecstasy in a
bottle.  Once again there was a mystical transfusion, and blood
began to course again through the hard veins of New York--there was
the pleasure of Jacob's chauffeur when she remembered him, the
respectful frisking of the bell boys at the Plaza, the nervous
collapse of the head waiter at the restaurant where they dined.  As
for Jacob, he had control of himself now.  He was gentle,
considerate and polite, as it was natural for him to be--but as, in
this case, he had found it necessary to plan.  His manner promised
and outlined an ability to take care of her, a will to be leaned
on.

After dinner, their corner of the restaurant cleared gradually of
the theater crowd and the sense of being alone settled over them.
Their faces became grave, their voices very quiet.

"It's been five months since I saw you."  He looked down at his
hands thoughtfully.  "Nothing has changed with me, Jenny.  I love
you with all my heart.  I love your face and your faults and your
mind and everything about you.  The one thing I want in this world
is to make you happy."

"I know," she whispered.  "Gosh, I know!"

"Whether there's still only affection in your feeling toward me, I
don't know.  If you'll marry me, I think you'll find that the other
things will come, will be there before you know it--and what you
called a thrill will seem a joke to you, because life isn't for
boys and girls, Jenny, but for men and women."

"Jacob," she whispered, "you don't have to tell me.  I know."

He raised his eyes for the first time.  "What do you mean--you
know?"

"I get what you mean.  Oh, this is terrible!  Jacob, listen!  I
want to tell you.  Listen, dear, don't say anything.  Don't look at
me.  Listen, Jacob, I fell in love with a man."

"What?" he asked blankly.

"I fell in love with somebody.  That's what I mean about
understanding about a silly thrill."

"You mean you're in love with me?"

"No."

The appalling monosyllable floated between them, danced and
vibrated over the table:  "No--no--no--no--no!"

"Oh, this is awful!" she cried.  "I fell in love with a man I met
on location this summer.  I didn't mean to--I tried not to, but
first thing I knew there I was in love and all the wishing in the
world couldn't help it.  I wrote you and asked you to come, but I
didn't send the letter, and there I was, crazy about this man and
not daring to speak to him, and bawling myself to sleep every
night."

"An actor?" he heard himself saying in a dead voice.  "Raffino?"

"Oh, no, no, no!  Wait a minute, let me tell you.  It went on for
three weeks and I honestly wanted to kill myself, Jake.  Life
wasn't worth while unless I could have him.  And one night we got
in a car by accident alone and he just caught me and made me tell
him I loved him.  He knew--he couldn't help knowing."

"It just--swept over you," said Jacob steadily.  "I see."

"Oh, I knew you'd understand, Jake!  You understand everything.
You're the best person in the world, Jake, and don't I know it?"

"You're going to marry him?"

Slowly she nodded her head.  "I said I'd have to come East first
and see you."  As her fear lessened, the extent of his grief became
more apparent to her and her eyes filled with tears.  "It only
comes once, Jake, like that.  That's what kept in my mind all those
weeks I didn't hardly speak to him--if you lose it once, it'll
never come like that again and then what do you want to live for?
He was directing the picture--he was the same about me."

"I see."

As once before, her eyes held his like hands.  "Oh, Ja-a-ake!"  In
that sudden croon of compassion, all-comprehending and deep as a
song, the first force of the shock passed off.  Jacob's teeth came
together again and he struggled to conceal his misery.  Mustering
his features into an expression of irony, he called for the check.
It seemed an hour later they were in a taxi going toward the Plaza
Hotel.

She clung to him.  "Oh, Jake, say it's all right!  Say you
understand!  Darling Jake, my best friend, my only friend, say you
understand!"

"Of course I do, Jenny."  His hand patted her back automatically.

"Oh-h-h, Jake, you feel just awful, don't you?"

"I'll survive."

"Oh-h-h, Jake!"

They reached the hotel.  Before they got out Jenny glanced at her
face in her vanity mirror and turned up the collar of her fur cape.
In the lobby, Jacob ran into several people and said, "Oh, I'm so
sorry," in a strained, unconvincing voice.  The elevator waited.
Jenny, her face distraught and tearful, stepped in and held out her
hand toward him with the fist clenched helplessly.

"Jake," she said once more.

"Good night, Jenny."

She turned her face to the wire wall of the cage.  The gate
clanged.

"Hold on!" he almost said.  "Do you realize what you're doing,
starting that car like that?"

He turned and went out the door blindly.  "I've lost her," he
whispered to himself, awed and frightened.  "I've lost her!"

He walked over Fifty-ninth Street to Columbus Circle and then down
Broadway.  There were no cigarettes in his pocket--he had left them
at the restaurant--so he went into a tobacco store.  There was some
confusion about the change and someone in the store laughed.

When he came out he stood for a moment puzzled.  Then the heavy
tide of realization swept over him and beyond him, leaving him
stunned and exhausted.  It swept back upon him and over him again.
As one rereads a tragic story with the defiant hope that it will
end differently, so he went back to the morning, to the beginning,
to the previous year.  But the tide came thundering back with the
certainty that she was cut off from him forever in a high room at
the Plaza Hotel.

He walked down Broadway.  In great block letters over the porte-
cochère of the Capitol Theater five words glittered out into the
night:  "Carl Barbour and Jenny Prince."

The name startled him, as if a passer-by had spoken it.  He stopped
and stared.  Other eyes rose to that sign, people hurried by him
and turned in.

Jenny Prince.

Now that she no longer belonged to him, the name assumed a
significance entirely its own.

It hung there, cool and impervious, in the night, a challenge, a
defiance.

Jenny Prince.

"Come and rest upon my loveliness," it said.  "Fulfill your secret
dreams in wedding me for an hour."

Jenny Prince.

It was untrue--she was back at the Plaza Hotel, in love with
somebody.  But the name, with its bright insistence, rode high upon
the night.

"I love my dear public.  They are all so sweet to me."

The wave appeared far off, sent up whitecaps, rolled toward him
with the might of pain, washed over him.  "Never any more.  Never
any more."  The wave beat upon him, drove him down, pounding with
hammers of agony on his ears.  Proud and impervious, the name on
high challenged the night.

Jenny Prince.

She was there!  All of her, the best of her--the effort, the power,
the triumph, the beauty.

Jacob moved forward with a group and bought a ticket at the window.

Confused, he stared around the great lobby.  Then he saw an
entrance and walking in, found himself a place in the fast-
throbbing darkness.


THE END



JOSEPHINE: A WOMAN WITH A PAST


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


The Saturday Evening Post (6 September 1930)



I


Driving slowly through New Haven, two of the young girls became
alert.  Josephine and Lillian darted soft frank glances into
strolling groups of three or four undergraduates, into larger
groups on corners, which swung about as one man to stare at their
receding heads.  Believing that they recognized an acquaintance in
a solitary loiterer, they waved wildly, whereupon the youth's mouth
fell open, and as they turned the next corner he made a dazed
dilatory gesture with his hand.  They laughed.  'We'll send him a
post card when we get back to school tonight, to see if it really
was him.'

Adele Craw, sitting on one of the little seats, kept on talking to
Miss Chambers, the chaperon.  Glancing sideways at her, Lillian
winked at Josephine without batting an eye, but Josephine had gone
into a reverie.

This was New Haven--city of her adolescent dreams, of glittering
proms where she would move on air among men as intangible as the
tunes they danced to.  City sacred as Mecca, shining as Paris,
hidden as Timbuktu.  Twice a year the life-blood of Chicago, her
home, flowed into it, and twice a year flowed back, bringing
Christmas or bringing summer.  Bingo, bingo, bingo, that's the
lingo; love of mine, I pine for one of your glances; the darling
boy on the left there; underneath the stars I wait.

Seeing it for the first time, she found herself surprisingly
unmoved--the men they passed seemed young and rather bored with the
possibilities of the day, glad of anything to stare at; seemed
undynamic and purposeless against the background of bare elms,
lakes of dirty snow and buildings crowded together under the
February sky.  A wisp of hope, a well-turned-out derby-crowned man,
hurrying with stick and suitcase towards the station, caught her
attention, but his reciprocal glance was too startled, too
ingenuous.  Josephine wondered at the extent of her own
disillusionment.

She was exactly seventeen and she was blasé.  Already she had been
a sensation and a scandal; she had driven mature men to a state of
disequilibrium; she had, it was said, killed her grandfather, but
as he was over eighty at the time perhaps he just died.  Here and
there in the Middle West were discouraged little spots which upon
inspection turned out to be the youths who had once looked full
into her green and wistful eyes.  But her love affair of last
summer had ruined her faith in the all-sufficiency of men.  She had
grown bored with the waning September days--and it seemed as though
it had happened once too often.  Christmas with its provocative
shortness, its travelling glee clubs, had brought no one new.
There remained to her only a persistent, a physical hope; hope in
her stomach that there was someone whom she would love more than he
loved her.

They stopped at a sporting-goods store and Adele Craw, a pretty
girl with clear honourable eyes and piano legs, purchased the
sporting equipment which was the reason for their trip--they were
the spring hockey committee for the school.  Adele was in addition
the president of the senior class and the school's ideal girl.  She
had lately seen a change for the better in Josephine Perry--rather
as an honest citizen might guilelessly approve a speculator retired
on his profits.  On the other hand, Adele was simply incomprehensible
to Josephine--admirable, without doubt, but a member of another
species.  Yet with the charming adaptability that she had hitherto
reserved for men, Josephine was trying hard not to disillusion her,
trying to be honestly interested in the small, neat, organized
politics of the school.

Two men who had stood with their backs to them at another counter
turned to leave the store, when they caught sight of Miss Chambers
and Adele.  Immediately they came forward.  The one who spoke to
Miss Chambers was thin and rigid of face.  Josephine recognized him
as Miss Brereton's nephew, a student at New Haven, who had spent
several week-ends with his aunt at the school.  The other man
Josephine had never seen before.  He was tall and broad, with blond
curly hair and an open expression in which strength of purpose and
a nice consideration were pleasantly mingled.  It was not the sort
of face that generally appealed to Josephine.  The eyes were
obviously without a secret, with a sidewise gambol, without a
desperate flicker to show that they had a life of their own apart
from the mouth's speech.  The mouth itself was large and masculine;
its smile was an act of kindness and control.  It was rather with
curiosity as to the sort of man who would be attentive to Adele
Craw that Josephine continued to look at him, for his voice that
obviously couldn't lie greeted Adele as if this meeting was the
pleasant surprise of his day.

In a moment Josephine and Lillian were called over and introduced.

'This is Mr Waterbury'--that was Miss Brereton's nephew--'and Mr
Dudley Knowleton.'

Glancing at Adele, Josephine saw on her face an expression of
tranquil pride, even of possession.  Mr Knowleton spoke politely,
but it was obvious that though he looked at the younger girls he
did not quite see them.  But since they were friends of Adele's he
made suitable remarks, eliciting the fact that they were both
coming down to New Haven to their first prom the following week.
Who were their hosts?  Sophomores; he knew them slightly.
Josephine thought that was unnecessarily superior.  Why, they were
the charter members of the Loving Brothers' Association--Ridgeway
Saunders and George Davey--and on the glee-club trip the girls they
picked out to rush in each city considered themselves a sort of
élite, second only to the girls they asked to New Haven.

'And oh, I've got some bad news for you,' Knowleton said to Adele.
'You may be leading the prom.  Jack Coe went to the infirmary with
appendicitis, and against my better judgement I'm the provisional
chairman.'  He looked apologetic.  'Being one of those stone-age
dancers, the two-step king, I don't see how I ever got on the
committee at all.'

When the car was on its way back to Miss Brereton's school,
Josephine and Lillian bombarded Adele with questions.

'He's an old friend from Cincinnati,' she explained demurely.
'He's captain of the baseball team and he was last man for Skull
and Bones.'

'You're going to the prom with him?'

'Yes.  You see, I've known him all my life.'

Was there a faint implication in this remark that only those who
had known Adele all her life knew her at her true worth?

'Are you engaged?' Lillian demanded.

Adele laughed.  'Mercy, I don't think of such matters!  It doesn't
seem to be time for that sort of thing yet, does it?'  ('Yes,'
interpolated Josephine silently.)'  We're just good friends.  I
think there can be a perfectly healthy friendship between a man and
a girl without a lot of--'

'Mush,' supplied Lillian helpfully.

'Well, yes, but I don't like that word.  I was going to say without
a lot of sentimental romantic things that ought to come later.'

'Bravo, Adele!' said Miss Chambers somewhat perfunctorily.

But Josephine's curiosity was unappeased.

'Doesn't he say he's in love with you, and all that sort of thing?'

'Mercy, no!  Dud doesn't believe in such stuff any more than I do.
He's got enough to do at New Haven, serving on the committees and
the team.'

'Oh!' said Josephine.

She was oddly interested.  That two people who were attracted to
each other should never even say anything about it but be content
to 'not believe in such stuff', was something new in her
experience.  She had known girls who had no beaux, others who
seemed to have no emotions, and still others who lied about what
they thought and did; but here was a girl who spoke of the
attentions of the last man tapped for Skull and Bones as if they
were two of the limestone gargoyles that Miss Chambers had pointed
out on the just completed Harkness Hall.  Yet Adele seemed happy--
happier than Josephine, who had always believed that boys and girls
were made for nothing but each other, and as soon as possible.

In the light of his popularity and achievements, Knowleton seemed
more attractive.  Josephine wondered if he would remember her and
dance with her at the prom, or if that depended on how well he knew
her escort, Ridgeway Saunders.  She tried to remember whether she
had smiled at him when he was looking at her.  If she had really
smiled he would remember her and dance with her.  She was still
trying to be sure of that over her two French irregular verbs and
her ten stanzas of the Ancient Mariner that night; but she was
still uncertain when she fell asleep.


II


Three gay young sophomores, the founders of the Loving Brothers'
Association, took a house together for Josephine, Lillian and a
girl from Farmington and their three mothers.  For the girls it was
a first prom, and they arrived at New Haven with all the
nervousness of the condemned; but a Sheffield fraternity tea in the
afternoon yielded up such a plethora of boys from home, and boys
who had visited there and friends of those boys, and new boys with
unknown possibilities but obvious eagerness, that they were glowing
with self-confidence as they poured into the glittering crowd that
thronged the armoury at ten.

It was impressive; for the first time Josephine was at a function
run by men upon men's standards--an outward projection of the New
Haven world from which women were excluded and which went on
mysteriously behind the scenes.  She perceived that their three
escorts, who had once seemed the very embodiments of worldliness,
were modest fry in this relentless microcosm of accomplishment and
success.  A man's world!  Looking around her at the glee-club
concert, Josephine had felt a grudging admiration for the good
fellowship, the good feeling.  She envied Adele Craw, barely
glimpsed in the dressing-room, for the position she automatically
occupied by being Dudley Knowleton's girl tonight.  She envied her
more stepping off under the draped bunting through a gateway of
hydrangeas at the head of the grand march, very demure and faintly
unpowdered in a plain white dress.  She was temporarily the centre
of all attention, and at the sight something that had long lain
dormant in Josephine awakened--her sense of a problem, a scarcely
defined possibility.

'Josephine,' Ridgeway Saunders began, 'you can't realize how happy
I am now that it's come true.  I've looked forward to this so long,
and dreamed about it--'

She smiled up at him automatically, but her mind was elsewhere, and
as the dance progressed the idea continued to obsess her.  She was
rushed from the beginning; to the men from the tea were added a
dozen new faces, a dozen confident or timid voices, until, like all
the more popular girls, she had her own queue trailing her about
the room.  Yet all this had happened to her before, and there was
something missing.  One might have ten men to Adele's two, but
Josephine was abruptly aware that here a girl took on the
importance of the man who had brought her.

She was discomforted by the unfairness of it.  A girl earned her
popularity by being beautiful and charming.  The more beautiful and
charming she was, the more she could afford to disregard public
opinion.  It seemed absurd that simply because Adele had managed to
attach a baseball captain, who mightn't know anything about girls
at all, or be able to judge their attractions, she should be thus
elevated in spite of her thick ankles, her rather too pinkish face.

Josephine was dancing with Ed Bement from Chicago.  He was her
earliest beau, a flame of pigtail days in dancing school when one
wore white cotton stockings, lace drawers with a waist attached and
ruffled dresses with the inevitable sash.

'What's the matter with me?' she asked Ed, thinking aloud.  'For
months I've felt as if I were a hundred years old, and I'm just
seventeen and that party was only seven years ago.'

'You've been in love a lot since then,' Ed said.

'I haven't,' she protested indignantly.  'I've had a lot of silly
stories started about me, without any foundation, usually by girls
who were jealous.'

'Jealous of what?'

'Don't get fresh,' she said tartly.  'Dance me near Lillian.'

Dudley Knowleton had just cut in on Lillian.  Josephine spoke to
her friend; then waiting until their turns would bring them face to
face over a space of seconds, she smiled at Knowleton.  This time
she made sure that smile intersected as well as met glance, that he
passed beside the circumference of her fragrant charm.  If this had
been named like French perfume of a later day it might have been
called 'Please'.  He bowed and smiled back; a minute later he cut
in on her.

It was in an eddy in a corner of the room and she danced slower so
that he adapted himself, and for a moment they went around in a
slow circle.

'You looked so sweet leading the march with Adele,' she told him.
'You seemed so serious and kind, as if the others were a lot of
children.  Adele looked sweet, too.'  And she added on an
inspiration, 'At school I've taken her for a model.'

'You have!'  She saw him conceal his sharp surprise as he said,
'I'll have to tell her that.'

He was handsomer than she had thought, and behind his cordial good
manners there was a sort of authority.  Though he was correctly
attentive to her, she saw his eyes search the room quickly to see
if all went well; he spoke quietly, in passing, to the orchestra
leader, who came down deferentially to the edge of his dais.  Last
man for Bones.  Josephine knew what that meant--her father had been
Bones.  Ridgeway Saunders and the rest of the Loving Brothers'
Association would certainly not be Bones.  She wondered, if there
had been a Bones for girls, whether she would be tapped--or Adele
Craw with her ankles, symbol of solidity.


     Come on o-ver here.
     Want to have you near;
     Get a wel-come heart-y.
     Come on join the part-y.


'I wonder how many boys here have taken you for a model,' she said.
'If I were a boy you'd be exactly what I'd like to be.  Except I'd
be terribly bothered having girls falling in love with me all the
time.'

'They don't,' he said simply.  'They never have.'

'Oh yes--but they hide it because they're so impressed with you,
and they're afraid of Adele.'

'Adele wouldn't object.'  And he added hastily, '--if it ever
happened.  Adele doesn't believe in being serious about such
things.'

'Are you engaged to her?'

He stiffened a little.  'I don't believe in being engaged till the
right time comes.'

'Neither do I,' agreed Josephine readily.  'I'd rather have one
good friend than a hundred people hanging around being mushy all
the time.'

'Is that what that crowd does that keeps following you around
tonight?'

'What crowd?' she asked innocently.

'The fifty per cent of the sophomore class that's rushing you.'

'A lot of parlour snakes,' she said ungratefully.

Josephine was radiantly happy now as she turned beautifully through
the newly enchanted hall in the arms of the chairman of the prom
committee.  Even this extra time with him she owed to the awe which
he inspired in her entourage; but a man cut in eventually and there
was a sharp fall in her elation.  The man was impressed that Dudley
Knowleton had danced with her; he was more respectful, and his
modulated admiration bored her.  In a little while, she hoped,
Dudley Knowleton would cut back, but as midnight passed, dragging
on another hour with it, she wondered if after all it had only been
a courtesy to a girl from Adele's school.  Since then Adele had
probably painted him a neat little landscape of Josephine's past.
When finally he approached her she grew tense and watchful, a state
which made her exteriorly pliant and tender and quiet.  But instead
of dancing he drew her into the edge of a row of boxes.

'Adele had an accident on the cloakroom steps.  She turned her
ankle a little and tore her stocking on a nail.  She'd like to
borrow a pair from you because you're staying near here and we're
way out at the Lawn Club.'

'Of course.'

'I'll run over with you--I have a car outside.'

'But you're busy; you mustn't bother.'

'Of course I'll go with you.'

There was thaw in the air; a hint of thin and lucid spring hovered
delicately around the elms and cornices of buildings whose bareness
and coldness had so depressed her the week before.  The night had a
quality of asceticism, as if the essence of masculine struggle were
seeping everywhere through the little city where men of three
centuries had brought their energies and aspirations for winnowing.
And Dudley Knowleton sitting beside her, dynamic and capable, was
symbolic of it all.  It seemed that she had never met a man before.

'Come in, please,' she said as he went up the steps of the house
with her.  'They've made it very comfortable.'

There was an open fire burning in the dark parlour.  When she came
downstairs with the stockings she went in and stood beside him,
very still for a moment, watching it with him.  Then she looked up,
still silent, looked down, looked at him again.

'Did you get the stockings?' he asked, moving a little.

'Yes,' she said breathlessly.  'Kiss me for being so quick.'

He laughed as if she said something witty and moved towards the
door.  She was smiling and her disappointment was deeply hidden as
they got into the car.

'It's been wonderful meeting you,' she told him.  'I can't tell you
how many ideas I've gotten from what you said.'

'But I haven't any ideas.'

'You have.  All that about not getting engaged till the proper time
comes.  I haven't had much opportunity to talk to a man like you.
Otherwise my ideas would be different, I guess.  I've just realized
that I've been wrong about a lot of things.  I used to want to be
exciting.  Now I want to help people.'

'Yes,' he agreed, 'that's very nice.'

He seemed about to say more when they arrived at the armoury.  In
their absence supper had begun; and crossing the great floor by his
side, conscious of many eyes regarding them, Josephine wondered if
people thought that they had been up to something.

'We're late,' said Knowleton when Adele went off to put on the
stockings.  'The man you're with has probably given you up long
ago.  You'd better let me get you something here.'

'That would be too divine.'

Afterwards, back on the floor again, she moved in a sweet aura of
abstraction.  The followers of several departed belles merged with
hers until now no girl on the floor was cut in on with such
frequency.  Even Miss Brereton's nephew, Ernest Waterbury, danced
with her in stiff approval.  Danced?  With a tentative change of
pace she simply swung from man to man in a sort of hands-right-and-
left around the floor.  She felt a sudden need to relax, and as if
in answer to her mood a new man was presented, a tall, sleek
Southerner with a persuasive note:

'You lovely creacha.  I been strainin my eyes watchin your cameo
face floatin round.  You stand out above all these othuz like an
Amehken Beauty Rose over a lot of field daisies.'

Dancing with him a second time, Josephine hearkened to his
pleadings.

'All right.  Let's go outside.'

'It wasn't outdaws I was considering,' he explained as they left
the floor.  'I happen to have a mortgage on a nook right hee in the
building.'

'All right.'

Book Chaffee, of Alabama, led the way through the cloak-room,
through a passage to an inconspicuous door.

'This is the private apartment of my friend Sergeant Boone,
instructa of the battery.  He wanted to be particularly sure it'd
be used as a nook tonight and not a readin room or anything like
that.'

Opening the door he turned on a dim light; she came in and shut it
behind her, and they faced each other.

'Mighty sweet,' he murmured.  His tall face came down, his long
arms wrapped around her tenderly, and very slowly so that their
eyes met for quite a long time, he drew her up to him.  Josephine
kept thinking that she had never kissed a Southern boy before.

They started apart at the sudden sound of a key turning in the lock
outside.  Then there was a muffed snicker followed by retreating
footsteps, and Book sprang for the door and wrenched at the handle
just as Josephine noticed that this was not only Sergeant Boone's
parlour; it was his bedroom as well.

'Who was it?' she demanded.  'Why did they lock us in?'

'Some funny boy.  I'd like to get my hands on him.'

'Will he come back?'

Book sat down on the bed to think.  'I couldn't say.  Don't even
know who it was.  But if somebody on the committee came along it
wouldn't look too good, would it?'

Seeing her expression change, he came over and put his arm around
her.  'Don't you worry, honey.  We'll fix it.'

She returned his kiss, briefly but without distraction.  Then she
broke away and went into the next apartment, which was hung with
boots, uniform coats and various military equipment.

'There's a window up here,' she said.  It was high in the wall and
had not been opened for a long time.  Book mounted on a chair and
forced it ajar.

'About ten feet down,' he reported, after a moment, 'but there's a
big pile of snow just underneath.  You might get a nasty fall and
you'll sure soak your shoes and stockin's.'

'We've got to get out,' Josephine said sharply.

'We'd better wait and give this funny man a chance--'

'I won't wait.  I want to get out.  Look--throw out all the
blankets from the bed and I'll jump on that: or you jump first and
spread them over the pile of snow.'

After that it was merely exciting.  Carefully Book Chaffee wiped
the dust from the window to protect her dress; then they were
struck silent by a footstep that approached--and passed the outer
door.  Book jumped, and she heard him kicking profanely as he waded
out of the soft drift below.  He spread the blankets.  At the
moment when Josephine swung her legs out the window, there was the
sound of voices outside the door and the key turned again in the
lock.  She landed softly, reaching for his hand, and convulsed with
laughter they ran and skidded down the half block towards the
corner, and reaching the entrance to the armoury, they stood
panting for a moment, breathing in the fresh night.  Book was
reluctant to go inside.

'Why don't you let me conduct you where you're stayin?  We can sit
around and sort of recuperate.'

She hesitated, drawn towards him by the community of their late
predicament; but something was calling her inside, as if the
fulfilment of her elation awaited her there.

'No,' she decided.

As they went in she collided with a man in a great hurry, and
looked up to recognize Dudley Knowleton.

'So sorry,' he said.  'Oh hello--'

'Won't you dance me over to my box?' she begged him impulsively.
'I've torn my dress.'

As they started off he said abstractedly:  'The fact is, a little
mischief has come up and the buck has been passed to me.  I was
going along to see about it.'

Her heart raced wildly and she felt the need of being another sort
of person immediately.

'I can't tell you how much it's meant meeting you.  It would be
wonderful to have one friend I could be serious with without being
all mushy and sentimental.  Would you mind if I wrote you a letter--
I mean, would Adele mind?'

'Lord, no!'  His smile had become utterly unfathomable to her.  As
they reached the box she thought of one more thing:

'Is it true that the baseball team is training at Hot Springs
during Easter?'

'Yes.  You going there?'

'Yes.  Good night, Mr Knowleton.'

But she was destined to see him once more.  It was outside the
men's coat room, where she waited among a crowd of other pale
survivors and their paler mothers, whose wrinkles had doubled and
tripled with the passing night.  He was explaining something to
Adele, and Josephine heard the phrase, 'The door was locked, and
the window open--'

Suddenly it occurred to Josephine that, meeting her coming in damp
and breathless, he must have guessed at the truth--and Adele would
doubtless confirm his suspicion.  Once again the spectre of her old
enemy, the plain and jealous girl, arose before her.  Shutting her
mouth tight together she turned away.

But they had seen her, and Adele called to her in her cheerful
ringing voice:

'Come say good night.  You were so sweet about the stockings.
Here's a girl you won't find doing shoddy, silly things, Dudley.'
Impulsively she leaned and kissed Josephine on the cheek.  'You'll
see I'm right, Dudley--next year she'll be the most respected girl
in school.'


III


As things go in the interminable days of early March, what happened
next happened quickly.  The annual senior dance at Miss Brereton's
school came on a night soaked through with spring, and all the
junior girls lay awake listening to the sighing tunes from the
gymnasium.  Between the numbers, when boys up from New Haven and
Princeton wandered about the grounds, cloistered glances looked
down from dark open windows upon the vague figures.

Not Josephine, though she lay awake like the others.  Such
vicarious diversions had no place in the sober patterns she was
spinning now from day to day; yet she might as well have been in
the forefront of those who called down to the men and threw notes
and entered into conversations, for destiny had suddenly turned
against her and was spinning a dark web of its own.


     Lit-tle lady, don't be depressed and blue,
     After all, we're both in the same can-noo--


Dudley Knowleton was over in the gymnasium fifty yards away, but
proximity to a man did not thrill her as it would have done a year
ago--not, at least, in the same way.  Life, she saw now, was a
serious matter, and in the modest darkness a line of a novel
ceaselessly recurred to her:  'He is a man fit to be the father of
my children'.  What were the seductive graces, the fast lines of a
hundred parlour snakes compared to such realities.  One couldn't go
on forever kissing comparative strangers behind half-closed doors.

Under her pillow now were two letters, answers to her letters.
They spoke in a bold round hand of the beginning of baseball
practice; they were glad Josephine felt as she did about things;
and the writer certainly looked forward to seeing her at Easter.
Of all the letters she had ever received they were the most
difficult from which to squeeze a single drop of heart's blood--one
couldn't even read the 'Yours' of the subscription as 'Your'--but
Josephine knew them by heart.  They were precious because he had
taken the time to write them; they were eloquent in the very
postage stamp because he used so few.

She was restless in her bed--the music had begun again in the
gymnasium:


     Oh, my love, I've waited so long for you,
     Oh, my love, I'm singing this song for you--
       Oh-h-h--


From the next room there was light laughter, and then from below a
male voice, and a long interchange of comic whispers.  Josephine
recognized Lillian's laugh and the voices of two other girls.  She
could imagine them as they lay across the window in their
nightgowns, their heads just showing from the open window.  'Come
right down,' one boy kept saying.  'Don't be formal--come, just as
you are.'

There was a sudden silence, then a quick crunching of footsteps on
gravel, a suppressed snicker and a scurry, and the sharp,
protesting groan of several beds in the next room and the banging
of a door down the hall.  Trouble for somebody, maybe.  A few
minutes later Josephine's door half opened, she caught a glimpse of
Miss Kwain against the dim corridor light, and then the door
closed.

The next afternoon Josephine and four other girls, all of whom
denied having breathed so much as a word into the night, were
placed on probation.  There was absolutely nothing to do about it.
Miss Kwain had recognized their faces in the window and they were
all from two rooms.  It was an injustice, but it was nothing
compared to what happened next.  One week before Easter vacation
the school motored off on a one-day trip to inspect a milk farm--
all save the ones on probation.  Miss Chambers, who sympathized
with Josephine's misfortune, enlisted her services in entertaining
Mr Ernest Waterbury, who was spending a week-end with his aunt.
This was only vaguely better than nothing, for Mr Waterbury was a
very dull, very priggish young man.  He was so dull and so priggish
that the following morning Josephine was expelled from school.

It happened like this: they had strolled in the grounds, they had
sat down at a garden table and had tea.  Ernest Waterbury had
expressed a desire to see something in the chapel, just a few
minutes before his aunt's car rolled up the drive.  The chapel was
reached by descending winding mock-medieval stairs; and, her shoes
still wet from the garden, Josephine had slipped on the top step
and fallen five feet directly into Mr Waterbury's unwilling arms,
where she lay helpless, convulsed with irresistible laughter.  It
was in this position that Miss Brereton and the visiting trustee
had found them.

'But I had nothing to do with it!' declared the ungallant Mr
Waterbury.  Flustered and outraged, he was packed back to New
Haven, and Miss Brereton, connecting this with last week's sin,
proceeded to lose her head.  Josephine, humiliated and furious,
lost hers, and Mr Perry, who happened to be in New York, arrived at
the school the same night.  At his passionate indignation, Miss
Brereton collapsed and retracted, but the damage was done, and
Josephine packed her trunk.  Unexpectedly, monstrously, just as it
had begun to mean something, her school life was over.

For the moment all her feelings were directed against Miss
Brereton, and the only tears she shed at leaving were of anger and
resentment.  Riding with her father up to New York, she saw that
while at first he had instinctively and whole-heartedly taken her
part, he felt also a certain annoyance with her misfortune.

'We'll all survive,' he said.  'Unfortunately, even that old idiot
Miss Brereton will survive.  She ought to be running a reform
school.'  He brooded for a moment.  'Anyhow, your mother arrives
tomorrow and you and she go down to Hot Springs as you planned.'

'Hot Springs!' Josephine cried, in a choked voice.  'Oh, no!'

'Why not?' he demanded in surprise.  'It seems the best thing to
do.  Give it a chance to blow over before you go back to Chicago.'

'I'd rather go to Chicago,' said Josephine breathlessly.  'Daddy,
I'd much rather go to Chicago.'

'That's absurd.  Your mother's started East and the arrangements
are all made.  At Hot Springs you can get out and ride and play
golf and forget that old she-devil--'

'Isn't there another place in the East we could go?  There's people
I know going to Hot Springs who'll know all about this, people that
I don't want to meet--girls from school.'

'Now, Jo, you keep your chin up--this is one of those times.  Sorry
I said that about letting it blow over in Chicago; if we hadn't
made other plans we'd go back and face every old shrew and gossip
in town right away.  When anybody slinks off in a corner they think
you've been up to something bad.  If anybody says anything to you,
you tell them the truth--what I said to Miss Brereton.  You tell
them she said you could come back and I damn well wouldn't let you
go back.'

'They won't believe it.'

There would be, at all events, four days of respite at Hot Springs
before the vacations of the schools.  Josephine passed this time
taking golf lessons from a professional so newly arrived from
Scotland that he surely knew nothing of her misadventure; she even
went riding with a young man one afternoon, feeling almost at home
with him after his admission that he had flunked out of Princeton
in February--a confidence, however, which she did not reciprocate
in kind.  But in the evenings, despite the young man's importunity,
she stayed with her mother, feeling nearer to her than she ever had
before.

But one afternoon in the lobby Josephine saw by the desk two dozen
good-looking young men waiting by a stack of hat cases and bags,
and knew that what she dreaded was at hand.  She ran upstairs and
with an invented headache dined there that night, but after dinner
she walked restlessly around their apartment.  She was ashamed not
only of her situation but of her reaction to it.  She had never
felt any pity for the unpopular girls who skulked in dressing-rooms
because they could attract no partners on the floor, or for girls
who were outsiders at Lake Forest, and now she was like them--
hiding miserably out of life.  Alarmed lest already the change was
written in her face, she paused in front of the mirror, fascinated
as ever by what she found there.

'The darn fools!' she said aloud.  And as she said it her chin went
up and the faint cloud about her eyes lifted.  The phrases of the
myriad love letters she had received passed before her eyes; behind
her, after all, was the reassurance of a hundred lost and pleading
faces, of innumerable tender and pleading voices.  Her pride
flooded back into her till she could see the warm blood rushing up
into her cheeks.

There was a knock at the door--it was the Princeton boy.

'How about slipping downstairs?' he proposed.  'There's a dance.
It's full of E-lies, the whole Yale baseball team.  I'll pick up
one of them and introduce you and you'll have a big time.  How
about it?'

'All right, but I don't want to meet anybody.  You'll just have to
dance with me all evening.'

'You know that suits me.'

She hurried into a new spring evening dress of the frailest fairy
blue.  In the excitement of seeing herself in it, it seemed as if
she had shed the old skin of winter and emerged a shining chrysalis
with no stain; and going downstairs her feet fell softly just off
the beat of the music from below.  It was a tune from a play she
had seen a week ago in New York, a tune with a future--ready for
gaieties as yet unthought of, lovers not yet met.  Dancing off, she
was certain that life had innumerable beginnings.  She had hardly
gone ten steps when she was cut in upon by Dudley Knowleton.

'Why, Josephine!'  He had never used her first name before--he
stood holding her hand.  'Why, I'm so glad to see you!  I've been
hoping and hoping you'd be here.'

She soared skyward on a rocket of surprise and delight.  He was
actually glad to see her--the expression on his face was obviously
sincere.  Could it be possible that he hadn't heard?

'Adele wrote me you might be here.  She wasn't sure.'

--Then he knew and didn't care; he liked her anyhow.

'I'm in sackcloth and ashes,' she said.

'Well, they're very becoming to you.'

'You know what happened--' she ventured.

'I do.  I wasn't going to say anything, but it's generally agreed
that Waterbury behaved like a fool--and it's not going to be much
help to him in the elections next month.  Look--I want you to dance
with some men who are just starving for a touch of beauty.'

Presently she was dancing with, it seemed to her, the entire team
at once.  Intermittently Dudley Knowleton cut back in, as well as
the Princeton man, who was somewhat indignant at this unexpected
competition.  There were many girls from many schools in the room,
but with an admirable team spirit the Yale men displayed a sharp
prejudice in Josephine's favour; already she was pointed out from
the chairs along the wall.

But interiorly she was waiting for what was coming, for the moment
when she would walk with Dudley Knowleton into the warm, Southern
night.  It came naturally, just at the end of a number, and they
strolled along an avenue of early-blooming lilacs and turned a
corner and another corner . . .

'You were glad to see me, weren't you?' Josephine said.

'Of course.'

'I was afraid at first.  I was sorriest about what happened at
school because of you.  I'd been trying so hard to be different--
because of you.'

'You mustn't think of that school business any more.  Everybody
that matters knows you got a bad deal.  Forget it and start over.'

'Yes,' she agreed tranquilly.  She was happy.  The breeze and the
scent of lilacs--that was she, lovely and intangible; the rustic
bench where they sat and the trees--that was he, rugged and strong
beside her, protecting her.

'I'd thought so much of meeting you here,' she said after a minute.
'You'd been so good for me, that I thought maybe in a different way
I could be good for you--I mean I know ways of having a good time
that you don't know.  For instance, we've certainly got to go
horseback riding by moonlight some night.  That'll be fun.'

He didn't answer.

'I can really be very nice when I like somebody--that's really not
often,' she interpolated hastily, 'not seriously.  But I mean when
I do feel seriously that a boy and I are really friends I don't
believe in having a whole mob of other boys hanging around taking
up time.  I like to be with him all the time, all day and all
evening, don't you?'

He stirred a little on the bench; he leaned forward with his elbows
on his knees, looking at his strong hands.  Her gently modulated
voice sank a note lower.

'When I like anyone I don't even like dancing.  It's sweeter to be
alone.'

Silence for a moment.

'Well, you know'--he hesitated, frowning--'as a matter of fact, I'm
mixed up in a lot of engagements made some time ago with some
people.'  He floundered about unhappily.  'In fact, I won't even be
at the hotel after tomorrow.  I'll be at the house of some people
down the valley--a sort of house party.  As a matter of fact,
Adele's getting here tomorrow.'

Absorbed in her own thoughts, she hardly heard him at first, but at
the name she caught her breath sharply.

'We're both to be at this house party while we're here, and I
imagine it's more or less arranged what we're going to do.  Of
course, in the daytime I'll be here for baseball practice.'

'I see.'  Her lips were quivering.  'You won't be--you'll be with
Adele.'

'I think that--more or less--I will.  She'll--want to see you, of
course.'

Another silence while he twisted his big fingers and she helplessly
imitated the gesture.

'You were just sorry for me,' she said.  'You like Adele--much
better.'

'Adele and I understand each other.  She's been more or less my
ideal since we were children together.'

'And I'm not your kind of girl?'  Josephine's voice trembled with a
sort of fright.  'I suppose because I've kissed a lot of boys and
got a reputation for speed and raised the deuce.'

'It isn't that.'

'Yes, it is,' she declared passionately.  'I'm just paying for
things.'  She stood up.  'You'd better take me back inside so I can
dance with the kind of boys that like me.'

She walked quickly down the path, tears of misery streaming from
her eyes.  He overtook her by the steps, but she only shook her
head and said, 'Excuse me for being so fresh.  I'll grow up--I got
what was coming to me--it's all right.'

A little later when she looked around the floor for him he had gone--
and Josephine realized with a shock that for the first time in her
life, she had tried for a man and failed.  But, save in the very
young, only love begets love, and from the moment Josephine had
perceived that his interest in her was merely kindness she realized
the wound was not in her heart but in her pride.  She would forget
him quickly, but she would never forget what she had learned from
him.  There were two kinds of men, those you played with and those
you might marry.  And as this passed through her mind, her restless
eyes wandered casually over the group of stags, resting very
lightly on Mr Gordon Tinsley, the current catch of Chicago,
reputedly the richest young man in the Middle West.  He had never
paid any attention to young Josephine until tonight.  Ten minutes
ago he had asked her to go driving with him tomorrow.

But he did not attract her--and she decided to refuse.  One mustn't
run through people, and, for the sake of a romantic half-hour,
trade a possibility that might develop--quite seriously--later, at
the proper time.  She did not know that this was the first mature
thought that she had ever had in her life, but it was.

The orchestra were packing their instruments and the Princeton man
was still at her ear, still imploring her to walk out with him into
the night.  Josephine knew without cogitation which sort of man he
was--and the moon was bright even on the windows.  So with a
certain sense of relaxation she took his arm and they strolled out
to the pleasant bower she had so lately quitted, and their faces
turned towards each other, like little moons under the great white
ones which hovered high over the Blue Ridge; his arm dropped softly
about her yielding shoulder.

'Well?' he whispered.

'Well.'






THE LAST OF THE BELLES


by
 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)
 

Saturday Evening Post (2 March 1929)



After Atlanta's elaborate and theatrical rendition of Southern
charm, we all underestimated Tarleton.  It was a little hotter than
anywhere we'd been--a dozen rookies collapsed the first day in that
Georgia sun--and when you saw herds of cows drifting through the
business streets, hi-yaed by colored drovers, a trance stole down
over you out of the hot light; you wanted to move a hand or foot to
be sure you were alive.

So I stayed out at camp and let Lieutenant Warren tell me about the
girls.  This was fifteen years ago, and I've forgotten how I felt,
except that the days went along, one after another, better than
they do now, and I was empty-hearted, because up North she whose
legend I had loved for three years was getting married.  I saw the
clippings and newspaper photographs.  It was "a romantic wartime
wedding," all very rich and sad.  I felt vividly the dark radiance
of the sky under which it took place, and as a young snob, was more
envious than sorry.

A day came when I went into Tarleton for a haircut and ran into a
nice fellow named Bill Knowles, who was in my time at Harvard.
He'd been in the National Guard division that preceded us in camp;
at the last moment he had transferred to aviation and been left
behind.

"I'm glad I met you, Andy," he said with undue seriousness.  "I'll
hand you on all my information before I start for Texas.  You see,
there're really only three girls here--"

I was interested; there was something mystical about there being
three girls.

"--and here's one of them now."

We were in front of a drug store and he marched me in and
introduced me to a lady I promptly detested.

"The other two are Ailie Calhoun and Sally Carrol Happer."

I guessed from the way he pronounced her name, that he was
interested in Ailie Calhoun.  It was on his mind what she would be
doing while he was gone; he wanted her to have a quiet,
uninteresting time.

At my age I don't even hesitate to confess that entirely
unchivalrous images of Ailie Calhoun--that lovely name--rushed into
my mind.  At twenty-three there is no such thing as a preëmpted
beauty; though, had Bill asked me, I would doubtless have sworn in
all sincerity to care for her like a sister.  He didn't; he was
just fretting out loud at having to go.  Three days later he
telephoned me that he was leaving next morning and he'd take me to
her house that night.

We met at the hotel and walked uptown through the flowery, hot
twilight.  The four white pillars of the Calhoun house faced the
street, and behind them the veranda was dark as a cave with
hanging, weaving, climbing vines.

When we came up the walk a girl in a white dress tumbled out of the
front door, crying, "I'm so sorry I'm late!" and seeing us, added:
"Why, I thought I heard you come ten minutes--"

She broke off as a chair creaked and another man, an aviator from
Camp Harry Lee, emerged from the obscurity of the veranda.

"Why, Canby!" she cried.  "How are you?"

He and Bill Knowles waited with the tenseness of open litigants.

"Canby, I want to whisper to you, honey," she said, after just a
second.  "You'll excuse us, Bill."

They went aside.  Presently Lieutenant Canby, immensely displeased,
said in a grim voice, "Then we'll make it Thursday, but that means
sure."  Scarcely nodding to us, he went down the walk, the spurs
with which he presumably urged on his aeroplane gleaming in the
lamplight.

"Come in--I don't just know your name--"

There she was--the Southern type in all its purity.  I would have
recognized Ailie Calhoun if I'd never heard Ruth Draper or read
Marse Chan.  She had the adroitness sugar-coated with sweet,
voluble simplicity, the suggested background of devoted fathers,
brothers and admirers stretching back into the South's heroic age,
the unfailing coolness acquired in the endless struggle with the
heat.  There were notes in her voice that order slaves around, that
withered up Yankee captains, and then soft, wheedling notes that
mingled in unfamiliar loveliness with the night.

I could scarcely see her in the darkness, but when I rose to go--it
was plain that I was not to linger--she stood in the orange light
from the doorway.  She was small and very blond; there was too much
fever-colored rouge on her face, accentuated by a nose dabbed
clownish white, but she shone through that like a star.

"After Bill goes I'll be sitting here all alone night after night.
Maybe you'll take me to the country-club dances."  The pathetic
prophecy brought a laugh from Bill.  "Wait a minute," Ailie
murmured.  "Your guns are all crooked."

She straightened my collar pin, looking up at me for a second with
something more than curiosity.  It was a seeking look, as if she
asked, "Could it be you?"  Like Lieutenant Canby, I marched off
unwillingly into the suddenly insufficient night.

Two weeks later I sat with her on the same veranda, or rather she
half lay in my arms and yet scarcely touched me--how she managed
that I don't remember.  I was trying unsuccessfully to kiss her,
and had been trying for the best part of an hour.  We had a sort of
joke about my not being sincere.  My theory was that if she'd let
me kiss her I'd fall in love with her.  Her argument was that I was
obviously insincere.

In a lull between two of these struggles she told me about her
brother who had died in his senior year at Yale.  She showed me his
picture--it was a handsome, earnest face with a Leyendecker
forelock--and told me that when she met someone who measured up to
him she'd marry.  I found this family idealism discouraging; even
my brash confidence couldn't compete with the dead.

The evening and other evenings passed like that, and ended with my
going back to camp with the remembered smell of magnolia flowers
and a mood of vague dissatisfaction.  I never kissed her.  We went
to the vaudeville and to the country club on Saturday nights, where
she seldom took ten consecutive steps with one man, and she took me
to barbecues and rowdy watermelon parties, and never thought it was
worth while to change what I felt for her into love.  I see now
that it wouldn't have been hard, but she was a wise nineteen and
she must have seen that we were emotionally incompatible.  So I
became her confidant instead.

We talked about Bill Knowles.  She was considering Bill; for,
though she wouldn't admit it, a winter at school in New York and a
prom at Yale had turned her eyes North.  She said she didn't think
she'd marry a Southern man.  And by degrees I saw that she was
consciously and voluntarily different from these other girls who
sang nigger songs and shot craps in the country-club bar.  That's
why Bill and I and others were drawn to her.  We recognized her.

June and July, while the rumors reached us faintly, ineffectually,
of battle and terror overseas, Ailie's eyes roved here and there
about the country-club floor, seeking for something among the tall
young officers.  She attached several, choosing them with unfailing
perspicacity--save in the case of Lieutenant Canby, whom she
claimed to despise, but, nevertheless, gave dates to "because he
was so sincere"--and we apportioned her evenings among us all
summer.

One day she broke all her dates--Bill Knowles had leave and was
coming.  We talked of the event with scientific impersonality--
would he move her to a decision?  Lieutenant Canby, on the
contrary, wasn't impersonal at all; made a nuisance of himself.  He
told her that if she married Knowles he was going to climb up six
thousand feet in his aeroplane, shut off the motor and let go.  He
frightened her--I had to yield him my last date before Bill came.

On Saturday night she and Bill Knowles came to the country club.
They were very handsome together and once more I felt envious and
sad.  As they danced out on the floor the three-piece orchestra was
playing After You've Gone, in a poignant incomplete way that I can
hear yet, as if each bar were trickling off a precious minute of
that time.  I knew then that I had grown to love Tarleton, and I
glanced about half in panic to see if some face wouldn't come in
for me out of that warm, singing, outer darkness that yielded up
couple after couple in organdie and olive drab.  It was a time of
youth and war, and there was never so much love around.

When I danced with Ailie she suddenly suggested that we go outside
to a car.  She wanted to know why didn't people cut in on her
tonight?  Did they think she was already married?

"Are you going to be?"

"I don't know, Andy.  Sometimes, when he treats me as if I were
sacred, it thrills me."  Her voice was hushed and far away.  "And
then--"

She laughed.  Her body, so frail and tender, was touching mine, her
face was turned up to me, and there, suddenly, with Bill Knowles
ten yards off, I could have kissed her at last.  Our lips just
touched experimentally; then an aviation officer turned a corner of
the veranda near us, peered into our darkness and hesitated.

"Ailie."

"Yes."

"You heard about this afternoon?"

"What?"  She leaned forward, tenseness already in her voice.

"Horace Canby crashed.  He was instantly killed."

She got up slowly and stepped out of the car.

"You mean he was killed?" she said.

"Yes.  They don't know what the trouble was.  His motor--"

"Oh-h-h!"  Her rasping whisper came through the hands suddenly
covering her face.  We watched her helplessly as she put her head
on the side of the car, gagging dry tears.  After a minute I went
for Bill, who was standing in the stag line, searching anxiously
about for her, and told him she wanted to go home.

I sat on the steps outside.  I had disliked Canby, but his
terrible, pointless death was more real to me then than the day's
toll of thousands in France.  In a few minutes Ailie and Bill came
out.  Ailie was whimpering a little, but when she saw me her eyes
flexed and she came over swiftly.

"Andy"--she spoke in a quick, low voice--"of course you must never
tell anybody what I told you about Canby yesterday.  What he said,
I mean."

"Of course not."

She looked at me a second longer as if to be quite sure.  Finally
she was sure.  Then she sighed in such a quaint little way that I
could hardly believe my ears, and her brow went up in what can only
be described as mock despair.

"An-dy!"

I looked uncomfortably at the ground, aware that she was calling my
attention to her involuntarily disastrous effect on men.

"Good night, Andy!" called Bill as they got into a taxi.

"Good night," I said, and almost added:  "You poor fool."


II


Of course I should have made one of those fine moral decisions that
people make in books, and despised her.  On the contrary, I don't
doubt that she could still have had me by raising her hand.

A few days later she made it all right by saying wistfully, "I know
you think it was terrible of me to think of myself at a time like
that, but it was such a shocking coincidence."

At twenty-three I was entirely unconvinced about anything, except
that some people were strong and attractive and could do what they
wanted, and others were caught and disgraced.  I hoped I was of the
former.  I was sure Ailie was.

I had to revise other ideas about her.  In the course of a long
discussion with some girl about kissing--in those days people still
talked about kissing more than they kissed--I mentioned the fact
that Ailie had only kissed two or three men, and only when she
thought she was in love.  To my considerable disconcertion the girl
figuratively just lay on the floor and howled.

"But it's true," I assured her, suddenly knowing it wasn't.  "She
told me herself."

"Ailie Calhoun!  Oh, my heavens!  Why, last year at the Tech spring
house party--"

This was in September.  We were going over-seas any week now, and
to bring us up to full strength a last batch of officers from the
fourth training camp arrived.  The fourth camp wasn't like the
first three--the candidates were from the ranks; even from the
drafted divisions.  They had queer names without vowels in them,
and save for a few young militiamen, you couldn't take it for
granted that they came out of any background at all.  The addition
to our company was Lieutenant Earl Schoen from New Bedford,
Massachusetts; as fine a physical specimen as I have ever seen.  He
was six-foot-three, with black hair, high color and glossy dark-
brown eyes.  He wasn't very smart and he was definitely illiterate,
yet he was a good officer, high-tempered and commanding, and with
that becoming touch of vanity that sits well on the military.  I
had an idea that New Bedford was a country town, and set down his
bumptious qualities to that.

We were doubled up in living quarters and he came into my hut.
Inside of a week there was a cabinet photograph of some Tarleton
girl nailed brutally to the shack wall.

"She's no jane or anything like that.  She's a society girl; goes
with all the best people here."

The following Sunday afternoon I met the lady at a semiprivate
swimming pool in the country.  When Ailie and I arrived, there was
Schoen's muscular body rippling out of a bathing suit at the far
end of the pool.

"Hey, lieutenant!"

When I waved back at him he grinned and winked, jerking his head
toward the girl at his side.  Then, digging her in the ribs, he
jerked his head at me.  It was a form of introduction.

"Who's that with Kitty Preston?" Ailie asked, and when I told her
she said he looked like a street-car conductor, and pretended to
look for her transfer.

A moment later he crawled powerfully and gracefully down the pool
and pulled himself up at our side.  I introduced him to Ailie.

"How do you like my girl, lieutenant?" he demanded.  "I told you
she was all right, didn't I?"  He jerked his head toward Ailie;
this time to indicate that his girl and Ailie moved in the same
circles.  "How about us all having dinner together down at the
hotel some night?"

I left them in a moment, amused as I saw Ailie visibly making up
her mind that here, anyhow, was not the ideal.  But Lieutenant Earl
Schoen was not to be dismissed so lightly.  He ran his eyes
cheerfully and inoffensively over her cute, slight figure, and
decided that she would do even better than the other.  Then minutes
later I saw them in the water together, Ailie swimming away with a
grim little stroke she had, and Schoen wallowing riotously around
her and ahead of her, sometimes pausing and staring at her,
fascinated, as a boy might look at a nautical doll.

While the afternoon passed he remained at her side.  Finally Ailie
came over to me and whispered, with a laugh:  "He's following me
around.  He thinks I haven't paid my carfare."

She turned quickly.  Miss Kitty Preston, her face curiously
flustered, stood facing us.

"Ailie Calhoun, I didn't think it of you to go out and delib'ately
try to take a man away from another girl."--An expression of
distress at the impending scene flitted over Ailie's face.--"I
thought you considered yourself above anything like that."

Miss Preston's voice was low, but it held that tensity that can be
felt farther than it can be heard, and I saw Ailie's clear lovely
eyes glance about in panic.  Luckily, Earl himself was ambling
cheerfully and innocently toward us.

"If you care for him you certainly oughtn't to belittle yourself in
front of him," said Ailie in a flash, her head high.

It was her acquaintance with the traditional way of behaving
against Kitty Preston's naïve and fierce possessiveness, or if you
prefer it, Ailie's "breeding" against the other's "commonness."
She turned away.

"Wait a minute, kid!" cried Earl Schoen.  "How about your address?
Maybe I'd like to give you a ring on the phone."

She looked at him in a way that should have indicated to Kitty her
entire lack of interest.

"I'm very busy at the Red Cross this month," she said, her voice as
cool as her slicked-back blond hair.  "Good-by."

On the way home she laughed.  Her air of having been unwittingly
involved in a contemptible business vanished.

"She'll never hold that young man," she said.  "He wants somebody
new."

"Apparently he wants Ailie Calhoun."

The idea amused her.

"He could give me his ticket punch to wear, like a fraternity pin.
What fun!  If mother ever saw anybody like that come in the house,
she'd just lie down and die."

And to give Ailie credit, it was fully a fortnight before he did
come in her house, although he rushed her until she pretended to be
annoyed at the next country-club dance.

"He's the biggest tough, Andy," she whispered to me.  "But he's so
sincere."

She used the word "tough" without the conviction it would have
carried had he been a Southern boy.  She only knew it with her
mind; her ear couldn't distinguish between one Yankee voice and
another.  And somehow Mrs. Calhoun didn't expire at his appearance
on the threshold.  The supposedly ineradicable prejudices of
Ailie's parents were a convenient phenomenon that disappeared at
her wish.  It was her friends who were astonished.  Ailie, always a
little above Tarleton, whose beaux had been very carefully the
"nicest" men of the camp--Ailie and Lieutenant Schoen!  I grew
tired of assuring people that she was merely distracting herself--
and indeed every week or so there was someone new--an ensign from
Pensacola, an old friend from New Orleans--but always, in between
times, there was Earl Schoen.

Orders arrived for an advance party of officers and sergeants to
proceed to the port of embarkation and take ship to France.  My
name was on the list.  I had been on the range for a week and when
I got back to camp, Earl Schoen buttonholed me immediately.

"We're giving a little farewell party in the mess.  Just you and I
and Captain Craker and three girls."

Earl and I were to call for the girls.  We picked up Sally Carrol
Happer and Nancy Lamar, and went on to Ailie's house; to be met at
the door by the butler with the announcement that she wasn't home.

"Isn't home?" Earl repeated blankly.  "Where is she?"

"Didn't leave no information about that; just said she wasn't
home."

"But this is a darn funny thing!" he exclaimed.  He walked around
the familiar dusky veranda while the butler waited at the door.
Something occurred to him.  "Say," he informed me--"say, I think
she's sore."

I waited.  He said sternly to the butler, "You tell her I've got to
speak to her a minute."

"How'm I goin' tell her that when she ain't home?"

Again Earl walked musingly around the porch.  Then he nodded
several times and said:

"She's sore at something that happened downtown."

In a few words he sketched out the matter to me.

"Look here; you wait in the car," I said.  "Maybe I can fix this."
And when he reluctantly retreated:  "Oliver, you tell Miss Ailie I
want to see her alone."

After some argument he bore this message and in a moment returned
with a reply:

"Miss Ailie say she don't want to see that other gentleman about
nothing never.  She say come in if you like."

She was in the library.  I had expected to see a picture of cool,
outraged dignity, but her face was distraught, tumultuous,
despairing.  Her eyes were red-rimmed, as though she had been
crying slowly and painfully, for hours.

"Oh, hello, Andy," she said brokenly.  "I haven't seen you for so
long.  Has he gone?"

"Now, Ailie--"

"Now, Ailie!" she cried.  "Now, Ailie!  He spoke to me, you see.
He lifted his hat.  He stood there ten feet from me with that
horrible--that horrible woman--holding her arm and talking to her,
and then when he saw me he raised his hat.  Andy, I didn't know
what to do.  I had to go in the drug store and ask for a glass of
water, and I was so afraid he'd follow in after me that I asked Mr.
Rich to let me go out the back way.  I never want to see him or
hear of him again."

I talked.  I said what one says in such cases.  I said it for half
an hour.  I could not move her.  Several times she answered by
murmuring something about his not being "sincere," and for the
fourth time I wondered what the word meant to her.  Certainly not
constancy; it was, I half suspected, some special way she wanted to
be regarded.

I got up to go.  And then, unbelievably, the automobile horn
sounded three times impatiently outside.  It was stupefying.  It
said as plainly as if Earl were in the room, "All right; go to the
devil then!  I'm not going to wait here all night."

Ailie looked at me aghast.  And suddenly a peculiar look came into
her face, spread, flickered, broke into a teary, hysterical smile.

"Isn't he awful?" she cried in helpless despair.  "Isn't he
terrible?"

"Hurry up," I said quickly.  "Get your cape.  This is our last
night."

And I can still feel that last night vividly, the candlelight that
flickered over the rough boards of the mess shack, over the frayed
paper decorations left from the supply company's party, the sad
mandolin down a company street that kept picking My Indiana Home
out of the universal nostalgia of the departing summer.  The three
girls lost in this mysterious men's city felt something, too--a
bewitched impermanence as though they were on a magic carpet that
had lighted on the Southern countryside, and any moment the wind
would lift it and waft it away.  We toasted ourselves and the
South.  Then we left our napkins and empty glasses and a little of
the past on the table, and hand in hand went out into the moonlight
itself.  Taps had been played; there was no sound but the far-away
whinny of a horse, and a loud persistent snore at which we laughed,
and the leathery snap of a sentry coming to port over by the
guardhouse.  Craker was on duty; we others got into a waiting car,
motored into Tarleton and left Craker's girl.

Then Ailie and Earl, Sally and I, two and two in the wide back
seat, each couple turned from the other, absorbed and whispering,
drove away into the wide, flat darkness.

We drove through pine woods heavy with lichen and Spanish moss, and
between the fallow cotton fields along a road white as the rim of
the world.  We parked under the broken shadow of a mill where there
was the sound of running water and restive squawky birds and over
everything a brightness that tried to filter in anywhere--into the
lost nigger cabins, the automobile, the fastnesses of the heart.
The South sang to us--I wonder if they remember.  I remember--the
cool pale faces, the somnolent amorous eyes and the voices:

"Are you comfortable?"

"Yes; are you?"

"Are you sure you are?"

"Yes."

Suddenly we knew it was late and there was nothing more.  We turned
home.

Our detachment started for Camp Mills next day, but I didn't go to
France after all.  We passed a cold month on Long Island, marched
aboard a transport with steel helmets slung at our sides and then
marched off again.  There wasn't any more war.  I had missed the
war.  When I came back to Tarleton I tried to get out of the Army,
but I had a regular commission and it took most of the winter.  But
Earl Schoen was one of the first to be demobilized.  He wanted to
find a good job "while the picking was good."  Ailie was
noncommittal, but there was an understanding between them that he'd
be back.

By January the camps, which for two years had dominated the little
city, were already fading.  There was only the persistent
incinerator smell to remind one of all that activity and bustle.
What life remained centered bitterly about divisional headquarters
building, with the disgruntled regular officers who had also missed
the war.

And now the young men of Tarleton began drifting back from the ends
of the earth--some with Canadian uniforms, some with crutches or
empty sleeves.  A returned battalion of the National Guard paraded
through the streets with open ranks for their dead, and then
stepped down out of romance forever and sold you things over the
counters of local stores.  Only a few uniforms mingled with the
dinner coats at the country-club dance.

Just before Christmas, Bill Knowles arrived unexpectedly one day
and left the next--either he gave Ailie an ultimatum or she had
made up her mind at last.  I saw her sometimes when she wasn't busy
with returned heroes from Savannah and Augusta, but I felt like an
outmoded survival--and I was.  She was waiting for Earl Schoen with
such a vast uncertainty that she didn't like to talk about it.
Three days before I got my final discharge he came.

I first happened upon them walking down Market Street together, and
I don't think I've ever been so sorry for a couple in my life;
though I suppose the same situation was repeating itself in every
city where there had been camps.  Exteriorly Earl had about
everything wrong with him that could be imagined.  His hat was
green, with a radical feather; his suit was slashed and braided in
a grotesque fashion that national advertising and the movies have
put an end to.  Evidently he had been to his old barber, for his
hair bloused neatly on his pink, shaved neck.  It wasn't as though
he had been shiny and poor, but the background of mill-town dance
halls and outing clubs flamed out at you--or rather flamed out at
Ailie.  For she had never quite imagined the reality; in these
clothes even the natural grace of that magnificent body had
departed.  At first he boasted of his fine job; it would get them
along all right until he could "see some easy money."  But from the
moment he came back into her world on its own terms he must have
known it was hopeless.  I don't know what Ailie said or how much
her grief weighed against her stupefaction.  She acted quickly--
three days after his arrival, Earl and I went North together on the
train.

"Well, that's the end of that," he said moodily.  "She's a
wonderful girl, but too much of a highbrow for me.  I guess she's
got to marry some rich guy that'll give her a great social
position.  I can't see that stuck-up sort of thing."  And then,
later:  "She said to come back and see her in a year, but I'll
never go back.  This aristocrat stuff is all right if you got the
money for it, but--"

"But it wasn't real," he meant to finish.  The provincial society
in which he had moved with so much satisfaction for six months
already appeared to him as affected, "dudish" and artificial.

"Say, did you see what I saw getting on the train?" he asked me
after a while.  "Two wonderful janes, all alone.  What do you say
we mosey into the next car and ask them to lunch?  I'll take the
one in blue."  Halfway down the car he turned around suddenly.
"Say, Andy," he demanded, frowning; "one thing--how do you suppose
she knew I used to command a street car?  I never told her that."

"Search me."


III


This narrative arrives now at one of the big gaps that stared me in
the face when I began.  For six years, while I finished at Harvard
Law and built commercial aeroplanes and backed a pavement block
that went gritty under trucks, Ailie Calhoun was scarcely more than
a name on a Christmas card; something that blew a little in my mind
on warm nights when I remembered the magnolia flowers.  Occasionally
an acquaintance of Army days would ask me, "What became of that
blond girl who was so popular?" but I didn't know.  I ran into Nancy
Lamar at the Montmartre in New York one evening and learned that
Ailie had become engaged to a man in Cincinnati, had gone North to
visit his family and then broken it off.  She was lovely as ever and
there was always a heavy beau or two.  But neither Bill Knowles nor
Earl Schoen had ever come back.

And somewhere about that time I heard that Bill Knowles had married
a girl he met on a boat.  There you are--not much of a patch to
mend six years with.

Oddly enough, a girl seen at twilight in a small Indiana station
started me thinking about going South.  The girl, in stiff pink
organdie, threw her arms about a man who got off our train and
hurried him to a waiting car, and I felt a sort of pang.  It seemed
to me that she was bearing him off into the lost midsummer world of
my early twenties, where time had stood still and charming girls,
dimly seen like the past itself, still loitered along the dusky
streets.  I suppose that poetry is a Northern man's dream of the
South.  But it was months later that I sent off a wire to Ailie,
and immediately followed it to Tarleton.

It was July.  The Jefferson Hotel seemed strangely shabby and
stuffy--a boosters' club burst into intermittent song in the dining
room that my memory had long dedicated to officers and girls.  I
recognized the taxi driver who took me up to Ailie's house, but his
"Sure, I do, lieutenant," was unconvincing.  I was only one of
twenty thousand.

It was a curious three days.  I suppose some of Ailie's first young
lustre must have gone the way of such mortal shining, but I can't
bear witness to it.  She was still so physically appealing that you
wanted to touch the personality that trembled on her lips.  No--the
change was more profound than that.

At once I saw she had a different line.  The modulations of pride,
the vocal hints that she knew the secrets of a brighter, finer ante-
bellum day, were gone from her voice; there was no time for them
now as it rambled on in the half-laughing, half-desperate banter of
the newer South.  And everything was swept into this banter in
order to make it go on and leave no time for thinking--the present,
the future, herself, me.  We went to a rowdy party at the house of
some young married people, and she was the nervous, glowing center
of it.  After all, she wasn't eighteen, and she was as attractive
in her rôle of reckless clown as she had ever been in her life.

"Have you heard anything from Earl Schoen?" I asked her the second
night, on our way to the country-club dance.

"No."  She was serious for a moment.  "I often think of him.  He
was the--"  She hesitated.

"Go on."

"I was going to say the man I loved most, but that wouldn't be
true.  I never exactly loved him, or I'd have married him any old
how, wouldn't I?"  She looked at me questioningly.  "At least I
wouldn't have treated him like that."

"It was impossible."

"Of course," she agreed uncertainly.  Her mood changed; she became
flippant:  "How the Yankees did deceive us poor little Southern
girls.  Ah, me!"

When we reached the country club she melted like a chameleon into
the--to me--unfamiliar crowd.  There was a new generation upon the
floor, with less dignity than the ones I had known, but none of
them were more a part of its lazy, feverish essence than Ailie.
Possibly she had perceived that in her initial longing to escape
from Tarleton's provincialism she had been walking alone, following
a generation which was doomed to have no successors.  Just where
she lost the battle, waged behind the white pillars of her veranda,
I don't know.  But she had guessed wrong, missed out somewhere.
Her wild animation, which even now called enough men around her to
rival the entourage of the youngest and freshest, was an admission
of defeat.

I left her house, as I had so often left it that vanished June, in
a mood of vague dissatisfaction.  It was hours later, tossing about
my bed in the hotel, that I realized what was the matter, what had
always been the matter--I was deeply and incurably in love with
her.  In spite of every incompatibility, she was still, she would
always be to me, the most attractive girl I had ever known.  I told
her so next afternoon.  It was one of those hot days I knew so
well, and Ailie sat beside me on a couch in the darkened library.

"Oh, no, I couldn't marry you," she said, almost frightened; "I
don't love you that way at all. . . .  I never did.  And you don't
love me.  I didn't mean to tell you now, but next month I'm going
to marry another man.  We're not even announcing it, because I've
done that twice before."  Suddenly it occurred to her that I might
be hurt:  "Andy, you just had a silly idea, didn't you?  You know I
couldn't ever marry a Northern man."

"Who is he?" I demanded.

"A man from Savannah."

"Are you in love with him?"

"Of course I am."  We both smiled.  "Of course I am!  What are you
trying to make me say?"

There were no doubts, as there had been with other men.  She
couldn't afford to let herself have doubts.  I knew this because
she had long ago stopped making any pretensions with me.  This very
naturalness, I realized, was because she didn't consider me as a
suitor.  Beneath her mask of an instinctive thoroughbred she had
always been on to herself, and she couldn't believe that anyone not
taken in to the point of uncritical worship could really love her.
That was what she called being "sincere"; she felt most security
with men like Canby and Earl Schoen, who were incapable of passing
judgments on the ostensibly aristocratic heart.

"All right," I said, as if she had asked my permission to marry.
"Now, would you do something for me?"

"Anything."

"Ride out to camp."

"But there's nothing left there, honey."

"I don't care."

We walked downtown.  The taxi driver in front of the hotel repeated
her objection:  "Nothing there now, cap."

"Never mind.  Go there anyhow."

Twenty minutes later he stopped on a wide unfamiliar plain powdered
with new cotton fields and marked with isolated clumps of pine.

"Like to drive over yonder where you see the smoke?" asked the
driver.  "That's the new state prison."

"No.  Just drive along this road.  I want to find where I used to
live."

An old race course, inconspicuous in the camp's day of glory, had
reared its dilapidated grandstand in the desolation.  I tried in
vain to orient myself.

"Go along this road past that clump of trees, and then turn right--
no, turn left."

He obeyed, with professional disgust.

"You won't find a single thing, darling," said Ailie.  "The
contractors took it all down."

We rode slowly along the margin of the fields.  It might have been
here--

"All right.  I want to get out," I said suddenly.

I left Ailie sitting in the car, looking very beautiful with the
warm breeze stirring her long, curly bob.

It might have been here.  That would make the company streets down
there and the mess shack, where we dined that night, just over the
way.

The taxi driver regarded me indulgently while I stumbled here and
there in the knee-deep underbrush, looking for my youth in a
clapboard or a strip of roofing or a rusty tomato can.  I tried to
sight on a vaguely familiar clump of trees, but it was growing
darker now and I couldn't be quite sure they were the right trees.

"They're going to fix up the old race course," Ailie called from
the car.  "Tarleton's getting quite doggy in its old age."

No.  Upon consideration they didn't look like the right trees.  All
I could be sure of was this place that had once been so full of
life and effort was gone, as if it had never existed, and that in
another month Ailie would be gone, and the South would be empty for
me forever.


THE END





THE LOST DECADE


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Esquire (December 1939)



All sorts of people came into the offices of the news-weekly and
Orrison Brown had all sorts of relations with them.  Outside of
office hours he was "one of the editors"--during work time he was
simply a curly-haired man who a year before had edited the
Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern and was now only too glad to take the
undesirable assignments around the office, from straightening out
illegible copy to playing call boy without the title.

He had seen this visitor go into the editor's office--a pale, tall
man of forty with blond statuesque hair and a manner that was
neither shy nor timid, nor otherworldly like a monk, but something
of all three.  The name on his card, Louis Trimble, evoked some
vague memory, but having nothing to start on, Orrison did not
puzzle over it--until a buzzer sounded on his desk, and previous
experience warned him that Mr. Trimble was to be his first course
at lunch.

"Mr. Trimble--Mr. Brown," said the Source of all luncheon money.
"Orrison--Mr. Trimble's been away a long time.  Or he FEELS it's a
long time--almost twelve years.  Some people would consider
themselves lucky to've missed the last decade."

"That's so," said Orrison.

"I can't lunch today," continued his chief.  "Take him to Voisin or
21 or anywhere he'd like.  Mr. Trimble feels there're lots of
things he hasn't seen."

Trimble demurred politely.

"Oh, I can get around."

"I know it, old boy.  Nobody knew this place like you did once--and
if Brown tries to explain the horseless carriage just send him back
here to me.  And you'll be back yourself by four, won't you?"

Orrison got his hat.

"You've been away ten years?" he asked while they went down in the
elevator.

"They'd begun the Empire State Building," said Trimble.  "What does
that add up to?"

"About 1928.  But as the chief said, you've been lucky to miss a
lot."  As a feeler he added, "Probably had more interesting things
to look at."

"Can't say I have."

They reached the street and the way Trimble's face tightened at the
roar of traffic made Orrison take one more guess.

"You've been out of civilization?"

"In a sense."  The words were spoken in such a measured way that
Orrison concluded this man wouldn't talk unless he wanted to--and
simultaneously wondered if he could have possibly spent the
thirties in a prison or an insane asylum.

"This is the famous 21," he said.  "Do you think you'd rather eat
somewhere else?"

Trimble paused, looking carefully at the brownstone house.

"I can remember when the name 21 got to be famous," he said, "about
the same year as Moriarity's."  Then he continued almost
apologetically, "I thought we might walk up Fifth Avenue about five
minutes and eat wherever we happened to be.  Some place with young
people to look at."

Orrison gave him a quick glance and once again thought of bars and
gray walls and bars; he wondered if his duties included introducing
Mr. Trimble to complaisant girls.  But Mr. Trimble didn't look as
if that was in his mind--the dominant expression was of absolute
and deep-seated curiosity and Orrison attempted to connect the name
with Admiral Byrd's hideout at the South Pole or flyers lost in
Brazilian jungles.  He was, or he had been, quite a fellow--that
was obvious.  But the only definite clue to his environment--and to
Orrison the clue that led nowhere--was his countryman's obedience
to the traffic lights and his predilection for walking on the side
next to the shops and not the street.  Once he stopped and gazed
into a haberdasher's window.

"Crępe ties," he said.  "I haven't seen one since I left college."

"Where'd you go?"

"Massachusetts Tech."

"Great place."

"I'm going to take a look at it next week.  Let's eat somewhere
along here--"  They were in the upper Fifties "--you choose."

There was a good restaurant with a little awning just around the
corner.

"What do you want to see most?" Orrison asked, as they sat down.

Trimble considered.

"Well--the back of people's heads," he suggested.  "Their necks--
how their heads are joined to their bodies.  I'd like to hear what
those two little girls are saying to their father.  Not exactly
what they're saying but whether the words float or submerge, how
their mouths shut when they've finished speaking.  Just a matter of
rhythm--Cole Porter came back to the States in 1928 because he felt
that there were new rhythms around."

Orrison was sure he had his clue now, and with nice delicacy did
not pursue it by a millimeter--even suppressing a sudden desire to
say there was a fine concert in Carnegie Hall tonight.

"The weight of spoons," said Trimble, "so light.  A little bowl
with a stick attached.  The cast in that waiter's eye.  I knew him
once but he wouldn't remember me."

But as they left the restaurant the same waiter looked at Trimble
rather puzzled as if he almost knew him.  When they were outside
Orrison laughed:

"After ten years people will forget."

"Oh, I had dinner there last May--"  He broke off in an abrupt
manner.

It was all kind of nutsy, Orrison decided--and changed himself
suddenly into a guide.

"From here you get a good candid focus on Rockefeller Center," he
pointed out with spirit "--and the Chrysler Building and the
Armistead Building, the daddy of all the new ones."

"The Armistead Building," Trimble rubber-necked obediently.  "Yes--
I designed it."

Orrison shook his head cheerfully--he was used to going out with
all kinds of people.  But that stuff about having been in the
restaurant last May . . .

He paused by the brass entablature in the cornerstone of the
building.  "Erected 1928," it said.

Trimble nodded.

"But I was taken drunk that year--every-which-way drunk.  So I
never saw it before now."

"Oh."  Orrison hesitated.  "Like to go in now?"

"I've been in it--lots of times.  But I've never seen it.  And now
it isn't what I want to see.  I wouldn't ever be able to see it
now.  I simply want to see how people walk and what their clothes
and shoes and hats are made of.  And their eyes and hands.  Would
you mind shaking hands with me?"

"Not at all, sir."

"Thanks.  Thanks.  That's very kind.  I suppose it looks strange--
but people will think we're saying good-by.  I'm going to walk up
the avenue for awhile, so we WILL say good-by.  Tell your office
I'll be in at four."

Orrison looked after him when he started out, half expecting him to
turn into a bar.  But there was nothing about him that suggested or
ever had suggested drink.

"Jesus," he said to himself.  "Drunk for ten years."

He felt suddenly of the texture of his own coat and then he reached
out and pressed his thumb against the granite of the building by
his side.





LOVE IN THE NIGHT


by
 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)
 

Saturday Evening Post (14 March 1925)



The words thrilled Val.  They had come into his mind sometime
during the fresh gold April afternoon and he kept repeating them to
himself over and over:  "Love in the night; love in the night."  He
tried them in three languages--Russian, French and English--and
decided that they were best in English.  In each language they
meant a different sort of love and a different sort of night--the
English night seemed the warmest and softest with a thinnest and
most crystalline sprinkling of stars.  The English love seemed the
most fragile and romantic--a white dress and a dim face above it
and eyes that were pools of light.  And when I add that it was a
French night he was thinking about, after all, I see I must go back
and begin over.

Val was half Russian and half American.  His mother was the
daughter of that Morris Hasylton who helped finance the Chicago
World's Fair in 1892, and his father was--see the Almanach de
Gotha, issue of 1910--Prince Paul Serge Boris Rostoff, son of
Prince Vladimir Rostoff, grandson of a grand duke--'Jimber-jawed
Serge'--and third-cousin-once-removed to the czar.  It was all very
impressive, you see, on that side--house in St. Petersburg,
shooting lodge near Riga, and swollen villa, more like a palace,
overlooking the Mediterranean.  It was at this villa in Cannes that
the Rostoffs passed the winter--and it wasn't at all the thing to
remind Princess Rostoff that this Riviera villa, from the marble
fountain--after Bernini--to the gold cordial glasses--after dinner--
was paid for with American gold.

The Russians, of course, were gay people on the Continent in the
gala days before the war.  Of the three races that used Southern
France for a pleasure ground they were easily the most adept at the
grand manner.  The English were too practical, and the Americans,
though they spent freely, had no tradition of romantic conduct.
But the Russians--there was a people as gallant as the Latins, and
rich besides!  When the Rostoffs arrived at Cannes late in January
the restaurateurs telegraphed north for the Prince's favorite
labels to paste on their champagne, and the jewelers put incredibly
gorgeous articles aside to show to him--but not to the princess--
and the Russian Church was swept and garnished for the season that
the Prince might beg orthodox forgiveness for his sins.  Even the
Mediterranean turned obligingly to a deep wine color in the spring
evenings, and fishing boats with robin-breasted sails loitered
exquisitely offshore.

In a vague way young Val realized that this was all for the benefit
of him and his family.  It was a privileged paradise, this white
little city on the water, in which he was free to do what he liked
because he was rich and young and the blood of Peter the Great ran
indigo in his veins.  He was only seventeen in 1914, when this
history begins, but he had already fought a duel with a young man
four years his senior, and he had a small hairless scar to show for
it on top of his handsome head.

But the question of love in the night was the thing nearest his
heart.  It was a vague pleasant dream he had, something that was
going to happen to him some day that would be unique and
incomparable.  He could have told no more about it than that there
was a lovely unknown girl concerned in it, and that it ought to
take place beneath the Riviera moon.

The odd thing about all this was not that he had this excited and
yet almost spiritual hope of romance, for all boys of any
imagination have just such hopes, but that it actually came true.
And when it happened, it happened so unexpectedly; it was such a
jumble of impressions and emotions, of curious phrases that sprang
to his lips, of sights and sounds and moments that were here, were
lost, were past, that he scarcely understood it at all.  Perhaps
its very vagueness preserved it in his heart and made him forever
unable to forget.

There was an atmosphere of love all about him that spring--his
father's loves, for instance, which were many and indiscreet, and
which Val became aware of gradually from overhearing the gossip of
servants, and definitely from coming on his American mother
unexpectedly one afternoon, to find her storming hysterically at
his father's picture on the salon wall.  In the picture his father
wore a white uniform with a furred dolman and looked back
impassively at his wife as if to say "Were you under the
impression, my dear, that you were marrying into a family of
clergymen?"

Val tiptoed away, surprised, confused--and excited.  It didn't
shock him as it would have shocked an American boy of his age.  He
had known for years what life was among the Continental rich, and
he condemned his father only for making his mother cry.

Love went on around him--reproachless love and illicit love alike.
As he strolled along the seaside promenade at nine o'clock, when
the stars were bright enough to compete with the bright lamps, he
was aware of love on every side.  From the open-air cafés, vivid
with dresses just down from Paris, came a sweet pungent odor of
flowers and chartreuse and fresh black coffee and cigarettes--and
mingled with them all he caught another scent, the mysterious
thrilling scent of love.  Hands touched jewel-sparkling hands upon
the white tables.  Gay dresses and white shirt fronts swayed
together, and matches were held, trembling a little, for slow-
lighting cigarettes.  On the other side of the boulevard lovers
less fashionable, young Frenchmen who worked in the stores of
Cannes, sauntered with their fiancées under the dim trees, but
Val's young eyes seldom turned that way.  The luxury of music and
bright colors and low voices--they were all part of his dream.
They were the essential trappings of Love in the night.

But assume as he might the rather fierce expression that was
expected from a young Russian gentleman who walked the streets
alone, Val was beginning to be unhappy.  April twilight had
succeeded March twilight, the season was almost over, and he had
found no use to make of the warm spring evenings.  The girls of
sixteen and seventeen whom he knew, were chaperoned with care
between dusk and bedtime--this, remember, was before the war--and
the others who might gladly have walked beside him were an affront
to his romantic desire.  So April passed by--one week, two weeks,
three weeks--

He had played tennis until seven and loitered at the courts for
another hour, so it was half-past eight when a tired cab horse
accomplished the hill on which gleamed the façade of the Rostoff
villa.  The lights of his mother's limousine were yellow in the
drive, and the princess, buttoning her gloves, was just coming out
the glowing door.  Val tossed two francs to the cabman and went to
kiss her on the cheek.

"Don't touch me," she said quickly.  "You've been handling money."

"But not in my mouth, mother," he protested humorously.

The princess looked at him impatiently.

"I'm angry," she said.  "Why must you be so late tonight?  We're
dining on a yacht and you were to have come along too."

"What yacht?"

"Americans."  There was always a faint irony in her voice when she
mentioned the land of her nativity.  Her America was the Chicago of
the nineties which she still thought of as the vast upstairs to a
butcher shop.  Even the irregularities of Prince Paul were not too
high a price to have paid for her escape.

"Two yachts," she continued; "in fact we don't know which one.  The
note was very indefinite.  Very careless indeed."

Americans.  Val's mother had taught him to look down on Americans,
but she hadn't succeeded in making him dislike them.  American men
noticed you, even if you were seventeen.  He liked Americans.
Although he was thoroughly Russian he wasn't immaculately so--the
exact proportion, like that of a celebrated soap, was about ninety-
nine and three-quarters per cent.

"I want to come," he said, "I'll hurry up, mother.  I'll--"

"We're late now."  The princess turned as her husband appeared in
the door.  "Now Val says he wants to come."

"He can't," said Prince Paul shortly.  "He's too outrageously
late."

Val nodded.  Russian aristocrats, however indulgent about
themselves, were always admirably Spartan with their children.
There were no arguments.

"I'm sorry," he said.

Prince Paul grunted.  The footman, in red and silver livery, opened
the limousine door.  But the grunt decided the matter for Val,
because Princess Rostoff at that day and hour had certain
grievances against her husband which gave her command of the
domestic situation.

"On second thought you'd better come, Val," she announced coolly.
"It's too late now, but come after dinner.  The yacht is either the
Minnehaha or the Privateer."  She got into the limousine.  "The one
to come to will be the gayer one, I suppose--the Jacksons' yacht--"

"Find got sense," muttered the Prince cryptically, conveying that
Val would find it if he had any sense.  "Have my man take a look at
you 'fore you start.  Wear tie of mine 'stead of that outrageous
string you affected in Vienna.  Grow up.  High time."

As the limousine crawled crackling down the pebbled drive Val's
face was burning.


II


It was dark in Cannes harbor, rather it seemed dark after the
brightness of the promenade that Val had just left behind.  Three
frail dock lights glittered dimly upon innumerable fishing boats
heaped like shells along the beach.  Farther out in the water there
were other lights where a fleet of slender yachts rode the tide
with slow dignity, and farther still a full ripe moon made the
water bosom into a polished dancing floor.  Occasionally there was
a swish! creak! drip! as a rowboat moved about in the shallows, and
its blurred shape threaded the labyrinth of hobbled fishing skiffs
and launches.  Val, descending the velvet slope of sand, stumbled
over a sleeping boatman and caught the rank savor of garlic and
plain wine.  Taking the man by the shoulders he shook open his
startled eyes.

"Do you know where the Minnehaha is anchored, and the Privateer?"

As they slid out into the bay he lay back in the stern and stared
with vague discontent at the Riviera moon.  That was the right
moon, all right.  Frequently, five nights out of seven, there was
the right moon.  And here was the soft air, aching with
enchantment, and here was the music, many strains of music from
many orchestras, drifting out from the shore.  Eastward lay the
dark Cape of Antibes, and then Nice, and beyond that Monte Carlo,
where the night rang chinking full of gold.  Some day he would
enjoy all that, too, know its every pleasure and success--when he
was too old and wise to care.

But tonight--tonight, that stream of silver that waved like a wide
strand of curly hair toward the moon; those soft romantic lights of
Cannes behind him, the irresistible ineffable love in this air--
that was to be wasted forever.

"Which one?" asked the boatman suddenly.

"Which what?" demanded Val, sitting up.

"Which boat?"

He pointed.  Val turned; above hovered the gray, sword-like prow of
a yacht.  During the sustained longing of his wish they had covered
half a mile.

He read the brass letters over his head.  It was the Privateer, but
there were only dim lights on board, and no music and no voices,
only a murmurous k-plash at intervals as the small waves leaped at
the sides.

"The other one," said Val; "the Minnehaha."

"Don't go yet."

Val started.  The voice, low and soft, had dropped down from the
darkness overhead.

"What's the hurry?" said the soft voice.  "Thought maybe somebody
was coming to see me, and have suffered terrible disappointment."

The boatman lifted his oars and looked hesitatingly at Val.  But
Val was silent, so the man let the blades fall into the water and
swept the boat out into the moonlight.

"Wait a minute!" cried Val sharply.

"Good-by," said the voice.  "Come again when you can stay longer."

"But I am going to stay now," he answered breathlessly.

He gave the necessary order and the rowboat swung back to the foot
of the small companionway.  Someone young, someone in a misty white
dress, someone with a lovely low voice, had actually called to him
out of the velvet dark.  "If she has eyes!" Val murmured to
himself.  He liked the romantic sound of it and repeated it under
his breath--"If she has eyes."

"What are you?"  She was directly above him now; she was looking
down and he was looking up as he climbed the ladder, and as their
eyes met they both began to laugh.

She was very young, slim, almost frail, with a dress that
accentuated her youth by its blanched simplicity.  Two wan dark
spots on her cheeks marked where the color was by day.

"What are you?" she repeated, moving back and laughing again as his
head appeared on the level of the deck.  "I'm frightened now and I
want to know."

"I am a gentleman," said Val, bowing.

"What sort of a gentleman?  There are all sorts of gentlemen.
There was a--there was a colored gentleman at the table next to
ours in Paris, and so--"  She broke off.  "You're not American, are
you?"

"I'm Russian," he said, as he might have announced himself to be an
archangel.  He thought quickly and then added, "And I am the most
fortunate of Russians.  All this day, all this spring I have
dreamed of falling in love on such a night, and now I see that
heaven has sent me to you."

"Just one moment!" she said, with a little gasp.  "I'm sure now
that this visit is a mistake.  I don't go in for anything like
that.  Please!"

"I beg your pardon."  He looked at her in bewilderment, unaware
that he had taken too much for granted.  Then he drew himself up
formally.

"I have made an error.  If you will excuse me I will say good
night."

He turned away.  His hand was on the rail.

"Don't go," she said, pushing a strand of indefinite hair out of
her eyes.  "On second thoughts you can talk any nonsense you like
if you'll only not go.  I'm miserable and I don't want to be left
alone."

Val hesitated; there was some element in this that he failed to
understand.  He had taken it for granted that a girl who called to
a strange man at night, even from the deck of a yacht, was
certainly in a mood for romance.  And he wanted intensely to stay.
Then he remembered that this was one of the two yachts he had been
seeking.

"I imagine that the dinner's on the other boat," he said.

"The dinner?  Oh, yes, it's on the Minnehaha.  Were you going
there?"

"I was going there--a long time ago."

"What's your name?"

He was on the point of telling her when something made him ask a
question instead.

"And you?  Why are you not at the party?"

"Because I preferred to stay here.  Mrs. Jackson said there would
be some Russians there--I suppose that's you."  She looked at him
with interest.  "You're a very young man, aren't you?"

"I am much older than I look," said Val stiffly.  "People always
comment on it.  It's considered rather a remarkable thing."

"How old are you?"

"Twenty-one," he lied.

She laughed.

"What nonsense!  You're not more than nineteen."

His annoyance was so perceptible that she hastened to reassure him.
"Cheer up!  I'm only seventeen myself.  I might have gone to the
party if I'd thought there'd be anyone under fifty there."

He welcomed the change of subject.

"You preferred to sit and dream here beneath the moon."

"I've been thinking of mistakes."  They sat down side by side in
two canvas deck chairs.  "It's a most engrossing subject--the
subject of mistakes.  Women very seldom brood about mistakes--
they're much more willing to forget than men are.  But when they do
brood--"

"You have made a mistake?" inquired Val.

She nodded.

"Is it something that cannot be repaired?"

"I think so," she answered.  "I can't be sure.  That's what I was
considering when you came along."

"Perhaps I can help in some way," said Val.  "Perhaps your mistake
is not irreparable, after all."

"You can't," she said unhappily.  "So let's not think about it.
I'm very tired of my mistake and I'd much rather you'd tell me
about all the gay, cheerful things that are going on in Cannes
tonight."

They glanced shoreward at the line of mysterious and alluring
lights, the big toy banks with candles inside that were really the
great fashionable hotels, the lighted clock in the old town, the
blurred glow of the Café de Paris, the pricked-out points of villa
windows rising on slow hills toward the dark sky.

"What is everyone doing there?" she whispered.  "It looks as though
something gorgeous was going on, but what it is I can't quite
tell."

"Everyone there is making love," said Val quietly.

"Is that it?"  She looked for a long time, with a strange
expression in her eyes.  "Then I want to go home to America," she
said.  "There is too much love here.  I want to go home tomorrow."

"You are afraid of being in love then?"

She shook her head.

"It isn't that.  It's just because--there is no love here for me."

"Or for me either," added Val quietly.  "It is sad that we two
should be at such a lovely place on such a lovely night and have--
nothing."

He was leaning toward her intently, with a sort of inspired and
chaste romance in his eyes--and she drew back.

"Tell me more about yourself," she inquired quickly.  "If you are
Russian where did you learn to speak such excellent English?"

"My mother was American," he admitted.  "My grandfather was
American also, so she had no choice in the matter."

"Then you're American too!"

"I am Russian," said Val with dignity.

She looked at him closely, smiled and decided not to argue.  "Well
then," she said diplomatically, "I suppose you must have a Russian
name."

But he had no intention now of telling her his name.  A name, even
the Rostoff name, would be a desecration of the night.  They were
their own low voices, their two white faces--and that was enough.
He was sure, without any reason for being sure but with a sort of
instinct that sang triumphantly through his mind, that in a little
while, a minute or an hour, he was going to undergo an initiation
into the life of romance.  His name had no reality beside what was
stirring in his heart.

"You are beautiful," he said suddenly.

"How do you know?"

"Because for women moonlight is the hardest light of all."

"Am I nice in the moonlight?"

"You are the loveliest thing that I have ever known."

"Oh."  She thought this over.  "Of course I had no business to let
you come on board.  I might have known what we'd talk about--in
this moon.  But I can't sit here and look at the shore--forever.
I'm too young for that.  Don't you think I'm too young for that?"

"Much too young," he agreed solemnly.

Suddenly they both became aware of new music that was close at
hand, music that seemed to come out of the water not a hundred
yards away.

"Listen!" she cried.  "It's from the Minnehaha.  They've finished
dinner."

For a moment they listened in silence.

"Thank you," said Val suddenly.

"For what?"

He hardly knew he had spoken.  He was thanking the deep low horns
for singing in the breeze, the sea for its warm murmurous complaint
against the bow, the milk of the stars for washing over them until
he felt buoyed up in a substance more taut than air.

"So lovely," she whispered.

"What are we going to do about it?"

"Do we have to do something about it?  I thought we could just sit
and enjoy--"

"You didn't think that," he interrupted quietly.  "You know that we
must do something about it.  I am going to make love to you--and
you are going to be glad."

"I can't," she said very low.  She wanted to laugh now, to make
some light cool remark that would bring the situation back into the
safe waters of a casual flirtation.  But it was too late now.  Val
knew that the music had completed what the moon had begun.

"I will tell you the truth," he said.  "You are my first love.  I
am seventeen--the same age as you, no more."

There was something utterly disarming about the fact that they were
the same age.  It made her helpless before the fate that had thrown
them together.  The deck chairs creaked and he was conscious of a
faint illusive perfume as they swayed suddenly and childishly
together.


III


Whether he kissed her once or several times he could not afterward
remember, though it must have been an hour that they sat there
close together and he held her hand.  What surprised him most about
making love was that it seemed to have no element of wild passion--
regret, desire, despair--but a delirious promise of such happiness
in the world, in living, as he had never known.  First love--this
was only first love!  What must love itself in its fullness, its
perfection be.  He did not know that what he was experiencing then,
that unreal, undesirous medley of ecstasy and peace, would be
unrecapturable forever.

The music had ceased for some time when presently the murmurous
silence was broken by the sound of a rowboat disturbing the quiet
waves.  She sprang suddenly to her feet and her eyes strained out
over the bay.

"Listen!" she said quickly.  "I want you to tell me your name."

"No."

"Please," she begged him.  "I'm going away tomorrow."

He didn't answer.

"I don't want you to forget me," she said.  "My name is--"

"I won't forget you.  I will promise to remember you always.
Whoever I may love I will always compare her to you, my first love.
So long as I live you will always have that much freshness in my
heart."

"I want you to remember," she murmured brokenly.  "Oh, this has
meant more to me than it has to you--much more."

She was standing so close to him that he felt her warm young breath
on his face.  Once again they swayed together.  He pressed her
hands and wrists between his as it seemed right to do, and kissed
her lips.  It was the right kiss, he thought, the romantic kiss--
not too little or too much.  Yet there was a sort of promise in it
of other kisses he might have had, and it was with a slight sinking
of his heart that he heard the rowboat close to the yacht and
realized that her family had returned.  The evening was over.

"And this is only the beginning," he told himself.  "All my life
will be like this night."

She was saying something in a low quick voice and he was listening
tensely.

"You must know one thing--I am married.  Three months ago.  That
was the mistake that I was thinking about when the moon brought you
out here.  In a moment you will understand."

She broke off as the boat swung against the companionway and a
man's voice floated up out of the darkness.

"Is that you, my dear?"

"Yes."

"What is this other rowboat waiting?"

"One of Mrs. Jackson's guests came here by mistake and I made him
stay and amuse me for an hour."

A moment later the thin white hair and weary face of a man of sixty
appeared above the level of the deck.  And then Val saw and
realized too late how much he cared.


IV


When the Riviera season ended in May the Rostoffs and all the other
Russians closed their villas and went north for the summer.  The
Russian Orthodox Church was locked up and so were the bins of rarer
wine, and the fashionable spring moonlight was put away, so to
speak, to wait for their return.

"We'll be back next season," they said as a matter of course.

But this was premature, for they were never coming back any more.
Those few who straggled south again after five tragic years were
glad to get work as chambermaids or valets de chambre in the great
hotels where they had once dined.  Many of them, of course, were
killed in the war or in the revolution; many of them faded out as
spongers and small cheats in the big capitals, and not a few ended
their lives in a sort of stupefied despair.

When the Kerensky government collapsed in 1917, Val was a
lieutenant on the eastern front, trying desperately to enforce
authority in his company long after any vestige of it remained.  He
was still trying when Prince Paul Rostoff and his wife gave up
their lives one rainy morning to atone for the blunders of the
Romanoffs--and the enviable career of Morris Hasylton's daughter
ended in a city that bore even more resemblance to a butcher shop
than had Chicago in 1892.

After that Val fought with Denikin's army for a while until he
realized that he was participating in a hollow farce and the glory
of Imperial Russia was over.  Then he went to France and was
suddenly confronted with the astounding problem of keeping his body
and soul together.

It was, of course, natural that he should think of going to
America.  Two vague aunts with whom his mother had quarreled many
years ago still lived there in comparative affluence.  But the idea
was repugnant to the prejudices his mother had implanted in him,
and besides he hadn't sufficient money left to pay for his passage
over.  Until a possible counter-revolution should restore to him
the Rostoff properties in Russia he must somehow keep alive in
France.

So he went to the little city he knew best of all.  He went to
Cannes.  His last two hundred francs bought him a third-class
ticket and when he arrived he gave his dress suit to an obliging
party who dealt in such things and received in return money for
food and bed.  He was sorry afterward that he had sold the dress
suit, because it might have helped him to a position as a waiter.
But he obtained work as a taxi driver instead and was quite as
happy, or rather quite as miserable, at that.

Sometimes he carried Americans to look at villas for rent, and when
the front glass of the automobile was up, curious fragments of
conversation drifted out to him from within.

"--heard this fellow was a Russian prince." . . . "Sh!" . . . "No,
this one right here." . . . "Be quiet, Esther!"--followed by subdued
laughter.

When the car stopped, his passengers would edge around to have a
look at him.  At first he was desperately unhappy when girls did
this; after a while he didn't mind any more.  Once a cheerfully
intoxicated American asked him if it were true and invited him to
lunch, and another time an elderly woman seized his hand as she got
out of the taxi, shook it violently and then pressed a hundred-
franc note into his hand.

"Well, Florence, now I can tell 'em back home I shook hands with a
Russian prince."

The inebriated American who had invited him to lunch thought at
first that Val was a son of the czar, and it had to be explained to
him that a prince in Russia was simply the equivalent of a British
courtesy lord.  But he was puzzled that a man of Val's personality
didn't go out and make some real money.

"This is Europe," said Val gravely.  "Here money is not made.  It
is inherited or else it is slowly saved over a period of many years
and maybe in three generations a family moves up into a higher
class."

"Think of something people want--like we do."

"That is because there is more money to want with in America.
Everything that people want here has been thought of long ago."

But after a year and with the help of a young Englishman he had
played tennis with before the war, Val managed to get into the
Cannes branch of an English bank.  He forwarded mail and bought
railroad tickets and arranged tours for impatient sight-seers.
Sometimes a familiar face came to his window; if Val was recognized
he shook hands; if not he kept silence.  After two years he was no
longer pointed out as a former prince, for the Russians were an old
story now--the splendor of the Rostoffs and their friends was
forgotten.

He mixed with people very little.  In the evenings he walked for a
while on the promenade, took a slow glass of beer in a café, and
went early to bed.  He was seldom invited anywhere because people
thought that his sad, intent face was depressing--and he never
accepted anyhow.  He wore cheap French clothes now instead of the
rich tweeds and flannels that had been ordered with his father's
from England.  As for women, he knew none at all.  Of the many
things he had been certain about at seventeen, he had been most
certain about this--that his life would be full of romance.  Now
after eight years he knew that it was not to be.  Somehow he had
never had time for love--the war, the revolution and now his
poverty had conspired against his expectant heart.  The springs of
his emotion which had first poured forth one April night had dried
up immediately and only a faint trickle remained.

His happy youth had ended almost before it began.  He saw himself
growing older and more shabby, and living always more and more in
the memories of his gorgeous boyhood.  Eventually he would become
absurd, pulling out an old heirloom of a watch and showing it to
amused young fellow clerks who would listen with winks to his tales
of the Rostoff name.

He was thinking these gloomy thoughts one April evening in 1922 as
he walked beside the sea and watched the never-changing magic of
the awakening lights.  It was no longer for his benefit, that
magic, but it went on, and he was somehow glad.  Tomorrow he was
going away on his vacation, to a cheap hotel farther down the shore
where he could bathe and rest and read; then he would come back and
work some more.  Every year for three years he had taken his
vacation during the last two weeks in April, perhaps because it was
then that he felt the most need for remembering.  It was in April
that what was destined to be the best part of his life had come to
a culmination under a romantic moonlight.  It was sacred to him--
for what he had thought of as an initiation and a beginning had
turned out to be the end.

He paused now in front of the Café des Étrangers and after a moment
crossed the street on impulse and sauntered down to the shore.  A
dozen yachts, already turned to a beautiful silver color, rode at
anchor in the bay.  He had seen them that afternoon, and read the
names painted on their bows--but only from habit.  He had done it
for three years now, and it was almost a natural function of his
eye.

"Un beau soir," remarked a French voice at his elbow.  It was a
boatman who had often seen Val here before.  "Monsieur finds the
sea beautiful?"

"Very beautiful."

"I too.  But a bad living except in the season.  Next week, though,
I earn something special.  I am paid well for simply waiting here
and doing nothing more from eight o'clock until midnight."

"That's very nice," said Val politely.

"A widowed lady, very beautiful, from America, whose yacht always
anchors in the harbor for the last two weeks in April.  If the
Privateer comes tomorrow it will make three years."


V


All night Val didn't sleep--not because there was any question in
his mind as to what he should do, but because his long stupefied
emotions were suddenly awake and alive.  Of course he must not see
her--not he, a poor failure with a name that was now only a shadow--
but it would make him a little happier always to know that she
remembered.  It gave his own memory another dimension, raised it
like those stereopticon glasses that bring out a picture from the
flat paper.  It made him sure that he had not deceived himself--he
had been charming once upon a time to a lovely woman, and she did
not forget.

An hour before train time next day he was at the railway station
with his grip, so as to avoid any chance encounter in the street.
He found himself a place in a third-class carriage of the waiting
train.

Somehow as he sat there he felt differently about life--a sort of
hope, faint and illusory, that he hadn't felt twenty-four hours
before.  Perhaps there was some way in those next few years in
which he could make it possible to meet her once again--if he
worked hard, threw himself passionately into whatever was at hand.
He knew of at least two Russians in Cannes who had started over
again with nothing except good manners and ingenuity and were now
doing surprisingly well.  The blood of Morris Hasylton began to
throb a little in Val's temples and made him remember something he
had never before cared to remember--that Morris Hasylton, who had
built his daughter a palace in St. Petersburg, had also started
from nothing at all.

Simultaneously another emotion possessed him, less strange, less
dynamic but equally American--the emotion of curiosity.  In case he
did--well, in case life should ever make it possible for him to
seek her out, he should at least know her name.

He jumped to his feet, fumbled excitedly at the carriage handle and
jumped from the train.  Tossing his valise into the check room he
started at a run for the American consulate.

"A yacht came in this morning," he said hurriedly to a clerk, "an
American yacht--the Privateer.  I want to know who owns it."

"Just a minute," said the clerk, looking at him oddly.  "I'll try
to find out."

After what seemed to Val an interminable time he returned.

"Why, just a minute," he repeated hesitantly.  "We're--it seems
we're finding out."

"Did the yacht come?"

"Oh, yes--it's here all right.  At least I think so.  If you'll
just wait in that chair."

After another ten minutes Val looked impatiently at his watch.  If
they didn't hurry he'd probably miss his train.  He made a nervous
movement as if to get up from his chair.

"Please sit still," said the clerk, glancing at him quickly from
his desk.  "I ask you.  Just sit down in that chair."

Val stared at him.  How could it possibly matter to the clerk
whether or not he waited?

"I'll miss my train," he said impatiently.  "I'm sorry to have
given you all this bother--"

"Please sit still!  We're glad to get it off our hands.  You see,
we've been waiting for your inquiry for--ah--three years."

Val jumped to his feet and jammed his hat on his head.

"Why didn't you tell me that?" he demanded angrily.

"Because we had to get word to our--our client.  Please don't go!
It's--ah, it's too late."

Val turned.  Someone slim and radiant with dark frightened eyes was
standing behind him, framed against the sunshine of the doorway.

"Why--"

Val's lips parted, but no words came through.  She took a step
toward him.

"I--"  She looked at him helplessly, her eyes filling with tears.
"I just wanted to say hello," she murmured.  "I've come back for
three years just because I wanted to say hello."

Still Val was silent.

"You might answer," she said impatiently.  "You might answer when
I'd--when I'd just about begun to think you'd been killed in the
war."  She turned to the clerk.  "Please introduce us!" she cried.
"You see, I can't say hello to him when we don't even know each
other's names."



It's the thing to distrust these international marriages, of
course.  It's an American tradition that they always turn out
badly, and we are accustomed to such headlines as:  "Would Trade
Coronet for True American Love, Says Duchess," and "Claims Count
Mendicant Tortured Toledo Wife."  The other sort of headlines are
never printed, for who would want to read:  "Castle is Love Nest,
Asserts Former Georgia Belle," or "Duke and Packer's Daughter
Celebrate Golden Honeymoon."

So far there have been no headlines at all about the young
Rostoffs.  Prince Val is much too absorbed in that string of
moonlight-blue taxicabs which he manipulates with such unusual
efficiency, to give out interviews.  He and his wife only leave New
York once a year--but there is still a boatman who rejoices when
the Privateer steams into Cannes harbor on a mid-April night.


THE END




MAGNETISM


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


The Saturday Evening Post  (3 March 1928)



I


The pleasant, ostentatious boulevard was lined at prosperous
intervals with New England Colonial houses--without ship models in
the hall.  When the inhabitants moved out here the ship models had
at last been given to the children.  The next street was a complete
exhibit of the Spanish-bungalow phase of West Coast architecture;
while two streets over, the cylindrical windows and round towers of
1897--melancholy antiques which sheltered swamis, yogis, fortune
tellers, dressmakers, dancing teachers, art academies and
chiropractors--looked down now upon brisk buses and trolley cars.
A little walk around the block could, if you were feeling old that
day, be a discouraging affair.

On the green flanks of the modern boulevard children, with their
knees marked by the red stains of the mercurochrome era, played
with toys with a purpose--beams that taught engineering, soldiers
that taught manliness, and dolls that taught motherhood.  When the
dolls were so banged up that they stopped looking like real babies
and began to look like dolls, the children developed affection for
them.  Everything in the vicinity--even the March sunlight--was
new, fresh, hopeful and thin, as you would expect in a city that
had tripled its population in fifteen years.

Among the very few domestics in sight that morning was a handsome
young maid sweeping the steps of the biggest house on the street.
She was a large, simple Mexican girl with the large, simple
ambitions of the time and the locality, and she was already
conscious of being a luxury--she received one hundred dollars a
month in return for her personal liberty.  Sweeping, Dolores kept
an eye on the stairs inside, for Mr Hannaford's car was waiting and
he would soon be coming down to breakfast.  The problem came first
this morning, however--the problem as to whether it was a duty or a
favour when she helped the English nurse down the steps with the
perambulator.  The English nurse always said 'Please', and 'Thanks
very much', but Dolores hated her and would have liked, without any
special excitement, to beat her insensible.  Like most Latins under
the stimulus of American life, she had irresistible impulses
towards violence.

The nurse escaped, however.  Her blue cape faded haughtily into the
distance just as Mr Hannaford, who had come quietly downstairs,
stepped into the space of the front door.

'Good morning.'  He smiled at Dolores; he was young and
extraordinarily handsome.  Dolores tripped on the broom and fell
off the stoop.  George Hannaford hurried down the steps, reached
her as she was getting to her feet cursing volubly in Mexican, just
touched her arm with a helpful gesture and said, 'I hope you didn't
hurt yourself.'

'Oh, no.'

'I'm afraid it was my fault; I'm afraid I startled you, coming out
like that.'

His voice had real regret in it; his brow was knit with solicitude.

'Are you sure you're all right?'

'Aw, sure.'

'Didn't turn your ankle?'

'Aw, no.'

'I'm terribly sorry about it.'

'Aw, it wasn't your fault.'

He was still frowning as she went inside, and Dolores, who was not
hurt and thought quickly, suddenly contemplated having a love
affair with him.  She looked at herself several times in the pantry
mirror and stood close to him as she poured his coffee, but he read
the paper and she saw that that was all for the morning.

Hannaford entered his car and drove to Jules Rennard's house.
Jules was a French Canadian by birth, and George Hannaford's best
friend; they were fond of each other and spent much time together.
Both of them were simple and dignified in their tastes and in their
way of thinking, instinctively gentle, and in a world of the
volatile and the bizarre found in each other a certain quiet
solidity.

He found Jules at breakfast.

'I want to fish for barracuda,' said George abruptly.  'When will
you be free?  I want to take the boat and go down to Lower
California.'

Jules had dark circles under his eyes.  Yesterday he had closed out
the greatest problem of his life by settling with his ex-wife for
two hundred thousand dollars.  He had married too young, and the
former slavey from the Quebec slums had taken to drugs upon her
failure to rise with him.  Yesterday, in the presence of lawyers,
her final gesture had been to smash his finger with the base of a
telephone.  He was tired of women for a while and welcomed the
suggestion of a fishing trip.

'How's the baby?' he asked.

'The baby's fine.'

'And Kay?'

'Kay's not herself, but I don't pay any attention.  What did you do
to your hand?'

'I'll tell you another time.  What's the matter with Kay, George?'

'Jealous.'

'Of who?'

'Helen Avery.  It's nothing.  She's not herself, that's all.'  He
got up.  'I'm late,' he said.  'Let me know as soon as you're free.
Any time after Monday will suit me.'

George left and drove out by an interminable boulevard which
narrowed into a long, winding concrete road and rose into the hilly
country behind.  Somewhere in the vast emptiness a group of
buildings appeared, a barnlike structure, a row of offices, a large
but quick restaurant and half a dozen small bungalows.  The
chauffeur dropped Hannaford at the main entrance.  He went in and
passed through various enclosures, each marked off by swinging
gates and inhabited by a stenographer.

'Is anybody with Mr Schroeder?' he asked, in front of a door
lettered with that name.

'No, Mr Hannaford.'

Simultaneously his eye fell on a young lady who was writing at a
desk aside, and he lingered a moment.

'Hello, Margaret,' he said.  'How are you, darling?'

A delicate, pale beauty looked up, frowning a little, still
abstracted in her work.  It was Miss Donovan, the script girl, a
friend of many years.

'Hello.  Oh, George, I didn't see you come in.  Mr Douglas wants to
work on the book sequence this afternoon.'

'All right.'

'These are the changes we decided on Thursday night.'  She smiled
up at him and George wondered for the thousandth time why she had
never gone into pictures.

'All right,' he said.  'Will initials do?'

'Your initials look like George Harris's.'

'Very well, darling.'

As he finished, Pete Schroeder opened his door and beckoned him.
'George, come here!' he said with an air of excitement.  'I want
you to listen to some one on the phone.'

Hannaford went in.

'Pick up the phone and say "Hello",' directed Schroeder.  'Don't
say who you are.'

'Hello,' said Hannaford obediently.

'Who is this?' asked a girl's voice.

Hannaford put his hand over the mouthpiece.  'What am I supposed to
do?'

Schroeder snickered and Hannaford hesitated, smiling and
suspicious.

'Who do you want to speak to?' he temporized into the phone.

'To George Hannaford, I want to speak to.  Is this him?'

'Yes.'

'Oh, George; it's me.'

'Who?'

'Me--Gwen.  I had an awful time finding you.  They told me--'

'Gwen who?'

'Gwen--can't you hear?  From San Francisco--last Thursday night.'

'I'm sorry,' objected George.  'Must be some mistake.'

'Is this George Hannaford?'

'Yes.'

The voice grew slightly tart:  'Well, this is Gwen Becker you spent
last Thursday evening with in San Francisco.  There's no use
pretending you don't know who I am, because you do.'

Schroeder took the apparatus from George and hung up the receiver.

'Somebody has been doubling for me up in Frisco,' said Hannaford.

'So that's where you were Thursday night!'

'Those things aren't funny to me--not since that crazy Zeller girl.
You can never convince them they've been sold because the man
always looks something like you.  What's new, Pete?'

'Let's go over to the stage and see.'

Together they walked out a back entrance, along a muddy walk, and
opening a little door in the big blank wall of the studio building
entered into its half darkness.

Here and there figures spotted the dim twilight, figures that
turned up white faces to George Hannaford, like souls in purgatory
watching the passage of a half-god through.  Here and there were
whispers and soft voices and, apparently from afar, the gentle
tremolo of a small organ.  Turning the corner made by some flats,
they came upon the white crackling glow of a stage with two people
motionless upon it.

An actor in evening clothes, his shirt front, collar and cuffs
tinted a brilliant pink, made as though to get chairs for them, but
they shook their heads and stood watching.  For a long while
nothing happened on the stage--no one moved.  A row of lights went
off with a savage hiss, went on again.  The plaintive tap of a
hammer begged admission to nowhere in the distance; a blue face
appeared among the blinding lights above and called something
unintelligible into the upper blackness.  Then the silence was
broken by a low clear voice from the stage:

'If you want to know why I haven't got stockings on, look in my
dressing-room.  I spoiled four pairs yesterday and two already this
morning . . .  This dress weighs six pounds.'

A man stepped out of the group of observers and regarded the girl's
brown legs; their lack of covering was scarcely distinguishable,
but, in any event, her expression implied that she would do nothing
about it.  The lady was annoyed, and so intense was her personality
that it had taken only a fractional flexing of her eyes to indicate
the fact.  She was a dark, pretty girl with a figure that would be
full-blown sooner than she wished.  She was just eighteen.

Had this been the week before, George Hannaford's heart would have
stood still.  Their relationship had been in just that stage.  He
hadn't said a word to Helen Avery that Kay could have objected to,
but something had begun between them on the second day of this
picture that Kay had felt in the air.  Perhaps it had begun even
earlier, for he had determined, when he saw Helen Avery's first
release, that she should play opposite him.  Helen Avery's voice
and the dropping of her eyes when she finished speaking, like a
sort of exercise in control, fascinated him.  He had felt that they
both tolerated something, that each knew half of some secret about
people and life, and that if they rushed towards each other there
would be a romantic communion of almost unbelievable intensity.  It
was this element of promise and possibility that had haunted him
for a fortnight and was now dying away.

Hannaford was thirty, and he was a moving-picture actor only
through a series of accidents.  After a year in a small technical
college he had taken a summer job with an electric company, and his
first appearance in a studio was in the role of repairing a bank of
Klieg lights.  In an emergency he played a small part and made
good, but for fully a year after that he thought of it as a purely
transitory episode in his life.  At first much of it had offended
him--the almost hysterical egotism and excitability hidden under an
extremely thin veil of elaborate good-fellowship.  It was only
recently, with the advent of such men as Jules Rennard into
pictures, that he began to see the possibilities of a decent and
secure private life, much as his would have been as a successful
engineer.  At last his success felt solid beneath his feet.

He met Kay Tomkins at the old Griffith Studios at Mamaroneck and
their marriage was a fresh, personal affair, removed from most
stage marriages.  Afterwards they had possessed each other
completely, had been pointed to:  'Look, there's one couple in
pictures who manage to stay together.'  It would have taken
something out of many people's lives--people who enjoyed a
vicarious security in the contemplation of their marriage--if they
hadn't stayed together, and their love was fortified by a certain
effort to live up to that.

He held women off by a polite simplicity that underneath was hard
and watchful; when he felt a certain current being turned on he
became emotionally stupid.  Kay expected and took much more from
men, but she, too, had a careful thermometer against her heart.
Until the other night, when she reproached him for being interested
in Helen Avery, there had been an absolute minimum of jealousy
between them.

George Hannaford was still absorbed in the thought of Helen Avery
as he left the studio and walked towards his bungalow over the way.
There was in his mind, first, a horror that anyone should come
between him and Kay, and second, a regret that he no longer carried
that possibility in the forefront of his mind.  It had given him a
tremendous pleasure, like the things that had happened to him
during his first big success, before he was so 'made' that there
was scarcely anything better ahead; it was something to take out
and look at--a new and still mysterious joy.  It hadn't been love,
for he was critical of Helen Avery as he had never been critical of
Kay.  But his feeling of last week had been sharply significant and
memorable, and he was restless, now that it had passed.

Working that afternoon, they were seldom together, but he was
conscious of her and he knew that she was conscious of him.

She stood a long time with her back to him at one point, and when
she turned at length, their eyes swept past each other's, brushing
like bird wings.  Simultaneously he saw they had gone far, in their
way; it was well that he had drawn back.  He was glad that someone
came for her when the work was almost over.

Dressed, he returned to the office wing, stopping in for a moment
to see Schroeder.  No one answered his knock, and, turning the
knob, he went in.  Helen Avery was there alone.

Hannaford shut the door and they stared at each other.  Her face
was young, frightened.  In a moment in which neither of them spoke,
it was decided that they would have some of this out now.  Almost
thankfully he felt the warm sap of emotion flow out of his heart
and course through his body.

'Helen!'

She murmured 'What?' in an awed voice.

'I feel terribly about this.'  His voice was shaking.

Suddenly she began to cry; painful, audible sobs shook her.  'Have
you got a handkerchief?' she said.

He gave her a handkerchief.  At that moment there were steps
outside.  George opened the door halfway just in time to keep
Schroeder from entering on the spectacle of her tears.

'Nobody's in,' he said facetiously.  For a moment longer he kept
his shoulder against the door.  Then he let it open slowly.

Outside in his limousine, he wondered how soon Jules would be ready
to go fishing.


II


From the age of twelve Kay Tompkins had worn men like rings on
every finger.  Her face was round, young, pretty and strong; a
strength accentuated by the responsive play of brows and lashes
around her clear, glossy, hazel eyes.  She was the daughter of a
senator from a Western state and she hunted unsuccessfully for
glamour through a small Western city until she was seventeen, when
she ran away from home and went on the stage.  She was one of those
people who are famous far beyond their actual achievement.

There was that excitement about her that seemed to reflect the
excitement of the world.  While she was playing small parts in
Ziegfeld shows she attended proms at Yale, and during a temporary
venture into pictures she met George Hannaford, already a star of
the new 'natural' type then just coming into vogue.  In him she
found what she had been seeking.

She was at present in what is known as a dangerous state.  For six
months she had been helpless and dependent entirely upon George,
and now that her son was the property of a strict and possessive
English nurse, Kay, free again, suddenly felt the need of proving
herself attractive.  She wanted things to be as they had been
before the baby was thought of.  Also she felt that lately George
had taken her too much for granted; she had a strong instinct that
he was interested in Helen Avery.

When George Hannaford came home that night he had minimized to
himself their quarrel of the previous evening and was honestly
surprised at her perfunctory greeting.

'What's the matter, Kay?' he asked after a minute.  'Is this going
to be another night like last night?'

'Do you know we're going out tonight?' she said, avoiding an
answer.

'Where?'

'To Katherine Davis'.  I didn't know whether you'd want to go--'

'I'd like to go.'

'I didn't know whether you'd want to go.  Arthur Busch said he'd
stop for me.'

They dined in silence.  Without any secret thoughts to dip into
like a child into a jam jar, George felt restless, and at the same
time was aware that the atmosphere was full of jealousy, suspicion
and anger.  Until recently they had preserved between them
something precious that made their house one of the pleasantest in
Hollywood to enter.  Now suddenly it might be any house; he felt
common and he felt unstable.  He had come near to making something
bright and precious into something cheap and unkind.  With a sudden
surge of emotion, he crossed the room and was about to put his arm
around her when the doorbell rang.  A moment later Dolores
announced Mr Arthur Busch.

Busch was an ugly, popular little man, a continuity writer and
lately a director.  A few years ago they had been hero and heroine
to him, and even now, when he was a person of some consequence in
the picture world, he accepted with equanimity Kay's use of him for
such purposes as tonight's.  He had been in love with her for
years, but, because his love seemed hopeless, it had never caused
him much distress.

They went on to the party.  It was a housewarming, with Hawaiian
musicians in attendance, and the guests were largely of the old
crowd.  People who had been in the early Griffith pictures, even
though they were scarcely thirty, were considered to be of the old
crowd; they were different from those coming along now, and they
were conscious of it.  They had a dignity and straightforwardness
about them from the fact that they had worked in pictures before
pictures were bathed in a golden haze of success.  They were still
rather humble before their amazing triumph, and thus, unlike the
new generation, who took it all for granted, they were constantly
in touch with reality.  Half a dozen or so of the women were
especially aware of being unique.  No one had come along to fill
their places; here and there a pretty face had caught the public
imagination for a year, but those of the old crowd were already
legends, ageless and disembodied.  With all this, they were still
young enough to believe that they would go forever.

George and Kay were greeted affectionately: people moved over and
made place for them.  The Hawaiians performed and the Duncan
sisters sang at the piano.  From the moment George saw who was here
he guessed that Helen Avery would be here, too, and the fact
annoyed him.  It was not appropriate that she should be part of
this gathering through which he and Kay had moved familiarly and
tranquilly for years.

He saw her first when someone opened the swinging door to the
kitchen, and when, a little later, she came out and their eyes met,
he knew absolutely that he didn't love her.  He went up to speak to
her, and at her first words he saw something had happened to her,
too, that had dissipated the mood of the afternoon.  She had got a
big part.

'And I'm in a daze!' she cried happily.  'I didn't think there was
a chance and I've thought of nothing else since I read the book a
year ago.'

'It's wonderful.  I'm awfully glad.'

He had the feeling, though, that he should look at her with a
certain regret; one couldn't jump from such a scene as this
afternoon to a plane of casual friendly interest.  Suddenly she
began to laugh.

'Oh, we're such actors, George--you and I.'

'What do you mean?'

'You know what I mean.'

'I don't.'

'Oh, yes, you do.  You did this afternoon.  It was a pity we didn't
have a camera.'

Short of declaring then and there that he loved her, there was
absolutely nothing more to say.  He grinned acquiescently.  A group
formed around them and absorbed them, and George, feeling that the
evening had settled something, began to think about going home.  An
excited and sentimental elderly lady--someone's mother--came up and
began telling him how much she believed in him, and he was polite
and charming to her, as only he could be, for half an hour.  Then
he went to Kay, who had been sitting with Arthur Busch all evening,
and suggested that they go.

She looked up unwillingly.  She had had several highballs and the
fact was mildly apparent.  She did not want to go, but she got up
after a mild argument and George went upstairs for his coat.  When
he came down Katherine Davis told him that Kay had already gone out
to the car.

The crowd had increased; to avoid a general good-night he went out
through the sun-parlour door to the lawn; less than twenty feet
away from him he saw the figures of Kay and Arthur Busch against a
bright street lamp; they were standing close together and staring
into each other's eyes.  He saw that they were holding hands.

After the first start of surprise George instinctively turned
about, retraced his steps, hurried through the room he had just
left, and came noisily out the front door.  But Kay and Arthur
Busch were still standing close together, and it was lingeringly
and with abstracted eyes that they turned around finally and saw
him.  Then both of them seemed to make an effort; they drew apart
as if it was a physical ordeal.  George said good-bye to Arthur
Busch with special cordiality, and in a moment he and Kay were
driving homeward through the clear California night.

He said nothing, Kay said nothing.  He was incredulous.  He
suspected that Kay had kissed a man here and there, but he had
never seen it happen or given it any thought.  This was different;
there had been an element of tenderness in it and there was
something veiled and remote in Kay's eyes that he had never seen
there before.

Without having spoken, they entered the house; Kay stopped by the
library door and looked in.

'There's someone there,' she said, and she added without interest:
'I'm going upstairs.  Good night.'

As she ran up the stairs the person in the library stepped out into
the hall.

'Mr Hannaford--'

He was a pale and hard young man; his face was vaguely familiar,
but George didn't remember where he had seen it before.

'Mr Hannaford?' said the young man.  'I recognize you from your
pictures.'  He looked at George, obviously a little awed.

'What can I do for you?'

'Well, will you come in here?'

'What is it?  I don't know who you are.'

'My name is Donovan.  I'm Margaret Donovan's brother.'  His face
toughened a little.

'Is anything the matter?'

Donovan made a motion towards the door.  'Come in here.'  His voice
was confident now, almost threatening.

George hesitated, then he walked into the library.  Donovan
followed and stood across the table from him, his legs apart, his
hands in his pockets.

'Hannaford,' he said, in the tone of a man trying to whip himself
up to anger, 'Margaret wants fifty thousand dollars.'

'What the devil are you talking about?' exclaimed George
incredulously.

'Margaret wants fifty thousand dollars,' repeated Donovan.

'You're Margaret Donovan's brother?'

'I am.'

'I don't believe it.'  But he saw the resemblance now.  'Does
Margaret know you're here?'

'She sent me here.  She'll hand over those two letters for fifty
thousand, and no questions asked.'

'What letters?'  George chuckled irresistibly.  'This is some joke
of Schroeder's, isn't it?'

'This ain't a joke, Hannaford.  I mean the letters you signed your
name to this afternoon.'


III


An hour later George went upstairs in a daze.  The clumsiness of
the affair was at once outrageous and astounding.  That a friend of
seven years should suddenly request his signature on papers that
were not what they were purported to be made all his surroundings
seem diaphanous and insecure.  Even now the design engrossed him
more than a defence against it, and he tried to re-create the steps
by which Margaret had arrived at this act of recklessness or
despair.

She had served as a script girl in various studios and for various
directors for ten years; earning first twenty, now a hundred
dollars a week.  She was lovely-looking and she was intelligent; at
any moment in those years she might have asked for a screen test,
but some quality of initiative or ambition had been lacking.  Not a
few times had her opinion made or broken incipient careers.  Still
she waited at directors' elbows, increasingly aware that the years
were slipping away.

That she had picked George as a victim amazed him most of all.
Once, during the year before his marriage, there had been a
momentary warmth; he had taken her to a Mayfair ball, and he
remembered that he had kissed her going home that night in the car.
The flirtation trailed along hesitatingly for a week.  Before it
could develop into anything serious he had gone East and met Kay.

Young Donovan had shown him a carbon of the letters he had signed.

They were written on the typewriter that he kept in his bungalow at
the studio, and they were carefully and convincingly worded.  They
purported to be love letters, asserting that he was Margaret
Donovan's lover, that he wanted to marry her, and that for that
reason he was about to arrange a divorce.  It was incredible.
Someone must have seen him sign them that morning; someone must
have heard her say:  'Your initials are like Mr Harris's.'

George was tired.  He was training for a screen football game to be
played next week, with the Southern California varsity as extras,
and he was used to regular hours.  In the middle of a confused and
despairing sequence of thought about Margaret Donovan and Kay, he
suddenly yawned.  Mechanically he went upstairs, undressed and got
into bed.

Just before dawn Kay came to him in the garden.  There was a river
that flowed past it now, and boats faintly lit with green and
yellow lights moved slowly, remotely by.  A gentle starlight fell
like rain upon the dark, sleeping face of the world, upon the black
mysterious bosoms of the trees, the tranquil gleaming water and the
farther shore.

The grass was damp, and Kay came to him on hurried feet; her thin
slippers were drenched with dew.  She stood upon his shoes,
nestling close to him, and held up her face as one shows a book
open at a page.

'Think how you love me,' she whispered.  'I don't ask you to love
me always like this, but I ask you to remember.'

'You'll always be like this to me.'

'Oh no; but promise me you'll remember.'  Her tears were falling.
'I'll be different, but somewhere lost inside me there'll always be
the person I am tonight.'

The scene dissolved slowly but George struggled into consciousness.
He sat up in bed; it was morning.  In the yard outside he heard the
nurse instructing his son in the niceties of behaviour for two-
month-old babies.  From the yard next door a small boy shouted
mysteriously:  'Who let that barrier through on me?'

Still in his pyjamas, George went to the phone and called his
lawyers.  Then he rang for his man, and while he was being shaved a
certain order evolved from the chaos of the night before.  First,
he must deal with Margaret Donovan; second, he must keep the matter
from Kay, who in her present state might believe anything; and
third, he must fix things up with Kay.  The last seemed the most
important of all.

As he finished dressing he heard the phone ring downstairs and,
with an instinct of danger, picked up the receiver.

'Hello . . .  Oh, yes.'  Looking up, he saw that both his doors
were closed.  'Good morning, Helen . . .  It's all right, Dolores.
I'm taking it up here.'  He waited till he heard the receiver click
downstairs.

'How are you this morning, Helen?'

'George, I called up about last night.  I can't tell you how sorry
I am.'

'Sorry?  Why are you sorry?'

'For treating you like that.  I don't know what was in me, George.
I didn't sleep all night thinking how terrible I'd been.'

A new disorder established itself in George's already littered
mind.

'Don't be silly,' he said.  To his despair he heard his own voice
run on:  'For a minute I didn't understand, Helen.  Then I thought
it was better so.'

'Oh, George,' came her voice after a moment, very low.

Another silence.  He began to put in a cuff button.

'I had to call up,' she said after a moment.  'I couldn't leave
things like that.'

The cuff button dropped to the floor; he stooped to pick it up, and
then said 'Helen!' urgently into the mouthpiece to cover the fact
that he had momentarily been away.

'What, George?'

At this moment the hall door opened and Kay, radiating a faint
distaste, came into the room.  She hesitated.

'Are you busy?'

'It's all right.'  He stared into the mouthpiece for a moment.

'Well, good-bye,' he muttered abruptly and hung up the receiver.
He turned to Kay:  'Good morning.'

'I didn't mean to disturb you,' she said distantly.

'You didn't disturb me.'  He hesitated.  'That was Helen Avery.'

'It doesn't concern me who it was.  I came to ask you if we're
going to the Coconut Grove tonight.'

'Sit down, Kay.'

'I don't want to talk.'

'Sit down a minute,' he said impatiently.  She sat down.  'How long
are you going to keep this up?' he demanded.

'I'm not keeping up anything.  We're simply through, George, and
you know it as well as I do.'

'That's absurd,' he said.  'Why, a week ago--'

'It doesn't matter.  We've been getting nearer to this for months,
and now it's over.'

'You mean you don't love me?'  He was not particularly alarmed.
They had been through scenes like this before.

'I don't know.  I suppose I'll always love you in a way.'  Suddenly
she began to sob.  'Oh, it's all so sad.  He's cared for me so
long.'

George stared at her.  Face to face with what was apparently a real
emotion, he had no words of any kind.  She was not angry, not
threatening or pretending, not thinking about him at all, but
concerned entirely with her emotions towards another man.

'What is it?' he cried.  'Are you trying to tell me you're in love
with this man?'

'I don't know,' she said helplessly.

He took a step towards her, then went to the bed and lay down on
it, staring in misery at the ceiling.  After a while a maid knocked
to say that Mr Busch and Mr Castle, George's lawyer, were below.
The fact carried no meaning to him.  Kay went into her room and he
got up and followed her.

'Let's send word we're out,' he said.  'We can go away somewhere
and talk this over.'

'I don't want to go away.'

She was already away, growing more mysterious and remote with every
minute.  The things on her dressing-table were the property of a
stranger.

He began to speak in a dry, hurried voice.  'If you're still
thinking about Helen Avery, it's nonsense.  I've never given a damn
for anybody but you.'

They went downstairs and into the living-room.  It was nearly noon--
another bright emotionless California day.  George saw that Arthur
Busch's ugly face in the sunshine was wan and white; he took a step
towards George and then stopped, as if he were waiting for
something--a challenge, a reproach, a blow.

In a flash the scene that would presently take place ran itself off
in George's mind.  He saw himself moving through the scene, saw his
part, an infinite choice of parts, but in every one of them Kay
would be against him and with Arthur Busch.  And suddenly he
rejected them all.

'I hope you'll excuse me,' he said quickly to Mr Castle.  'I called
you up because a script girl named Margaret Donovan wants fifty
thousand dollars for some letters she claims I wrote her.  Of
course the whole thing is--'  He broke off.  It didn't matter.
'I'll come to see you tomorrow.'  He walked up to Kay and Arthur,
so that only they could hear.

'I don't know about you two--what you want to do.  But leave me out
of it; you haven't any right to inflict any of it on me, for after
all it's not my fault.  I'm not going to be mixed up in your
emotions.'

He turned and went out.  His car was before the door and he said
'Go to Santa Monica' because it was the first name that popped into
his head.  The car drove off into the everlasting hazeless
sunlight.

He rode for three hours, past Santa Monica and then along towards
Long Beach by another road.  As if it were something he saw out of
the corner of his eye and with but a fragment of his attention, he
imagined Kay and Arthur Busch progressing through the afternoon.
Kay would cry a great deal and the situation would seem harsh and
unexpected to them at first, but the tender closing of the day
would draw them together.  They would turn inevitably towards each
other and he would slip more and more into the position of the
enemy outside.

Kay had wanted him to get down in the dirt and dust of a scene and
scramble for her.  Not he; he hated scenes.  Once he stooped to
compete with Arthur Busch in pulling at Kay's heart, he would never
be the same to himself.  He would always be a little like Arthur
Busch; they would always have that in common, like a shameful
secret.  There was little of the theatre about George; the millions
before whose eyes the moods and changes of his face had flickered
during ten years had not been deceived about that.  From the moment
when, as a boy of twenty, his handsome eyes had gazed off into the
imaginary distance of a Griffith Western, his audience had been
really watching the progress of a straightforward, slow-thinking,
romantic man through an accidentally glamorous life.

His fault was that he had felt safe too soon.  He realized suddenly
that the two Fairbankses, in sitting side by side at table, were
not keeping up a pose.  They were giving hostages to fate.  This
was perhaps the most bizarre community in the rich, wild, bored
empire, and for a marriage to succeed here, you must expect nothing
or you must be always together.  For a moment his glance had
wavered from Kay and he stumbled blindly into disaster.

As he was thinking this and wondering where he would go and what he
should do, he passed an apartment house that jolted his memory.  It
was on the outskirts of town, a pink horror built to represent
something, somewhere, so cheaply and sketchily that whatever it
copied the architect must have long since forgotten.  And suddenly
George remembered that he had once called for Margaret Donovan here
the night of a Mayfair dance.

'Stop at this apartment!' he called through the speaking-tube.

He went in.  The negro elevator boy stared open-mouthed at him as
they rose in the cage.  Margaret Donovan herself opened the door.

When she saw him she shrank away with a little cry.  As he entered
and closed the door she retreated before him into the front room.
George followed.

It was twilight outside and the apartment was dusky and sad.  The
last light fell softly on the standardized furniture and the great
gallery of signed photographs of moving-picture people that covered
one wall.  Her face was white, and as she stared at him she began
nervously wringing her hands.

'What's this nonsense, Margaret?' George said, trying to keep any
reproach out of his voice.  'Do you need money that bad?'

She shook her head vaguely.  Her eyes were still fixed on him with
a sort of terror; George looked at the floor.

'I suppose this was your brother's idea.  At least I can't believe
you'd be so stupid.'  He looked up, trying to preserve the brusque
masterly attitude of one talking to a naughty child, but at the
sight of her face every emotion except pity left him.  'I'm a
little tired.  Do you mind if I sit down?'

'No.'

'I'm a little confused today,' said George after a minute.  'People
seem to have it in for me today.'

'Why, I thought'--her voice became ironic in mid-sentence--'I
thought everybody loved you, George.'

'They don't.'

'Only me?'

'Yes,' he said abstractedly.

'I wish it had been only me.  But then, of course, you wouldn't
have been you.'

Suddenly he realized that she meant what she was saying.

'That's just nonsense.'

'At least you're here,' Margaret went on.  'I suppose I ought to be
glad of that.  And I am.  I most decidedly am.  I've often thought
of you sitting in that chair, just at this time when it was almost
dark.  I used to make up little one-act plays about what would
happen then.  Would you like to hear one of them?  I'll have to
begin by coming over and sitting on the floor at your feet.'

Annoyed and yet spellbound, George kept trying desperately to seize
upon a word or mood that would turn the subject.

'I've seen you sitting there so often that you don't look a bit
more real than your ghost.  Except that your hat has squashed your
beautiful hair down on one side and you've got dark circles or dirt
under your eyes.  You look white, too, George.  Probably you were
on a party last night.'

'I was.  And I found your brother waiting for me when I got home.'

'He's a good waiter, George.  He's just out of San Quentin prison,
where he's been waiting the last six years.'

'Then it was his idea?'

'We cooked it up together.  I was going to China on my share.'

'Why was I the victim?'

'That seemed to make it realer.  Once I thought you were going to
fall in love with me five years ago.'

The bravado suddenly melted out of her voice and it was still light
enough to see that her mouth was quivering.

'I've loved you for years,' she said--'since the first day you came
West and walked into the old Realart Studio.  You were so brave
about people, George.  Whoever it was, you walked right up to them
and tore something aside as if it was in your way and began to know
them.  I tried to make love to you, just like the rest, but it was
difficult.  You drew people right up close to you and held them
there, not able to move either way.'

'This is all entirely imaginary,' said George, frowning
uncomfortably, 'and I can't control--'

'No, I know.  You can't control charm.  It's simply got to be used.
You've got to keep your hand in if you have it, and go through life
attaching people to you that you don't want.  I don't blame you.
If you only hadn't kissed me the night of the Mayfair dance.  I
suppose it was the champagne.'

George felt as if a band which had been playing for a long time in
the distance had suddenly moved up and taken a station beneath his
window.  He had always been conscious that things like this were
going on around him.  Now that he thought of it, he had always been
conscious that Margaret loved him, but the faint music of these
emotions in his ear had seemed to bear no relation to actual life.
They were phantoms that he had conjured up out of nothing; he had
never imagined their actual incarnations.  At his wish they should
die inconsequently away.

'You can't imagine what it's been like,' Margaret continued after a
minute.  'Things you've just said and forgotten, I've put myself
asleep night after night remembering--trying to squeeze something
more out of them.  After that night you took me to the Mayfair
other men didn't exist for me any more.  And there were others, you
know--lots of them.  But I'd see you walking along somewhere about
the lot, looking at the ground and smiling a little, as if
something very amusing had just happened to you, the way you do.
And I'd pass you and you'd look up and really smile:  "Hello,
darling!"  "Hello, darling" and my heart would turn over.  That
would happen four times a day.'

George stood up and she, too, jumped up quickly.

'Oh, I've bored you,' she cried softly.  'I might have known I'd
bore you.  You want to go home.  Let's see--is there anything else?
Oh, yes; you might as well have those letters.'

Taking them out of a desk, she took them to a window and identified
them by a rift of lamplight.

'They're really beautiful letters.  They'd do you credit.  I
suppose it was pretty stupid, as you say, but it ought to teach you
a lesson about--about signing things, or something.'  She tore the
letters small and threw them in the wastebasket:  'Now go on,' she
said.

'Why must I go now?'

For the third time in twenty-four hours sad and uncontrollable
tears confronted him.

'Please go!' she cried angrily--'or stay if you like.  I'm yours
for the asking.  You know it.  You can have any woman you want in
the world by just raising your hand.  Would I amuse you?'

'Margaret--'

'Oh, go on then.'  She sat down and turned her face away.  'After
all you'll begin to look silly in a minute.  You wouldn't like
that, would you?  So get out.'

George stood there helpless, trying to put himself in her place and
say something that wouldn't be priggish, but nothing came.

He tried to force down his personal distress, his discomfort, his
vague feeling of scorn, ignorant of the fact that she was watching
him and understanding it all and loving the struggle in his face.
Suddenly his own nerves gave way under the strain of the past
twenty-four hours and he felt his eyes grow dim and his throat
tighten.  He shook his head helplessly.  Then he turned away--still
not knowing that she was watching him and loving him until she
thought her heart would burst with it--and went out to the door.


IV


The car stopped before his house, dark save for small lights in the
nursery and the lower hall.  He heard the telephone ringing but
when he answered it, inside, there was no one on the line.  For a
few minutes he wandered about in the darkness, moving from chair to
chair and going to the window to stare out into the opposite
emptiness of the night.

It was strange to be alone, to feel alone.  In his overwrought
condition the fact was not unpleasant.  As the trouble of last
night had made Helen Avery infinitely remote, so his talk with
Margaret had acted as a catharsis to his own personal misery.  It
would swing back upon him presently, he knew, but for a moment his
mind was too tired to remember, to imagine or to care.

Half an hour passed.  He saw Dolores issue from the kitchen, take
the paper from the front steps and carry it back to the kitchen for
a preliminary inspection.  With a vague idea of packing his grip,
he went upstairs.  He opened the door of Kay's room and found her
lying down.

For a moment he didn't speak, but moved around the bathroom
between.  Then he went into her room and switched on the lights.

'What's the matter?' he asked casually.  'Aren't you feeling well?'

'I've been trying to get some sleep,' she said.  'George, do you
think that girl's gone crazy?'

'What girl?'

'Margaret Donovan.  I've never heard of anything so terrible in my
life.'

For a moment he thought that there had been some new development.

'Fifty thousand dollars!' she cried indignantly.  'Why, I wouldn't
give it to her even if it were true.  She ought to be sent to
jail.'

'Oh, it's not so terrible as that,' he said.  'She has a brother
who's a pretty bad egg and it was his idea.'

'She's capable of anything,' Kay said solemnly.  'And you're just a
fool if you don't see it.  I've never liked her.  She has dirty
hair.'

'Well, what of it?' he demanded impatiently, and added:  'Where's
Arthur Busch?'

'He went home right after lunch.  Or rather I sent him home.'

'You decided you were not in love with him?'

She looked up almost in surprise.  'In love with him?  Oh, you mean
this morning.  I was just mad at you; you ought to have known that.
I was a little sorry for him last night, but I guess it was the
highballs.'

'Well, what did you mean when you--'  He broke off.  Wherever he
turned he found a muddle, and he resolutely determined not to
think.

'My heavens!' exclaimed Kay.  'Fifty thousand dollars!'

'Oh, drop it.  She tore up the letters--she wrote them herself--and
everything's all right.'

'George.'

'Yes.'

'Of course Douglas will fire her right away.'

'Of course he won't.  He won't know anything about it.'

'You mean to say you're not going to let her go?  After this?'

He jumped up.  'Do you suppose she thought that?' he cried.

'Thought what?'

'That I'd have them let her go?'

'You certainly ought to.'

He looked hastily through the phone book for her name.

'Oxford--' he called.

After an unusually long time the switchboard operator answered:
'Bourbon Apartments.'

'Miss Margaret Donovan, please.'

'Why--'  The operator's voice broke off.  'If you'll just wait a
minute, please.'  He held the line; the minute passed, then
another.  Then the operator's voice:  'I couldn't talk to you then.
Miss Donovan has had an accident.  She's shot herself.  When you
called they were taking her through the lobby to St Catherine's
Hospital.'

'Is she--is it serious?' George demanded frantically.

'They thought so at first, but now they think she'll be all right.
They're going to probe for the bullet.'

'Thank you.'

He got up and turned to Kay.

'She's tried to kill herself,' he said in a strained voice.  'I'll
have to go around to the hospital.  I was pretty clumsy this
afternoon and I think I'm partly responsible for this.'

'George,' said Kay suddenly.

'What?'

'Don't you think it's sort of unwise to get mixed up in this?
People might say--'

'I don't give a damn what they say,' he answered roughly.

He went to his room and automatically began to prepare for going
out.  Catching sight of his face in the mirror, he closed his eyes
with a sudden exclamation of distaste, and abandoned the intention
of brushing his hair.

'George,' Kay called from the next room, 'I love you.'

'I love you too.'

'Jules Rennard called up.  Something about barracuda fishing.
Don't you think it would be fun to get up a party?  Men and girls
both?'

'Somehow the idea doesn't appeal to me.  The whole idea of
barracuda fishing--'

The phone rang below and he started.  Dolores was answering it.

It was a lady who had already called twice today.

'Is Mr Hannaford in?'

'No,' said Dolores promptly.  She stuck out her tongue and hung up
the phone just as George Hannaford came downstairs.  She helped him
into his coat, standing as close as she could to him, opened the
door and followed a little way out on the porch.

'Meester Hannaford,' she said suddenly, 'that Miss Avery she call
up five-six times today.  I tell her you out and say nothing to
missus.'

'What?'  He stared at her, wondering how much she knew about his
affairs.

'She call up just now and I say you out.'

'All right,' he said absently.

'Meester Hannaford.'

'Yes, Dolores.'

'I deedn't hurt myself thees morning when I fell off the porch.'

'That's fine.  Good night, Dolores.'

'Good night, Meester Hannaford.'

George smiled at her, faintly, fleetingly, tearing a veil from
between them, unconsciously promising her a possible admission to
the thousand delights and wonders that only he knew and could
command.  Then he went to his waiting car and Dolores, sitting down
on the stoop, rubbed her hands together in a gesture that might
have expressed either ecstasy or strangulation, and watched the
rising of the thin, pale California moon.




MAJESTY


by
 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)
 

Saturday Evening Post (13 July 1929)



The extraordinary thing is not that people in a lifetime turn out
worse or better than we had prophesied; particularly in America
that is to be expected.  The extraordinary thing is how people keep
their levels, fulfill their promises, seem actually buoyed up by an
inevitable destiny.

One of my conceits is that no one has ever disappointed me since I
turned eighteen and could tell a real quality from a gift for
sleight of hand, and even many of the merely showy people in my
past seem to go on being blatantly and successfully showy to the
end.

Emily Castleton was born in Harrisburg in a medium-sized house,
moved to New York at sixteen to a big house, went to the Briarly
School, moved to an enormous house, moved to a mansion at Tuxedo
Park, moved abroad, where she did various fashionable things and
was in all the papers.  Back in her debutante year one of those
French artists who are so dogmatic about American beauties,
included her with eleven other public and semipublic celebrities as
one of America's perfect types.  At the time numerous men agreed
with him.

She was just faintly tall, with fine, rather large features, eyes
with such an expanse of blue in them that you were really aware of
it whenever you looked at her, and a good deal of thick blond hair--
arresting and bright.  Her mother and father did not know very
much about the new world they had commandeered so Emily had to
learn everything for herself, and she became involved in various
situations and some of the first bloom wore off.  However, there
was bloom to spare.  There were engagements and semi-engagements,
short passionate attractions, and then a big affair at twenty-two
that embittered her and sent her wandering the continents looking
for happiness.  She became "artistic" as most wealthy unmarried
girls do at that age, because artistic people seem to have some
secret, some inner refuge, some escape.  But most of her friends
were married now, and her life was a great disappointment to her
father; so, at twenty-four, with marriage in her head if not in her
heart, Emily came home.

This was a low point in her career and Emily was aware of it.  She
had not done well.  She was one of the most popular, most beautiful
girls of her generation with charm, money and a sort of fame, but
her generation was moving into new fields.  At the first note of
condescension from a former schoolmate, now a young "matron," she
went to Newport and was won by William Brevoort Blair.  Immediately
she was again the incomparable Emily Castleton.  The ghost of the
French artist walked once more in the newspapers; the most-talked-
of leisure-class event of October was her wedding day.


Splendor to mark society nuptials. . . .  Harold Castleton sets out
a series of five-thousand-dollar pavilions arranged like the
interconnecting tents of a circus, in which the reception, the
wedding supper and the ball will be held. . . .  Nearly a thousand
guests, many of them leaders in business, will mingle with those
who dominate the social world. . . .  The wedding gifts are
estimated to be worth a quarter of a million dollars. . . .


An hour before the ceremony, which was to be solemnized at St.
Bartholomew's, Emily sat before a dressing-table and gazed at her
face in the glass.  She was a little tired of her face at that
moment and the depressing thought suddenly assailed her that it
would require more and more looking after in the next fifty years.

"I ought to be happy," she said aloud, "but every thought that
comes into my head is sad."

Her cousin, Olive Mercy, sitting on the side of the bed, nodded.
"All brides are sad."

"It's such a waste," Emily said.

Olive frowned impatiently.

"Waste of what?  Women are incomplete unless they're married and
have children."

For a moment Emily didn't answer.  Then she said slowly, "Yes, but
whose children?"

For the first time in her life, Olive, who worshipped Emily, almost
hated her.  Not a girl in the wedding party but would have been
glad of Brevoort Blair--Olive among the others.

"You're lucky," she said.  "You're so lucky you don't even know it.
You ought to be paddled for talking like that."

"I shall learn to love him," announced Emily facetiously.  "Love
will come with marriage.  Now, isn't that a hell of a prospect?"

"Why so deliberately unromantic?"

"On the contrary, I'm the most romantic person I've ever met in my
life.  Do you know what I think when he puts his arms around me?  I
think that if I look up I'll see Garland Kane's eyes."

"But why, then--"

"Getting into his plane the other day I could only remember Captain
Marchbanks and the little two-seater we flew over the Channel in,
just breaking our hearts for each other and never saying a word
about it because of his wife.  I don't regret those men; I just
regret the part of me that went into caring.  There's only the
sweepings to hand to Brevoort in a pink waste-basket.  There should
have been something more; I thought even when I was most carried
away that I was saving something for the one.  But apparently I
wasn't."  She broke off and then added:  "And yet I wonder."

The situation was no less provoking to Olive for being
comprehensible, and save for her position as a poor relation, she
would have spoken her mind.  Emily was well spoiled--eight years of
men had assured her they were not good enough for her and she had
accepted the fact as probably true.

"You're nervous."  Olive tried to keep the annoyance out of her
voice.  "Why not lie down for an hour?"

"Yes," answered Emily absently.

Olive went out and downstairs.  In the lower hall she ran into
Brevoort Blair, attired in a nuptial cutaway even to the white
carnation, and in a state of considerable agitation.

"Oh, excuse me," he blurted out.  "I wanted to see Emily.  It's
about the rings--which ring, you know.  I've got four rings and she
never decided and I can't just hold them out in the church and have
her take her pick."

"I happen to know she wants the plain platinum band.  If you want
to see her anyhow--"

"Oh, thanks very much.  I don't want to disturb her."

They were standing close together, and even at this moment when he
was gone, definitely preëmpted, Olive couldn't help thinking how
alike she and Brevoort were.  Hair, coloring, features--they might
have been brother and sister--and they shared the same shy serious
temperaments, the same simple straightforwardness.  All this
flashed through her mind in an instant, with the added thought that
the blond, tempestuous Emily, with her vitality and amplitude of
scale, was, after all, better for him in every way; and then,
beyond this, a perfect wave of tenderness, of pure physical pity
and yearning swept over her and it seemed that she must step
forward only half a foot to find his arms wide to receive her.

She stepped backward instead, relinquishing him as though she still
touched him with the tip of her fingers and then drew the tips
away.  Perhaps some vibration of her emotion fought its way into
his consciousness, for he said suddenly:

"We're going to be good friends, aren't we?  Please don't think I'm
taking Emily away.  I know I can't own her--nobody could--and I
don't want to."

Silently, as he talked, she said good-by to him, the only man she
had ever wanted in her life.

She loved the absorbed hesitancy with which he found his coat and
hat and felt hopefully for the knob on the wrong side of the door.

When he had gone she went into the drawing-room, gorgeous and
portentous; with its painted bacchanals and massive chandeliers and
the eighteenth-century portraits that might have been Emily's
ancestors, but weren't, and by that very fact belonged the more to
her.  There she rested, as always, in Emily's shadow.

Through the door that led out to the small, priceless patch of
grass on Sixtieth Street now inclosed by the pavilions, came her
uncle, Mr. Harold Castleton.  He had been sampling his own
champagne.

"Olive so sweet and fair."  He cried emotionally, "Olive, baby,
she's done it.  She was all right inside, like I knew all the time.
The good ones come through, don't they--the real thoroughbreds?  I
began to think that the Lord and me, between us, had given her too
much, that she'd never be satisfied, but now she's come down to
earth just like a"--he searched unsuccessfully for a metaphor--
"like a thoroughbred, and she'll find it not such a bad place after
all."  He came closer.  "You've been crying, little Olive."

"Not much."

"It doesn't matter," he said magnanimously.  "If I wasn't so happy
I'd cry too."

Later, as she embarked with two other bridesmaids for the church,
the solemn throbbing of a big wedding seemed to begin with the
vibration of the car.  At the door the organ took it up, and later
it would palpitate in the cellos and base viols of the dance, to
fade off finally with the sound of the car that bore bride and
groom away.

The crowd was thick around the church, and ten feet out of it the
air was heavy with perfume and faint clean humanity and the fabric
smell of new clean clothes.  Beyond the massed hats in the van of
the church the two families sat in front rows on either side.  The
Blairs--they were assured a family resemblance by their expression
of faint condescension, shared by their in-laws as well as by true
Blairs--were represented by the Gardiner Blairs, senior and junior;
Lady Mary Bowes Howard, née Blair; Mrs. Potter Blair; Mrs. Princess
Potowki Parr Blair, née Inchbit; Miss Gloria Blair, Master Gardiner
Blair III, and the kindred branches, rich and poor, of Smythe,
Bickle, Diffendorfer and Hamn.  Across the aisle the Castletons
made a less impressive showing--Mr. Harold Castleton, Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Castleton and children, Harold Castleton Junior, and, from
Harrisburg, Mr. Carl Mercy, and two little old aunts named O'Keefe
hidden off in a corner.  Somewhat to their surprise the two aunts
had been bundled off in a limousine and dressed from head to foot
by a fashionable couturière that morning.

In the vestry, where the bridesmaids fluttered about like birds in
their big floppy hats, there was a last lip rouging and adjustment
of pins before Emily should arrive.  They represented several
stages of Emily's life--a schoolmate at Briarly, a last unmarried
friend of débutante year, a travelling companion of Europe, and the
girl she had visited in Newport when she met Brevoort Blair.

"They've got Wakeman," this last one said, standing by the door
listening to the music.  "He played for my sister, but I shall
never have Wakeman."

"Why not?"

"Why, he's playing the same thing over and over--'At Dawning.'
He's played it half a dozen times."

At this moment another door opened and the solicitous head of a
young man appeared around it.  "Almost ready?" he demanded of the
nearest bridesmaid.  "Brevoort's having a quiet little fit.  He
just stands there wilting collar after collar--"

"Be calm," answered the young lady.  "The bride is always a few
minutes late."

"A few minutes!" protested the best man.  "I don't call it a few
minutes.  They're beginning to rustle and wriggle like a circus
crowd out there, and the organist has been playing the same tune
for half an hour.  I'm going to get him to fill in with a little
jazz."

"What time is it?" Olive demanded.

"Quarter of five--ten minutes of five."

"Maybe there's been a traffic tie-up."  Olive paused as Mr. Harold
Castleton, followed by an anxious curate, shouldered his way in,
demanding a phone.

And now there began a curious dribbling back from the front of the
church, one by one, then two by two, until the vestry was crowded
with relatives and confusion.

"What's happened?"

"What on earth's the matter?"

A chauffeur came in and reported excitedly.  Harold Castleton swore
and, his face blazing, fought his way roughly toward the door.
There was an attempt to clear the vestry, and then, as if to
balance the dribbling, a ripple of conversation commenced at the
rear of the church and began to drift up toward the altar, growing
louder and faster and more excited, mounting always, bringing
people to their feet, rising to a sort of subdued roar.  The
announcement from the altar that the marriage had been postponed
was scarcely heard, for by that time everyone knew that they were
participating in a front-page scandal, that Brevoort Blair had been
left waiting at the altar and Emily Castleton had run away.


II


There were a dozen reporters outside the Castleton house on
Sixtieth Street when Olive arrived, but in her absorption she
failed even to hear their questions; she wanted desperately to go
and comfort a certain man whom she must not approach, and as a sort
of substitute she sought her Uncle Harold.  She entered through the
interconnecting five-thousand-dollar pavilions, where caterers and
servants still stood about in a respectful funereal half-light,
waiting for something to happen, amid trays of caviar and turkey's
breast and pyramided wedding cake.  Upstairs, Olive found her uncle
sitting on a stool before Emily's dressing-table.  The articles of
make-up spread before him, the repertoire of feminine preparation
in evidence about, made his singularly inappropriate presence a
symbol of the mad catastrophe.

"Oh, it's you."  His voice was listless; he had aged in two hours.
Olive put her arm about his bowed shoulder.

"I'm so terribly sorry, Uncle Harold."

Suddenly a stream of profanity broke from him, died away, and a
single large tear welled slowly from one eye.

"I want to get my massage man," he said.  "Tell McGregor to get
him."  He drew a long broken sigh, like a child's breath after
crying, and Olive saw that his sleeves were covered with a dust of
powder from the dressing-table, as if he had been leaning forward
on it, weeping, in the reaction from his proud champagne.

"There was a telegram," he muttered.

"It's somewhere."

And he added slowly,

"From now on YOU'RE my daughter."

"Oh, no, you mustn't say that!"

Unrolling the telegram, she read:


I can't make the grade I would feel like a fool either way but this
will be over sooner so damn sorry for you

                                                          EMILY


When Olive had summoned the masseur and posted a servant outside
her uncle's door, she went to the library, where a confused
secretary was trying to say nothing over an inquisitive and
persistent telephone.

"I'm so upset, Miss Mercy," he cried in a despairing treble.  "I do
declare I'm so upset I have a frightful headache.  I've thought for
half an hour I heard dance music from down below."

Then it occurred to Olive that she, too, was becoming hysterical;
in the breaks of the street traffic a melody was drifting up,
distinct and clear:


          "--Is she fair
          Is she sweet
          I don't care--cause
          I can't compete--
          Who's the--"


She ran quickly downstairs and through the drawing-room, the tune
growing louder in her ears.  At the entrance of the first pavilion
she stopped in stupefaction.

To the music of a small but undoubtedly professional orchestra a
dozen young couples were moving about the canvas floor.  At the bar
in the corner stood additional young men, and half a dozen of the
caterer's assistants were busily shaking cocktails and opening
champagne.

"Harold!" she called imperatively to one of the dancers.  "Harold!"

A tall young man of eighteen handed his partner to another and came
toward her.

"Hello, Olive.  How did father take it?"

"Harold, what in the name of--"

"Emily's crazy," he said consolingly.  "I always told you Emily was
crazy.  Crazy as a loon.  Always was."

"What's the idea of this?"

"This?"  He looked around innocently.  "Oh, these are just some
fellows that came down from Cambridge with me."

"But--DANCING!"

"Well, nobody's dead, are they?  I thought we might as well use up
some of this--"

"Tell them to go home," said Olive.

"Why?  What on earth's the harm?  These fellows came all the way
down from Cambridge--"

"It simply isn't dignified."

"But they don't care, Olive.  One fellow's sister did the same
thing--only she did it the day after instead of the day before.
Lots of people do it nowadays."

"Send the music home, Harold," said Olive firmly, "or I'll go to
your father."

Obviously he felt that no family could be disgraced by an episode
on such a magnificent scale, but he reluctantly yielded.  The
abysmally depressed butler saw to the removal of the champagne, and
the young people, somewhat insulted, moved nonchalantly out into
the more tolerant night.  Alone with the shadow--Emily's shadow--
that hung over the house, Olive sat down in the drawing-room to
think.  Simultaneously the butler appeared in the doorway.

"It's Mr. Blair, Miss Olive."

She jumped tensely to her feet.

"Who does he want to see?"

"He didn't say.  He just walked in."

"Tell him I'm in here."

He entered with an air of abstraction rather than depression,
nodded to Olive and sat down on a piano stool.  She wanted to say,
"Come here.  Lay your head here, poor man.  Never mind."  But she
wanted to cry, too, and so she said nothing.

"In three hours," he remarked quietly, "we'll be able to get the
morning papers.  There's a shop on Fifty-ninth Street."

"That's foolish--" she began.

"I am not a superficial man"--he interrupted her--"nevertheless, my
chief feeling now is for the morning papers.  Later there will be a
politely silent gauntlet of relatives, friends and business
acquaintances.  About the actual affair I surprise myself by not
caring at all."

"I shouldn't care about any of it."

"I'm rather grateful that she did it in time."

"Why don't you go away?"  Olive leaned forward earnestly.  "Go to
Europe until it all blows over."

"Blows over."  He laughed.  "Things like this don't ever blow over.
A little snicker is going to follow me around the rest of my life."
He groaned.  "Uncle Hamilton started right for Park Row to make the
rounds of the newspaper offices.  He's a Virginian and he was
unwise enough to use the old-fashioned word 'horsewhip' to one
editor.  I can hardly wait to see THAT paper."  He broke off.  "How
is Mr. Castleton?"

"He'll appreciate your coming to inquire."

"I didn't come about that."  He hesitated.  "I came to ask you a
question.  I want to know if you'll marry me in Greenwich tomorrow
morning."

For a minute Olive fell precipitately through space; she made a
strange little sound; her mouth dropped ajar.

"I know you like me," he went on quickly.  "In fact, I once
imagined you loved me a little bit, if you'll excuse the
presumption.  Anyhow, you're very like a girl that once did love
me, so maybe you would--"  His face was pink with embarrassment,
but he struggled grimly on; "anyhow, I like you enormously and
whatever feeling I may have had for Emily has, I might say, flown."

The clangor and alarm inside her was so loud that it seemed he must
hear it.

"The favor you'll be doing me will be very great," he continued.
"My heavens, I know it sounds a little crazy, but what could be
crazier than the whole afternoon?  You see, if you married me the
papers would carry quite a different story; they'd think that Emily
went off to get out of our way, and the joke would be on her after
all."

Tears of indignation came to Olive's eyes.

"I suppose I ought to allow for your wounded egotism, but do you
realize you're making me an insulting proposition?"

His face fell.

"I'm sorry," he said after a moment.  "I guess I was an awful fool
even to think of it, but a man hates to lose the whole dignity of
his life for a girl's whim.  I see it would be impossible.  I'm
sorry."

He got up and picked up his cane.

Now he was moving toward the door, and Olive's heart came into her
throat and a great, irresistible wave of self-preservation swept
over her--swept over all her scruples and her pride.  His steps
sounded in the hall.

"Brevoort!" she called.  She jumped to her feet and ran to the
door.  He turned.  "Brevoort, what was the name of that paper--the
one your uncle went to?"

"Why?"

"Because it's not too late for them to change their story if I
telephone now!  I'll say we were married tonight!"


III


There is a society in Paris which is merely a heterogeneous
prolongation of American society.  People moving in are connected
by a hundred threads to the motherland, and their entertainments,
eccentricities and ups and downs are an open book to friends and
relatives at Southampton, Lake Forest or Back Bay.  So during her
previous European sojourn Emily's whereabouts, as she followed the
shifting Continental seasons, were publicly advertised; but from
the day, one month after the unsolemnized wedding, when she sailed
from New York, she dropped completely from sight.  There was an
occasional letter for her father, an occasional rumor that she was
in Cairo, Constantinople or the less frequented Riviera--that was
all.

Once, after a year, Mr. Castleton saw her in Paris, but, as he told
Olive, the meeting only served to make him uncomfortable.

"There was something about her," he said vaguely, "as if--well, as
if she had a lot of things in the back of her mind I couldn't
reach.  She was nice enough, but it was all automatic and formal.--
She asked about you."

Despite her solid background of a three-month-old baby and a
beautiful apartment on Park Avenue, Olive felt her heart falter
uncertainly.

"What did she say?"

"She was delighted about you and Brevoort."  And he added to
himself, with a disappointment he could not conceal:  "Even
though you picked up the best match in New York when she threw
it away." . . .

. . . It was more than a year after this that his secretary's voice
on the telephone asked Olive if Mr. Castleton could see them that
night.  They found the old man walking his library in a state of
agitation.

"Well, it's come," he declared vehemently.  "People won't stand
still; nobody stands still.  You go up or down in this world.
Emily chose to go down.  She seems to be somewhere near the bottom.
Did you ever hear of a man described to me as a"--he referred to a
letter in his hand--"dissipated ne'er-do-well named Petrocobesco?
He calls himself Prince Gabriel Petrocobesco, apparently from--from
nowhere.  This letter is from Hallam, my European man, and it
incloses a clipping from the Paris Matin.  It seems that this
gentleman was invited by the police to leave Paris, and among the
small entourage who left with him was an American girl, Miss
Castleton, 'rumored to be the daughter of a millionaire.'  The
party was escorted to the station by gendarmes."  He handed
clipping and letter to Brevoort Blair with trembling fingers.
"What do you make of it?  Emily come to that!"

"It's not so good," said Brevoort, frowning.

"It's the end.  I thought her drafts were big recently, but I never
suspected that she was supporting--"

"It may be a mistake," Olive suggested.  "Perhaps it's another Miss
Castleton."

"It's Emily all right.  Hallam looked up the matter.  It's Emily,
who was afraid ever to dive into the nice clean stream of life and
ends up now by swimming around in the sewers."

Shocked, Olive had a sudden sharp taste of fate in its ultimate
diversity.  She with a mansion building in Westbury Hills, and
Emily was mixed up with a deported adventurer in disgraceful
scandal.

"I've got no right to ask you this," continued Mr. Castleton.
"Certainly no right to ask Brevoort anything in connection with
Emily.  But I'm seventy-two and Fraser says if I put off the cure
another fortnight he won't be responsible, and then Emily will be
alone for good.  I want you to set your trip abroad forward by two
months and go over and bring her back."

"But do you think we'd have the necessary influence?" Brevoort
asked.  "I've no reason for thinking that she'd listen to me."

"There's no one else.  If you can't go I'll have to."

"Oh, no," said Brevoort quickly.  "We'll do what we can, won't we,
Olive?"

"Of course."

"Bring her back--it doesn't matter how--but bring her back.  Go
before a court if necessary and swear she's crazy."

"Very well.  We'll do what we can."



Just ten days after this interview the Brevoort Blairs called on
Mr. Castleton's agent in Paris to glean what details were
available.  They were plentiful but unsatisfactory.  Hallam had
seen Petrocobesco in various restaurants--a fat little fellow with
an attractive leer and a quenchless thirst.  He was of some obscure
nationality and had been moved around Europe for several years,
living heaven knew how--probably on Americans, though Hallam
understood that of late even the most outlying circles of
international society were closed to him.  About Emily, Hallam knew
very little.  They had been reported last week in Berlin and
yesterday in Budapest.  It was probably that such an undesirable as
Petrocobesco was required to register with the police everywhere,
and this was the line he recommended the Blairs to follow.

Forty-eight hours later, accompanied by the American vice consul,
they called upon the prefect of police in Budapest.  The officer
talked in rapid Hungarian to the vice consul, who presently
announced the gist of his remarks--the Blairs were too late.

"Where have they gone?"

"He doesn't know.  He received orders to move them on and they left
last night."

Suddenly the prefect wrote something on a piece of paper and handed
it, with a terse remark, to the vice consul.

"He says try there."

Brevoort looked at the paper.

"Sturmdorp--where's that?"

Another rapid conversation in Hungarian.

"Five hours from here on a local train that leaves Tuesdays and
Fridays.  This is Saturday."

"We'll get a car at the hotel," said Brevoort.

They set out after dinner.  It was a rough journey through the
night across the still Hungarian plain.  Olive awoke once from a
worried doze to find Brevoort and the chauffeur changing a tire;
then again as they stopped at a muddy little river, beyond which
glowed the scattered lights of a town.  Two soldiers in an
unfamiliar uniform glanced into the car; they crossed a bridge and
followed a narrow, warped main street to Sturmdorp's single inn;
the roosters were already crowing as they tumbled down on the mean
beds.

Olive awoke with a sudden sure feeling that they had caught up with
Emily; and with it came that old sense of helplessness in the face
of Emily's moods; for a moment the long past and Emily dominant in
it, swept back over her, and it seemed almost a presumption to be
here.  But Brevoort's singleness of purpose reassured her and
confidence had returned when they went downstairs, to find a
landlord who spoke fluent American, acquired in Chicago before the
war.

"You are not in Hungary now," he explained.  "You have crossed the
border into Czjeck-Hansa.  But it is only a little country with two
towns, this one and the capital.  We don't ask the visa from
Americans."

"That's probably why they came here," Olive thought.

"Perhaps you could give us some information about strangers?" asked
Brevoort.  "We're looking for an American lady--"  He described
Emily, without mentioning her probable companion; as he proceeded a
curious change came over the innkeeper's face.

"Let me see your passports," he said; then:  "And why you want to
see her?"

"This lady is her cousin."

The innkeeper hesitated momentarily.

"I think perhaps I be able to find her for you," he said.

He called the porter; there were rapid instructions in an
unintelligible patois.  Then:

"Follow this boy--he take you there."

They were conducted through filthy streets to a tumble-down house
on the edge of town.  A man with a hunting rifle, lounging outside,
straightened up and spoke sharply to the porter, but after an
exchange of phrases they passed, mounted the stairs and knocked at
a door.  When it opened a head peered around the corner; the porter
spoke again and they went in.

They were in a large dirty room which might have belonged to a poor
boarding house in any quarter of the Western world--faded walls,
split upholstery, a shapeless bed and an air, despite its bareness,
of being overcrowded by the ghostly furniture, indicated by dust
rings and worn spots, of the last decade.  In the middle of the
room stood a small stout man with hammock eyes and a peering nose
over a sweet, spoiled little mouth, who stared intently at them as
they opened the door, and then with a single disgusted "Chut!"
turned impatiently away.  There were several other people in the
room, but Brevoort and Olive saw only Emily, who reclined in a
chaise longue with half-closed eyes.

At the sight of them the eyes opened in mild astonishment; she made
a move as though to jump up, but instead held out her hand, smiled
and spoke their names in a clear polite voice, less as a greeting
than as a sort of explanation to the others of their presence here.
At their names a grudging amenity replaced the sullenness on the
little man's face.

The girls kissed.

"Tutu!" said Emily, as if calling him to attention--"Prince
Petrocobesco, let me present my cousin Mrs. Blair, and Mr. Blair."

"Plaisir," said Petrocobesco.  He and Emily exchanged a quick
glance, whereupon he said, "Won't you sit down?" and immediately
seated himself in the only available chair, as if they were playing
Going to Jerusalem.

"Plaisir," he repeated.  Olive sat down on the foot of Emily's
chaise longue and Brevoort took a stool from against the wall,
meanwhile noting the other occupants of the room.  There was a very
fierce young man in a cape who stood, with arms folded and teeth
gleaming, by the door, and two ragged, bearded men, one holding a
revolver, the other with his head sunk dejectedly on his chest, who
sat side by side in the corner.

"You come here long?" the prince asked.

"Just arrived this morning."

For a moment Olive could not resist comparing the two, the tall
fair-featured American and the unprepossessing South European,
scarcely a likely candidate for Ellis Island.  Then she looked at
Emily--the same thick bright hair with sunshine in it, the eyes
with the hint of vivid seas.  Her face was faintly drawn, there
were slight new lines around her mouth, but she was the Emily of
old--dominant, shining, large of scale.  It seemed shameful for all
that beauty and personality to have arrived in a cheap boarding
house at the world's end.

The man in the cape answered a knock at the door and handed a note
to Petrocobesco, who read it, cried "Chut!" and passed it to Emily.

"You see, there are no carriages," he said tragically in French.
"The carriages were destroyed--all except one, which is in a
museum.  Anyhow, I prefer a horse."

"No," said Emily.

"Yes, yes, yes!" he cried.  "Whose business is it how I go?"

"Don't let's have a scene, Tutu."

"Scene!"  He fumed.  "Scene!"

Emily turned to Olive:  "You came by automobile?"

"Yes."

"A big de luxe car?  With a back that opens?"

"Yes."

"There," said Emily to the prince.  "We can have the arms painted
on the side of that."

"Hold on," said Brevoort.  "This car belongs to a hotel in
Budapest."

Apparently Emily didn't hear.

"Janierka could do it," she continued thoughtfully.

At this point there was another interruption.  The dejected man in
the corner suddenly sprang to his feet and made as though to run to
the door, whereupon the other man raised his revolver and brought
the butt down on his head.  The man faltered and would have
collapsed had not his assailant hauled him back to the chair, where
he sat comatose, a slow stream of blood trickling over his
forehead.

"Dirty townsman!  Filthy, dirty spy!" shouted Petrocobesco between
clenched teeth.

"Now that's just the kind of remark you're not to make!" said Emily
sharply.

"Then why we don't hear?" he cried.  "Are we going to sit here in
this pigsty forever?"

Disregarding him, Emily turned to Olive and began to question her
conventionally about New York.  Was prohibition any more
successful?  What were the new plays?  Olive tried to answer and
simultaneously to catch Brevoort's eye.  The sooner their purpose
was broached, the sooner they could get Emily away.

"Can we see you alone, Emily?" demanded Brevoort abruptly.

"Why, for the moment we haven't got another room."

Petrocobesco had engaged the man with the cape in agitated
conversation, and taking advantage of this, Brevoort spoke
hurriedly to Emily in a lowered voice:

"Emily, your father's getting old; he needs you at home.  He wants
you to give up this crazy life and come back to America.  He sent
us because he couldn't come himself and no one else knew you well
enough--"

She laughed.  "You mean, knew the enormities I was capable of."

"No," put in Olive quickly.  "Cared for you as we do.  I can't tell
you how awful it is to see you wandering over the face of the
earth."

"But we're not wandering now," explained Emily.  "This is Tutu's
native country."

"Where's your pride, Emily?" said Olive impatiently.  "Do you know
that affair in Paris was in the papers?  What do you suppose people
think back home?"

"That affair in Paris was an outrage."  Emily's blue eyes flashed
around her.  "Someone will pay for that affair in Paris."

"It'll be the same everywhere.  Just sinking lower and lower,
dragged in the mire, and one day deserted--"

"Stop, please!"  Emily's voice was cold as ice.  "I don't think you
quite understand--"

Emily broke off as Petrocobesco came back, threw himself into his
chair and buried his face in his hands.

"I can't stand it," he whispered.  "Would you mind taking my pulse?
I think it's bad.  Have you got the thermometer in your purse?"

She held his wrist in silence for a moment.

"It's all right, Tutu."  Her voice was soft now, almost crooning.
"Sit up.  Be a man."

"All right."

He crossed his legs as if nothing had happened and turned abruptly
to Breevort:

"How are financial conditions in New York?" he demanded.

But Brevoort was in no humor to prolong the absurd scene.  The
memory of a certain terrible hour three years before swept over
him.  He was no man to be made a fool of twice, and his jaw set as
he rose to his feet.

"Emily, get your things together," he said tersely.  "We're going
home."

Emily did not move; an expression of astonishment, melting to
amusement, spread over her face.  Olive put her arm around her
shoulder.

"Come, dear.  Let's get out of this nightmare."  Then:

"We're waiting," Brevoort said.

Petrocobesco spoke suddenly to the man in the cape, who approached
and seized Brevoort's arm.  Brevoort shook him off angrily,
whereupon the man stepped back, his hand searching his belt.

"No!" cried Emily imperatively.

Once again there was an interruption.  The door opened without a
knock and two stout men in frock coats and silk hats rushed in and
up to Petrocobesco.  They grinned and patted him on the back
chattering in a strange language, and presently he grinned and
patted them on the back and they kissed all around; then, turning
to Emily, Petrocobesco spoke to her in French.

"It's all right," he said excitedly.  "They did not even argue the
matter.  I am to have the title of king."

With a long sigh Emily sank back in her chair and her lips parted
in a relaxed, tranquil smile.

"Very well, Tutu.  We'll get married."

"Oh, heavens, how happy!"  He clasped his hands and gazed up
ecstatically at the faded ceiling.  "How extremely happy!"  He fell
on his knees beside her and kissed her inside arm.

"What's all this about kings?" Brevoort demanded.  "Is this--is he
a king?"

"He's a king.  Aren't you, Tutu?"  Emily's hand gently stroked his
oiled hair and Olive saw that her eyes were unusually bright.

"I am your husband," cried Tutu weepily.  "The most happy man
alive."

"His uncle was Prince of Czjeck-Hansa before the war," explained
Emily, her voice singing her content.  "Since then there's been a
republic, but the peasant party wanted a change and Tutu was next
in line.  Only I wouldn't marry him unless he insisted on being
king instead of prince."

Brevoort passed his hand over his wet forehead.

"Do you mean that this is actually a fact?"

Emily nodded.  "The assembly voted it this morning.  And if you'll
lend us this de luxe limousine of yours we'll make our official
entrance into the capital this afternoon."


IV


Over two years later Mr. and Mrs. Brevoort Blair and their two
children stood upon a balcony of the Carlton Hotel in London, a
situation recommended by the management for watching royal
processions pass.  This one began with a fanfare of trumpets down
by the Strand, and presently a scarlet line of horse guards came
into sight.

"But, mummy," the little boy demanded, "is Aunt Emily Queen of
England?"

"No, dear; she's queen of a little tiny country, but when she
visits here she rides in the queen's carriage."

"Oh."

"Thanks to the magnesium deposits," said Brevoort dryly.

"Was she a princess before she got to be queen?" the little girl
asked.

"No, dear; she was an American girl and then she got to be a
queen."

"Why?"

"Because nothing else was good enough for her," said her father.
"Just think, one time she could have married me.  Which would you
rather do, baby--marry me or be a queen?"

The little girl hesitated.

"Marry you," she said politely, but without conviction.

"That'll do, Brevoort," said her mother.  "Here they come."

"I see them!" the little boy cried.

The cavalcade swept down the crowded street.  There were more horse
guards, a company of dragoons, outriders, then Olive found herself
holding her breath and squeezing the balcony rail as, between a
double line of beefeaters, a pair of great gilt-and-crimson coaches
rolled past.  In the first were the royal sovereigns, their
uniforms gleaming with ribbons, crosses and stars, and in the
second their two royal consorts, one old, the other young.  There
was about the scene the glamour shed always by the old empire of
half the world, by her ships and ceremonies, her pomps and symbols;
and the crowd felt it, and a slow murmur rolled along before the
carriage, rising to a strong steady cheer.  The two ladies bowed to
left and right, and though few knew who the second queen was, she
was cheered too.  In a moment the gorgeous panoply had rolled below
the balcony and on out of sight.

When Olive turned away from the window there were tears in her
eyes.

"I wonder if she likes it, Brevoort.  I wonder if she's really
happy with that terrible little man."

"Well, she got what she wanted, didn't she?  And that's something."

Olive drew a long breath.

"Oh, she's so wonderful," she cried--"so wonderful!  She could
always move me like that, even when I was angriest at her."

"It's all so silly," Brevoort said.

"I suppose so," answered Olive's lips.  But her heart, winged with
helpless adoration, was following her cousin through the palace
gates half a mile away.


THE END




MORE THAN JUST A HOUSE


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (24 June 1933)



This was the sort of thing Lew was used to--and he'd been around a
good deal already.  You came into an entrance hall, sometimes
narrow New England Colonial, sometimes cautiously spacious.  Once
in the hall, the host said:  "Clare"--or Virginia, or Darling--
"this is Mr. Lowrie."  The woman said, "How do you do, Mr. Lowrie,"
and Lew answered, "How do you do, Mrs. Woman."  Then the man
suggested, "How about a little cocktail?"  And Lew lifted his brows
apart and said, "Fine," in a tone that implied:  "What hospitality--
consideration--attention!"  Those delicious canapés.  "M'm'm!
Madame, what are they--broiled feathers?  Enough to spoil a
stronger appetite than mine."

But Lew was on his way up, with six new suits of clothes, and he
was getting into the swing of the thing.  His name was up for a
downtown club and he had his eye on a very modern bachelor
apartment full of wrought-iron swinging gates--as if he were a baby
inclined to topple downstairs--when he saved the life of the
Gunther girl and his tastes underwent revision.

This was back in 1925, before the Spanish-American--No, before
whatever it is that has happened since then.  The Gunther girls had
got off the train on the wrong side and were walking along arm in
arm, with Amanda in the path of an approaching donkey engine.
Amanda was rather tall, golden and proud, and the donkey engine was
very squat and dark and determined.  Lew had no time to speculate
upon their respective chances in the approaching encounter; he
lunged at Jean, who was nearest him, and as the two sisters clung
together, startled, he pulled Amanda out of the iron pathway by
such a hair's breadth that a piston cylinder touched her coat.

And so Lew's taste was changed in regard to architecture and
interior decoration.  At the Gunther house they served tea, hot or
iced, sugar buns, gingerbread and hot rolls at half-past four.
When he first went there he was embarrassed by his heroic status--
for about five minutes.  Then he learned that during the Civil War
the grandmother had been saved by her own grandmother from a
burning house in Montgomery County, that father had once saved ten
men at sea and been recommended for the Carnegie medal, that when
Jean was little a man had saved her from the surf at Cape May--
that, in fact, all the Gunthers had gone on saving and being saved
for the last fifty years and that their real debt to Lew was that
now there would be no gap left in the tradition.

This was on the very wide, vine-curtained veranda ["The first thing
I'd do would be tear off that monstrosity," said a visiting
architect] which almost completely bounded the big square box of
the house, circa 1880.  The sisters, three of them, appeared now
and then during the time Lew drank tea and talked to the older
people.  He was only twenty-six himself and he wished Amanda would
stay uncovered long enough for him to look at her, but only Bess,
the sixteen-year-old sister, was really in sight; in front of the
two others interposed a white-flannel screen of young men.

"It was the quickness," said Mr. Gunther, pacing the long straw
rug, "that second of coordination.  Suppose you'd tried to warn
them--never.  Your subconscious mind saw that they were joined
together--saw that if you pulled one, you pulled them both.  One
second, one thought, one motion.  I remember in 1904--"

"Won't Mr. Lowrie have another piece of gingerbread?" asked the
grandmother.

"Father, why don't you show Mr. Lowrie the apostles' spoons?" Bess
proposed.

"What?"  Her father stopped pacing.  "Is Mr. Lowrie interested in
old spoons?"

Lew was thinking at the moment of Amanda twisting somewhere between
the glare of the tennis courts and the shadow of the veranda,
through all the warmth and graciousness of the afternoon.

"Spoons?  Oh, I've got a spoon, thank you."

"Apostles' spoons," Bess explained.  "Father has one of the best
collections in America.  When he likes anybody enough he shows them
the spoons.  I thought, since you saved Amanda's life--"

He saw little of Amanda that afternoon--talked to her for a moment
by the steps while a young man standing near tossed up a tennis
racket and caught it by the handle with an impatient bend of his
knees at each catch.  The sun shopped among the yellow strands of
her hair, poured around the rosy tan of her cheeks and spun along
the arms that she regarded abstractedly as she talked to him.

"It's hard to thank a person for saving your life, Mr. Lowrie," she
said.  "Maybe you shouldn't have.  Maybe it wasn't worth saving."

"Oh, yes, it was," said Lew, in a spasm of embarrassment.

"Well, I'd like to think so."  She turned to the young man.  "Was
it, Allen?"

"It's a good enough life," Allen admitted, "if you go in for wooly
blondes."

She turned her slender smile full upon Lew for a moment, and then
aimed it a little aside, like a pocket torch that might dazzle him.
"I'll always feel that you own me, Mr. Lowrie; my life is forfeit
to you.  You'll always have the right to take me back and put me
down in front of that engine again."

Her proud mouth was a little overgracious about being saved, though
Lew didn't realize it; it seemed to Amanda that it might at least
have been someone in her own crowd.  The Gunthers were a haughty
family--haughty beyond all logic, because Mr. Gunther had once been
presented at the Court of St. James's and remained slightly
convalescent ever since.  Even Bess was haughty, and it was Bess,
eventually, who led Lew down to his car.

"It's a nice place," she agreed.  "We've been going to modernize
it, but we took a vote and decided to have the swimming pool
repaired instead."

Lew's eyes lifted over her--she was like Amanda, except for the
slightness of her and the childish disfigurement of a small wire
across her teeth--up to the house with its decorative balconies
outside the windows, its fickle gables, its gold-lettered, Swiss-
chalet mottoes, the bulging projections of its many bays.
Uncritically he regarded it; it seemed to him one of the finest
houses he had ever known.

"Of course, we're miles from town, but there's always plenty of
people.  Father and mother go South after the Christmas holidays
when we go back to school."

It was more than just a house, Lew decided as he drove away.  It
was a place where a lot of different things could go on at once--a
private life for the older people, a private romance for each girl.
Promoting himself, he chose his own corner--a swinging seat behind
one of the drifts of vines that cut the veranda into quarters.  But
this was in 1925, when the ten thousand a year that Lew had come to
command did not permit an indiscriminate crossing of social
frontiers.  He was received by the Gunthers and held at arm's
length by them, and then gradually liked for the qualities that
began to show through his awkwardness.  A good-looking man on his
way up can put directly into action the things he learns; Lew was
never again quite so impressed by the suburban houses whose
children lived upon rolling platforms in the street.

It was September before he was invited to the Gunthers' on an
intimate scale--and this largely because Amanda's mother insisted
upon it.

"He saved your life.  I want him asked to this one little party."

But Amanda had not forgiven him for saving her life.

"It's just a dance for friends," she complained.  "Let him come to
Jean's debut in October--everybody'll think he's a business
acquaintance of father's.  After all, you can be nice to somebody
without falling into their arms."

Mrs. Gunther translated this correctly as:  "You can be awful to
somebody without their knowing it"--and brusquely overrode her:
"You can't have advantages without responsibilities," she said
shortly.

Life had been opening up so fast for Lew that he had a black dinner
coat instead of a purple one.  Asked for dinner, he came early; and
thinking to give him his share of attention when it was most
convenient, Amanda walked with him into the tangled, out-of-hand
garden.  She wanted to be bored, but his gentle vitality disarmed
her, made her look at him closely for almost the first time.

"I hear everywhere that you're a young man with a future," she
said.

Lew admitted it.  He boasted a little; he did not tell her that he
had analyzed the spell which the Gunther house exerted upon him--
his father had been gardener on a similar Maryland estate when he
was a boy of five.  His mother had helped him to remember that when
he told her about the Gunthers.  And now this garden was shot
bright with sunset, with Amanda one of its own flowers in her
flowered dress; he told her, in a rush of emotion, how beautiful
she was, and Amanda, excited by the prospect of impending hours
with another man, let herself encourage him.  Lew had never been so
happy as in the moment before she stood up from the seat and put
her hand on his arm lightly.

"I do like you," she said.  "You're very handsome.  Do you know
that?"

The harvest dance took place in an L-shaped space formed by the
clearing of three rooms.  Thirty young people were there, and a
dozen of their elders, but there was no crowding, for the big
windows were opened to the veranda and the guests danced against
the wide, illimitable night.  A country orchestra alternated with
the phonograph, there was mildly calculated cider punch, and an air
of safety beside the open bookshelves of the library and the oil
portraits of the living room, as though this were one of an endless
series of dances that had taken place here in the past and would
take place again.

"Thought you never would cut in," Bess said to Lew.  "You'd be
foolish not to.  I'm the best dancer of us three, and I'm much the
smartest one.  Jean is the jazzy one, the most chic, but I think
it's passé to be jazzy and play the traps and neck every second
boy.  Amanda is the beauty, of course.  But I'm going to be the
Cinderella, Mr. Lowrie.  They'll be the two wicked sisters, and
gradually you'll find I'm the most attractive and get all hot and
bothered about me."

There was an interval of intervals before Lew could maneuver Amanda
to his chosen segment of the porch.  She was all radiant and
shimmering.  More than content to be with him, she tried to relax
with the creak of the settee.  Then instinct told her that
something was about to happen.

Lew, remembering a remark of Jean's--"He asked me to marry him, and
he hadn't even kissed me"--could yet think of no graceful way to
assault Amanda; nevertheless he was determined to tell her tonight
that he was in love with her.

"This'll seem sudden," he ventured, "but you might as well know.
Please put me down on the list of those who'd like to have a
chance."

She was not surprised, but being deep in herself at the moment, she
was rather startled.  Giving up the idea of relaxing, she sat
upright.

"Mr. Lowrie--can I call you by your first name?--can I tell you
something?  No, I won't--yes, I will, because I like you now.  I
didn't like you at first.  How's that for frankness?"

"Is that what you wanted to tell me?"

"No.  Listen.  You met Mr. Horton--the man from New York--the tall
man with the rather old-looking hair?"

"Yes."  Lew felt a pang of premonition in his stomach.

"I'm engaged to him.  You're the first to know--except mother
suspects.  Whee!  Now I told you because you saved my life, so you
do sort of own me--I wouldn't be here to be engaged, except for
you."  Then she was honestly surprised at his expression.
"Heavens, don't look like that!"  She regarded him, pained.  "Don't
tell me you've been secretly in love with me all these months.  Why
didn't I know?  And now it's too late."

Lew tried a laugh.

"I hardly know you," he confessed.  "I haven't had time to fall in
love with you."

"Maybe I work quick.  Anyhow, if you did, you'll have to forget it
and be my friend."  Finding his hand, she squeezed it.  "A big
night for this little girl, Mr. Lew; the chance of a lifetime.
I've been afraid for two days that his bureau drawer would stick or
the hot water would give out and he'd leave for civilization."

They were silent for a moment; then he asked:

"You very much in love with him?"

"Of course I am.  I mean, I don't know.  You tell me.  I've been in
love with so many people; how can I answer that?  Anyhow, I'll get
away from this old barn."

"This house?  You want to get away from here?  Why, this is a
lovely old house."

She was astonished now, and then suddenly explosive:

"This old tomb!  That's the chief reason I'm marrying George
Horton.  Haven't I stood it for twenty years?  Haven't I begged
mother and father on my knees to move into town?  This--shack--
where everybody can hear what everybody else says three rooms off,
and father won't allow a radio, and not even a phone till last
summer.  I'm afraid even to ask a girl down from school--probably
she'd go crazy listening to the shutters on a stormy night."

"It's a darn nice old house," he said automatically.

"Nice and quaint," she agreed.  "Glad you like it.  People who
don't have to live here generally do, but you ought to see us alone
in it--if there's a family quarrel you have to stay with it for
hours.  It all comes down to father wanting to live fifty miles
from anywhere, so we're condemned to rot.  I'd rather live in a
three-room apartment in town!"  Shocked by her own vehemence, she
broke off.  "Anyhow," she insisted, "it may seem nice to you, but
it's a nuisance to us."

A man pulled the vines apart and peered at them, claimed her and
pulled her to her feet; when she was gone, Lew went over the
railing with a handhold and walked into the garden; he walked far
enough away so that the lights and music from the house were
blurred into one entity like a stage effect, like an approaching
port viewed from a deck at night.

"I only saw her four times," he said to himself.  "Four times isn't
much.  Eeney-meeney-miney-moe--what could I expect in four times?
I shouldn't feel anything at all."  But he was engulfed by fear.
What had he just begun to know that now he might never know?  What
had happened in these moments in the garden this afternoon, what
was the excitement that had blacked out in the instant of its
birth?  The scarcely emergent young image of Amanda--he did not
want to carry it with him forever.  Gradually he realized a truth
behind his grief:  He had come too late for her; unknown to him,
she had been slipping away through the years.  With the odds
against him, he had managed to found himself on solid rock, and
then, looking around for the girl, discovered that she had just
gone.  "Sorry, just gone out; just left; just gone."  Too late in
every way--even for the house.  Thinking over her tirade, Lew saw
that he had come too late for the house; it was the house of a
childhood from which the three girls were breaking away, the house
of an older generation, sufficient unto them.  To a younger
generation it was pervaded with an aura of completion and
fulfillment beyond their own power to add to.  It was just old.

Nevertheless, he recalled the emptiness of many grander mansions
built in more spectacular fashions--empty to him, at any rate,
since he had first seen the Gunther place three months before.
Something humanly valuable would vanish with the break-up of this
family.  The house itself, designed for reading long Victorian
novels around an open fire of the evening, didn't even belong to an
architectural period worthy of restoration.

Lew circled an outer drive and stood quiet in the shadow of a
rosebush as a pair of figures strolled down from the house; by
their voices he recognized Jean and Allen Parks.

"Me, I'm going to New York," Jean said, "whether they let me or
not. . . .  No, not now, you nut.  I'm not in that mood."

"Then what mood are you in?"

"Not in any mood.  I'm only envious of Amanda because she's hooked
this M'sieur, and now she'll go to Long Island and live in a house
instead of a mouse trap.  Oh, Jake, this business of being simple
and swell--"

They passed out of hearing.  It was between dances, and Lew saw the
colors of frocks and the quick white of shirt fronts in the window-
panes as the guests flowed onto the porch.  He looked up at the
second floor as a light went on there--he had a conception of the
second floor as walled with crowded photographs; there must be bags
full of old materials, and trunks with costumes and dress-making
forms, and old dolls' houses, and an overflow, everywhere along the
vacant walls, of books for all generations--many childhoods side by
side drifting into every corner.

Another couple came down the walk from the house, and feeling that
inadvertently he had taken up too strategic a position, Lew moved
away; but not before he had identified the pair as Amanda and her
man from New York.

"What would you think if I told you I had another proposal
tonight?"

". . . be surprised at all."

"A very worthy young man.  Saved my life. . . .  Why weren't you
there on that occasion, Bubbles?  You'd have done it on a grand
scale, I'm sure."

Standing square in front of the house, Lew looked at it more
searchingly.  He felt a kinship with it--not precisely that, for
the house's usefulness was almost over and his was just beginning;
rather, the sense of superior unity that the thoughtful young feel
for the old, sense of the grandparent.  More than only a house.  He
would like to be that much used up himself before being thrown out
on the ash heap at the end.  And then, because he wanted to do some
courteous service to it while he could, if only to dance with the
garrulous little sister, he pulled a brash pocket comb through his
hair and went inside.


II


The man with the smiling scar approached Lew once more.

"This is probably," he announced, "the biggest party ever given in
New York."

"I even heard you the first time you told me," agreed Lew
cheerfully.

"But, on the other hand," qualified the man, "I thought the same
thing at a party two years ago, in 1927.  Probably they'll go on
getting bigger and bigger.  You play polo, don't you?"

"Only in the back yard," Lewis assured him.  "I said I'd like to
play.  I'm a serious business man."

"Somebody told me you were the polo star."  The man was somewhat
disappointed.  "I'm a writer myself.  A humani--a humanitarian.
I've been trying to help out a girl over there in that room where
the champagne is.  She's a lady.  And yet, by golly, she's the only
one in the room that can't take care of herself."

"Never try to take care of anybody," Lew advised him.  "They hate
you for it."

But although the apartment, or rather the string of apartments and
penthouses pressed into service for the affair, represented the
best resources of the New York sky line, it was only limited
metropolitan space at that, and moving among the swirls of dancers,
thinned with dawn, Lew found himself finally in the chamber that
the man had spoken of.  For a moment he did not recognize the girl
who had assumed the role of entertaining the glassy-eyed citizenry,
chosen by natural selection to personify dissolution; then, as she
issued a blanket invitation to a squad of Gaiety beauties to come
south and recuperate on her Maryland estates, he recognized Jean
Gunther.

She was the dark Gunther--dark and shining and driven.  Lew, living
in New York now, had seen none of the family since Amanda's
marriage four years ago.  Driving her home a quarter of an hour
later, he extracted what news he could; and then left her in the
dawn at the door of her apartment, mussed and awry, yet still
proud, and tottering with absurd formality as she thanked him and
said good night.

He called next afternoon and took her to tea in Central Park.

"I am," she informed him, "the child of the century.  Other people
claim to be the child of the century, but I'm actually the child of
the century.  And I'm having the time of my life at it."

Thinking back to another period--of young men on the tennis courts
and hot buns in the afternoon, and of wistaria and ivy climbing
along the ornate railings of a veranda--Lew became as moral as it
was possible to be in that well-remembered year of 1929.

"What are you getting out of it?  Why don't you invest in some
reliable man--just a sort of background?"

"Men are good to invest money for you," she dodged neatly.  "Last
year one darling spun out my allowance so it lasted ten months
instead of three."

"But how about marrying some candidate?"

"I haven't got any love," she said.  "Actually, I know four--five--
I know six millionaires I could maybe marry.  This little girl from
Carroll County.  It's just too many.  Now, if somebody that had
everything came along--"

She looked at Lew appraisingly.  "You've improved, for example."

"I should say I have," admitted Lew, laughing.  "I even go to first
nights.  But the most beautiful thing about me is I remember my old
friends, and among them are the lovely Gunther girls of Carroll
County."

"You're very nice," she said.  "Were you terribly in love with
Amanda?"

"I thought so, anyhow."

"I saw her last week.  She's super-Park Avenue and very busy having
Park Avenue babies.  She considers me rather disreputable and tells
her friends about our magnificent plantation in the old South."

"Do you ever go down to Maryland?"

"Do I though?  I'm going Sunday night, and spend two months there
saving enough money to come back on.  When mother died"--she paused--
"I suppose you knew mother died--I came into a little cash, and
I've still got it, but it has to be stretched, see?"--she pulled
her napkin cornerwise--"by tactful investing.  I think the next
step is a quiet summer on the farm."

Lew took her to the theater the next night, oddly excited by the
encounter.  The wild flush of the times lay upon her; he was
conscious of her physical pulse going at some abnormal rate, but
most of the young women he knew were being hectic, save the ones
caught up tight in domesticity.

He had no criticism to make--behind that lay the fact that he would
not have dared to criticize her.  Having climbed from a nether rung
of the ladder, he had perforce based his standards on what he could
see from where he was at the moment.  Far be it from him to tell
Jean Gunther how to order her life.

Getting off the train in Baltimore three weeks later, he stepped
into the peculiar heat that usually preceded an electric storm.  He
passed up the regular taxis and hired a limousine for the long ride
out to Carroll County, and as he drove through rich foliage,
moribund in midsummer, between the white fences that lined the
rolling road, many years fell away and he was again the young man,
starved for a home, who had first seen the Gunther house four years
ago.  Since then he had occupied a twelve-room apartment in New
York, rented a summer mansion on Long Island, but his spirit,
warped by loneliness and grown gypsy with change, turned back
persistently to this house.

Inevitably it was smaller than he had expected, a small, big house,
roomy rather than spacious.  There was a rather intangible neglect
about it--the color of the house had never been anything but a
brown-green relict of the sun; Lew had never known the stable to
lean otherwise than as the Tower of Pisa, nor the garden to grow
any other way than plebeian and wild.

Jean was on the porch--not, as she had prophesied, in the role of
gingham queen or rural equestrienne, but very Rue-de-la-Paix
against the dun cushions of the swinging settee.  There was the
stout, colored butler whom Lew remembered and who pretended, with
racial guile, to remember Lew delightedly.  He took the bag to
Amanda's old room, and Lew stared around it a little before he went
downstairs.  Jean and Bess were waiting over a cocktail on the
porch.

It struck him that Bess had made a leaping change out of childhood
into something that was not quite youth.  About her beauty there
was a detachment, almost an impatience, as though she had not asked
for the gift and considered it rather a burden; to a young man, the
gravity of her face might have seemed formidable.

"How is your father?" Lew asked.

"He won't be down tonight," Bess answered.  "He's not well.  He's
over seventy, you know.  People tire him.  When we have guests, he
has dinner upstairs."

"It would be better if he ate upstairs all the time," Jean
remarked, pouring the cocktails.

"No, it wouldn't," Bess contradicted her.  "The doctors said it
wouldn't.  There's no question about that."

Jean turned in a rush to Lew.  "For over a year Bess has hardly
left this house.  We could--"

"What junk!" her sister said impatiently.  "I ride every morning."

"--we could get a nurse who would do just as well."

Dinner was formal, with candles on the table and the two young
women in evening dresses.  Lew saw that much was missing--the
feeling that the house was bursting with activity, with expanding
life--all this had gone.  It was difficult for the diminished clan
to do much more than inhabit the house.  There was not a moving up
into vacated places; there was simply an anachronistic staying on
between a vanishing past and an incalculable future.

Midway through dinner, Lew lifted his head at a pause in the
conversation, but what he had confused with a mutter of thunder was
a long groan from the floor above, followed by a measured speech,
whose words were interrupted by the quick clatter of Bess' chair.

"You know what I ordered.  Just so long as I am the head of--"

"It's father."  Momentarily Jean looked at Lew as if she thought
the situation was faintly humorous, but at his concerned face, she
continued seriously, "You might as well know.  It's senile
dementia.  Not dangerous.  Sometimes he's absolutely himself.  But
it's hard on Bess."

Bess did not come down again; after dinner, Lew and Jean went into
the garden, splattered with faint drops before the approaching
rain.  Through the vivid green twilight Lew followed her long
dress, spotted with bright red roses--it was the first of that
fashion he had ever seen; in the tense hush he had an illusion of
intimacy with her, as though they shared the secrets of many years
and, when she caught at his arm suddenly at a rumble of thunder, he
drew her around slowly with his other arm and kissed her shaped,
proud mouth.

"Well, at least you've kissed one Gunther girl," Jean said lightly.
"How was it?  And don't you think you're taking advantage of us,
being unprotected out here in the country?"

He looked at her to see if she were joking, and with a swift laugh
she seized his arm again.  It was raining in earnest, and they fled
toward the house--to find Bess on her knees in the library, setting
light to an open fire.

"Father's all right," she assured them.  "I don't like to give him
the medicine till the last minute.  He's worrying about some man
that lent him twenty dollars in 1892."  She lingered, conscious of
being a third party, and yet impelled to play her mother's role and
impart an initial solidarity before she retired.  The storm broke,
shrieking in white at the windows, and Bess took the opportunity to
fly to the windows upstairs, calling down after a moment:

"The telephone's trying to ring.  Do you think it's safe to answer
it?"

"Perfectly," Jean called back, "or else they wouldn't ring."  She
came close to Lewis in the center of the room, away from the white,
quivering windows.

"It's strange having you here right now.  I don't mind saying I'm
glad you're here.  But if you weren't, I suppose we'd get along
just as well."

"Shall I help Bess close the windows?" Lew asked.

Simultaneously, Bess called downstairs:

"Nobody seemed to be on the phone, and I don't like holding it."

A ripping crash of thunder shook the house and Jean moved into
Lew's arm, breaking away as Bess came running down the stairs with
a yelp of dismay.

"The lights are out up there," she said.  "I never used to mind
storms when I was little.  Father used to make us sit on the porch
sometimes, remember?"

There was a dazzle of light around all the windows of the first
floor, reflecting itself back and forth in mirrors, so that every
room was pervaded with a white glare; there followed a sound as of
a million matches struck at once, so loud and terrible that the
thunder rolling down seemed secondary; then a splintering noise
separated itself out, and Bess' voice:

"That struck!"

Once again came the sickening lightning, and through a rolling
pandemonium of sound they groped from window to window till Jean
cried:  "It's William's room!  There's a tree on it!"

In a moment, Lew had flung wide the kitchen door and saw, in the
next glare, what had happened:  The great tree, in falling, had
divided the lean-to from the house proper.

"Is William there?" he demanded.

"Probably.  He should be."

Gathering up his courage, Lew dashed across the twenty feet of new
marsh, and with a waffle iron smashed in the nearest window.
Inundated with sheet rain and thunder, he yet realized that the
storm had moved off from overhead, and his voice was strong as he
called:  "William!  You all right?"

No answer.

"William!"

He paused and there came a quiet answer:

"Who dere?"

"You all right?"

"I wanna know who dere."

"The tree fell on you.  Are you hurt?"

There was a sudden peal of laughter from the shack as William
emerged mentally from dark and atavistic suspicions of his own.
Again and again the pealing laughter rang out.

"Hurt?  Not me hurt.  Nothin' hurt me.  I'm never better, as they
say.  Nothin' hurt me."

Irritated by his melting clothes, Lew said brusquely:

"Well, whether you know it or not, you're penned up in there.
You've got to try and get out this window.  That tree's too big to
push off tonight."

Half an hour later, in his room, Lew shed the wet pulp of his
clothing by the light of a single candle.  Lying naked on the bed,
he regretted that he was in poor condition, unnecessarily fatigued
with the exertion of pulling a fat man out a window.  Then, over
the dull rumble of the thunder he heard the phone again in the
hall, and Bess' voice, "I can't hear a word.  You'll have to get a
better connection," and for thirty seconds he dozed, to wake with a
jerk at the sound of his door opening.

"Who's that?" he demanded, pulling the quilt up over himself.

The door opened slowly.

"Who's that?"

There was a chuckle; a last pulse of lightning showed him three
tense, blue-veined fingers, and then a man's voice whispered:  "I
only wanted to know whether you were in for the night, dear.  I
worry--I worry."

The door closed cautiously, and Lew realized that old Gunther was
on some nocturnal round of his own.  Aroused, he slipped into his
sole change of clothes, listening to Bess for the third time at the
phone.

"--in the morning," she said.  "Can't it wait?  We've got to get a
connection ourselves."

Downstairs he found Jean surprisingly spritely before the fire.
She made a sign to him, and he went and stood above her,
indifferent suddenly to her invitation to kiss her.  Trying to
decide how he felt, he brushed his hand lightly along her shoulder.

"Your father's wandering around.  He came in my room.  Don't you
think you ought to--"

"Always does it," Jean said.  "Makes the nightly call to see if
we're in bed."

Lew stared at her sharply; a suspicion that had been taking place
in his subconscious assumed tangible form.  A bland, beautiful
expression stared back at him; but his ears lifted suddenly up the
stairs to Bess still struggling with the phone.

"All right.  I'll try to take it that way. . . .  P-ay-double ess-
ee-dee--'p-a-s-s-e-d.'  All right; ay-double you-ay-wy.  'Passed
away?'"  Her voice, as she put the phrase together, shook with
sudden panic.  "What did you say--'Amanda Gunther passed away'?"

Jean looked at Lew with funny eyes.

"Why does Bess try to take that message now?  Why not--"

"Shut up!" he ordered.  "This is something serious."

"I don't see--"

Alarmed by the silence that seeped down the stairs, Lew ran up and
found Bess sitting beside the telephone table holding the receiver
in her lap, just breathing and staring, breathing and staring.  He
took the receiver and got the message:

"Amanda passed away quietly, giving life to a little boy."

Lew tried to raise Bess from the chair, but she sank back, full of
dry sobbing.

"Don't tell father tonight."

How did it matter if this was added to that old store of confused
memories?  It mattered to Bess, though.

"Go away," she whispered.  "Go tell Jean."

Some premonition had reached Jean, and she was at the foot of the
stairs while he descended.

"What's the matter?"

He guided her gently back into the library.

"Amanda is dead," he said, still holding her.

She gathered up her forces and began to wail, but he put his hand
over her mouth.

"You've been drinking!" he said.  "You've got to pull yourself
together.  You can't put anything more on your sister."

Jean pulled herself together visibly--first her proud mouth and
then her whole body--but what might have seemed heroic under other
conditions seemed to Lew only reptilian, a fine animal effort--all
he had begun to feel about her went out in a few ticks of the
clock.

In two hours the house was quiet under the simple ministrations of
a retired cook whom Bess had sent for; Jean was put to sleep with a
sedative by a physician from Ellicott City.  It was only when Lew
was in bed at last that he thought really of Amanda, and broke
suddenly, and only for a moment.  She was gone out of the world,
his second--no, his third love--killed in single combat.  He
thought rather of the dripping garden outside, and nature so
suddenly innocent in the clearing night.  If he had not been so
tired he would have dressed and walked through the long-stemmed,
clinging ferns, and looked once more impersonally at the house and
its inhabitants--the broken old, the youth breaking and growing old
with it, the other youth escaping into dissipation.  Walking
through broken dreams, he came in his imagination to where the
falling tree had divided William's bedroom from the house, and
paused there in the dark shadow, trying to piece together what he
thought about the Gunthers.

"It's degenerate business," he decided--"all this hanging on to the
past.  I've been wrong.  Some of us are going ahead, and these
people and the roof over them are just push-overs for time.  I'll
be glad to leave it for good and get back to something fresh and
new and clean in Wall Street tomorrow."

Only once was he wakened in the night, when he heard the old man
quavering querulously about the twenty dollars that he had borrowed
in '92.  He heard Bess' voice soothing him, and then, just before
he went to sleep, the voice of the old Negress blotting out both
voices.


III


Lew's business took him frequently to Baltimore, but with the years
it seemed to change back into the Baltimore that he had known
before he met the Gunthers.  He thought of them often, but after
the night of Amanda's death he never went there.  By 1933, the role
that the family had played in his life seemed so remote--except for
the unforgettable fact that they had formed his ideas about how
life was lived--that he could drive along the Frederick Road to
where it dips into Carroll County before a feeling of recognition
crept over him.  Impelled by a formless motive, he stopped his car.

It was deep summer; a rabbit crossed the road ahead of him and a
squirrel did acrobatics on an arched branch.  The Gunther house was
up the next crossroad and five minutes away--in half an hour he
could satisfy his curiosity about the family; yet he hesitated.
With painful consequences, he had once tried to repeat the past,
and now, in normal times, he would have driven on with a feeling of
leaving the past well behind him; but he had come to realize
recently that life was not always a progress, nor a search for new
horizons, nor a going away.  The Gunthers were part of him; he
would not be able to bring to new friends the exact things that he
had brought to the Gunthers.  If the memory of them became extinct,
then something in himself became extinct also.

The squirrel's flight on the branch, the wind nudging at the
leaves, the cock splitting distant air, the creep of sunlight
transpiring through the immobility, lulled him into an adolescent
trance, and he sprawled back against the leather for a moment
without problems.  He loafed for ten minutes before the "k-dup, k-
dup, k-dup" of a walking horse came around the next bend of the
road.  The horse bore a girl in Jodhpur breeches, and bending
forward, Lew recognized Bess Gunther.

He scrambled from the car.  The horse shied as Bess recognized Lew
and pulled up.  "Why, Mr. Lowrie! . . .  Hey!  Hoo-oo there,
girl! . . .  Where did you arrive from?  Did you break down?"

It was a lovely face, and a sad face, but it seemed to Lew that
some new quality made it younger--as if she had finally abandoned
the cosmic sense of responsibility which had made her seem older
than her age four years ago.

"I was thinking about you all," he said.  "Thinking of paying you a
visit."  Detecting a doubtful shadow in her face, he jumped to a
conclusion and laughed.  "I don't mean a visit; I mean a call.  I'm
solvent--sometimes you have to add that these days."

She laughed too:  "I was only thinking the house was full and where
would we put you."

"I'm bound for Baltimore anyhow.  Why not get off your rocking
horse and sit in my car a minute."

She tied the mare to a tree and got in beside him.

He had not realized that flashing fairness could last so far into
the twenties--only when she didn't smile, he saw from three small
thoughtful lines that she was always a grave girl--he had a quick
recollection of Amanda on an August afternoon, and looking at Bess,
he recognized all that he remembered of Amanda.

"How's your father?"

"Father died last year.  He was bedridden a year before he died."
Her voice was in the singsong of something often repeated.  "It was
just as well."

"I'm sorry.  How about Jean?  Where is she?"

"Jean married a Chinaman--I mean she married a man who lives in
China.  I've never seen him."

"Do you live alone, then?"

"No, there's my aunt."  She hesitated.  "Anyhow, I'm getting
married next week."

Inexplicably, he had the old sense of loss in his diaphragm.

"Congratulations!  Who's the unfortunate--"

"From Philadelphia.  The whole party went over to the races this
afternoon.  I wanted to have a last ride with Juniper."

"Will you live in Philadelphia?"

"Not sure.  We're thinking of building another house on the place,
tear down the old one.  Of course, we might remodel it."

"Would that be worth doing?"

"Why not?" she said hastily.  "We could use some of it, the
architects think."

"You're fond of it, aren't you?"

Bess considered.

"I wouldn't say it was just my idea of modernity.  But I'm a sort
of a home girl."  She accentuated the words ironically.  "I never
went over very big in Baltimore, you know--the family failure.  I
never had the sort of thing Amanda and Jean had."

"Maybe you didn't want it."

"I thought I did when I was young."

The mare neighed peremptorily and Bess backed out of the car.

"So that's the story, Lew Lowrie, of the last Gunther girl.  You
always did have a sort of yen for us, didn't you?"

"Didn't I!  If I could possibly stay in Baltimore, I'd insist on
coming to your wedding."

At the lost expression on her face, he wondered to whom she was
handing herself, a very precious self.  He knew more about people
now, and he felt the steel beneath the softness in her, the girders
showing through the gentle curves of cheek and chin.  She was an
exquisite person, and he hoped that her husband would be a good
man.

When she had ridden off into a green lane, he drove tentatively
toward Baltimore.  This was the end of a human experience and it
released old images that regrouped themselves about him--if he had
married one of the sisters; supposing--The past, slipping away
under the wheels of his car, crunched awake his acuteness.

"Perhaps I was always an intruder in that family. . . .  But why on
earth was that girl riding in bedroom slippers?"

At the crossroads store he stopped to get cigarettes.  A young
clerk searched the case with country slowness.

"Big wedding up at the Gunther place," Lew remarked.

"Hah?  Miss Bess getting married?"

"Next week.  The wedding party's there now."

"Well, I'll be dog!  Wonder what they're going to sleep on, since
Mark H. Bourne took the furniture away?"

"What's that?  What?"

"Month ago Mark H. Bourne took all the furniture and everything
else while Miss Bess was out riding--they mortgaged on it just
before Gunther died.  They say around here she ain't got a stitch
except them riding clothes.  Mark H. Bourne was good and sore.  His
claim was they sold off all the best pieces of furniture without
his knowing it. . . .  Now, that's ten cents I owe you."

"What do she and her aunt live on?"

"Never heard about an aunt--I only been here a year.  She works the
truck garden herself; all she buys from us is sugar, salt and
coffee."

Anything was possible these times, yet Lew wondered what incredibly
fantastic pride had inspired her to tell that lie.

He turned his car around and drove back to the Gunther place.  It
was a desperately forlorn house he came to, and a jungled garden;
one side of the veranda had slipped from the brick pillars and
sloped to the ground; a shingle job, begun and abandoned, rotted
paintless on the roof, a broken pane gaped from the library window.

Lew went in without knocking.  A voice challenged him from the
dining room and he walked toward it, his feet loud on the rugless
floor, through rooms empty of stick and book, empty of all save
casual dust.  Bess Gunther, wearing the cheapest of house dresses,
rose from the packing box on which she sat, with fright in her
eyes; a tin spoon rattled on the box she was using as a table.

"Have you been kidding me?" he demanded.  "Are you actually living
like this?"

"It's you."  She smiled in relief; then, with visible effort, she
spurred herself into amenities:

"Take a box, Mr. Lowrie.  Have a canned-goods box--they're
superior; the grain is better.  And welcome to the open spaces.
Have a cigar, a glass of champagne, have some rabbit stew and meet
my fiancé."

"Stop that."

"All right," she agreed.

"Why didn't you go and live with some relatives?"

"Haven't got any relatives.  Jean's in China."

"What are you doing?  What do you expect to happen?"

"I was waiting for you, I guess."

"What do you mean?"

"You always seemed to turn up.  I thought if you turned up, I'd
make a play for you.  But when it came to the point, I thought I'd
better lie.  I seem to lack the S.A. my sisters had."

Lew pulled her up from the box and held her with his fingers by her
waist.

"Not to me."

In the hour since Lew had met her on the road the vitality seemed
to have gone out of her; she looked up at him very tired.

"So you liked the Gunthers," she whispered.  "You liked us all."

Lew tried to think, but his heart beat so quick that he could only
sit her back on the box and pace along the empty walls.

"We'll get married," he said.  "I don't know whether I love you--I
don't even know you--I know the notion of your being in want or
trouble makes me physically sick."  Suddenly he went down on both
knees in front of her so that she would not seem so unbearably
small and helpless.  "Miss Bess Gunther, so it was you I was meant
to love all the while."

"Don't be so anxious about it," she laughed.  "I'm not used to
being loved.  I wouldn't know what to do; I never got the trick of
it."  She looked down at him, shy and fatigued.  "So here we are.
I told you years ago that I had the makings of Cinderella."

He took her hand; she drew it back instinctively and then replaced
it in his.  "Beg your pardon.  Not even used to being touched.  But
I'm not afraid of you, if you stay quiet and don't move suddenly."

It was the same old story of reserve Lew could not fathom, motives
reaching back into a past he did not share.  With the three girls,
facts seemed to reveal themselves precipitately, pushing up through
the gay surface; they were always unsuspected things, currents and
predilections alien to a man who had been able to shoot in a
straight line always.

"I was the conservative sister," Bess said.  "I wasn't any less
pleasure loving but with three girls, somebody has to play the boy,
and gradually that got to be my part. . . .  Yes, touch me like
that.  Touch my cheek.  I want to be touched; I want to be held.
And I'm glad it's you; but you've got to go slow; you've got to be
careful.  I'm afraid I'm the kind of person that's forever.  I'll
live with you and die for you, but I never knew what halfway
meant. . . .  Yes, that's the wrist.  Do you like it?  I've had a
lot of fun looking at myself in the last month, because there's one
long mirror upstairs that was too big to take out."

Lew stood up.  "All right, we'll start like that.  I'll be so
healthy that I'll make you all healthy again."

"Yes, like that," she agreed.

"Suppose we begin by setting fire to this house."

"Oh, no!"  She took him seriously.  "In the first place, it's
insured.  In the second place--"

"All right, we'll just get out.  We'll get married in Baltimore, or
Ellicott City if you'd rather."

"How about Juniper?  I can't go off and leave her."

"We'll leave her with the young man at the store."

"The house isn't mine.  It's all mortgaged away, but they let me
live here--I guess it was remorse after they took even our old
music, and our old scrapbooks.  They didn't have a chance of
getting a tenant, anyhow."

Minute by minute, Lew found out more about her, and liked what he
found, but he saw that the love in her was all incrusted with the
sacrificial years, and that he would have to be gardener to it for
a while.  The task seemed attractive.

"You lovely," he told her.  "You lovely!  We'll survive, you and I
because you're so nice and I'm so convinced about it."

"And about Juniper--will she survive if we go away like this?"

"Juniper too."

She frowned and then smiled--and this time really smiled--and said:
"Seems to me, you're falling in love."

"Speak for yourself.  My opinion is that this is going to be the
best thing ever happened."

"I'm going to help.  I insist on--"

They went out together--Bess changed into her riding habit, but
there wasn't another article that she wanted to bring with her.
Backing through the clogging weeds of the garden, Lew looked at the
house over his shoulder.  "Next week or so we'll decide what to do
about that."

It was a bright sunset--the creep of rosy light that played across
the blue fenders of the car and across their crazily happy faces
moved across the house too--across the paralyzed door of the ice
house, the rusting tin gutters, the loose-swinging shutter, the
cracked cement of the front walk, the burned place of last year's
rubbish back of the tennis court.  Whatever its further history,
the whole human effort of collaboration was done now.  The purpose
of the house was achieved--finished and folded--it was an effort
toward some commonweal, an effort difficult to estimate, so closely
does it press against us still.




NEWS OF PARIS--FIFTEEN YEARS AGO


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Furioso, Winter, 1947



"We shouldn't both be coming from the same direction," Ruth said.
"A lot of people know we're at the same hotel."

Henry Haven Dell smiled and then they both laughed.  It was a
bright morning in April and they had just turned off the Champs
Elysées toward the English Church.

"I'll walk on the other side of the street," he said, "and then
we'll meet at the door."

"No, we oughtn't even to sit together.  I'm a countess--laugh it
off but anything I do will be in that damn 'Boulevardier.'"

They stopped momentarily.

"But I hate to leave you," he said.  "You look so lovely."

"I hate to leave you too," she whispered.  "I never knew how nice
you were.  But good-bye."

Half way across the street, he stopped to a great screech of auto
horns playing Debussy.

"We're lunching," he called back.

She nodded, but continued to walk looking straight ahead on her
sidewalk.  Henry Haven Dell continued his crossing and then walked
quickly, from time to time throwing a happy glance at the figure
across the way.

--I wonder if they have telephones in churches, he thought.  After
the ceremony he would see.

He stood in a rear row, catching Ruth's eye from time to time,
teasing her.  It was a very fashionable wedding.  As the bride and
groom came down the aisle the bride caught his arm and took him
with them down the street.

"Isn't it fun," the bride said.  "And just think, Henry, I almost
married you."

Her husband laughed.

--at what, Henry thought.  I could have had her if she'd really
been the one.

Aloud he said:

"I have to telephone before the reception."

"The hotel's full of phones.  Come and stand beside me.  I want you
to be the first to know."

He got to the phone only after an hour.

"The Paris is delayed," said the Compagnie Transatlantique.  "We
can't give you an exact hour.  Not before four."

"Oh, no, Monsieur--not possibly."

Good.  In the lobby he joined a party of wedding guests and
repaired to the Ritz on the man's part of the bar.  You couldn't be
with women incessantly.

"How long will you be in Paris, Henry?"

"That's not a fair question.  I can always tell you how long I'll
be in New York or London."

He had two cocktails--each at a different table.  A little before
one when the confusion and din were at their height he went out
into the Rue Cambon.  There was not a taxi to be had--the doormen
were chasing them all the way up to the Rue de Rivoli.  One sailed
into port with a doorman on the running board but a lovely little
brunette in pale green was already waiting.

"Oh, look," begged Henry.  "You're not by any chance going near the
Bois?"

He was getting into the cab as he spoke.  His morning coat was a
sort of introduction.  She nodded.

"I'm lunching there."

"I'm Henry Dell," he said, lifting his hat.

"Oh, it's you--at last," she said eagerly.  "I'm Bessie Wing--born
Leighton.  I know all your cousins."

"Isn't this nice," he exclaimed and she agreed.

"I'm breaking my engagement at luncheon," she said.  "And I'll name
you."

"Really breaking your engagement?"

"At the Café Dauphine--from one to two."

"I'll be there--from time to time I'll look at you."

"What I want to know is--does he take me home afterward.  I'm not
Emily Posted."

On impulse he said:

"No, I do.  You may be faint or something.  I'll keep an eye on
you."

She shook her head.

"No--it wouldn't be reverend this afternoon," she said.  "But I'll
be here weeks."

"This afternoon," he said.  "You see, there's a boat coming in."

After a moment's reluctance she answered:

"I do ALMOST know you.  Leave it this way.  If you see me talk
shaking a spoon back and forth I'll meet you in front in five
minutes."

Ruth was waiting at table.  Henry talked lazily to her for ten
minutes, watching her face and the spring light upon the table.
Then with a casual glance he located Bessie Wing across the room,
deep in conversation with a man of twenty-six, his own age.

"We'll have this afternoon--and then good-bye," said Ruth.

"Not even this afternoon," he answered solemnly, "I'm meeting the
boat in an hour."

"I'm sorry, Henry.  Hasn't it been fun?"

"Lots of fun.  So much fun."  He felt sincerely sad.

"It's just as well," said Ruth with a little effort, "I have
fittings that I've postponed.  Remember me when you go to the Opera
or out to St.-Germain."

"I'll do my best to forget you."

A little later he saw the spoon waving.

"Let me go first," he said.  "I somehow couldn't bear to sit here
and see you walk off."

"All right, I'll sit here and think."

Bessie was waiting under a pear tree in front--they crammed hastily
into a taxi like escaping children.

"Was it bad?" he asked.  "I watched you.  There were tears in his
eyes."

She nodded.

"It was pretty bad."

"Why did you break it?"

"Because my first marriage was a flop.  There were so many men
around that when I married I didn't know who I loved any more.  So
there didn't seem to be any point if you know what I mean.  Why
should it have been Hershell Wing?"

"How about this other man?"

"It would have been the same way only now it would be my fault
because I know."

They sat in the cool American drawing room of her apartment and had
coffee.

"For anyone so beautiful--" he said, "there must be many times like
those.  When there isn't a man--there's just men."

"There was a man once," she said, "when I was sixteen.  He looked
like you.  He didn't love me."

Henry went and sat beside her on the fauteuil.

"That happens too," said Henry.  "Perhaps the safest way is 'Ships
that pass in the night.'"

She held back a little.

"I don't want to be old-fashioned but we don't know each other."

"Sure we do--remember--we met this morning."

She laughed.

"Sedative for a broken engagement!"

"The specific one," he said.

It was quiet in the room.  The peacocks in the draperies stirred in
the April wind.

Later they stood on her balcony arm in arm and looked over a sea of
green leaves to the Arc de Triomphe.

"Where is the phone?" he asked suddenly.  "Never mind--I know."

He went inside, picked up the phone beside her bed.

"Compagnie Générale? . . .  How about the boat train from the
Paris?"

"Oh, she has not docked in Havre yet, monsieur.  Call in several
hours.  The delay has been at Southampton."

Returning to the balcony Henry said:

"All right--let's do go to the Exposition."

"I have to, you see," she said.  "This woman, Mary Tolliver I told
you about--she's the only person I can go to with what I did at
luncheon.  She'll understand."

"Would she understand about us too?"

"She'll never know.  She's been an ideal of mine since I was
sixteen."

She was not much older than Bessie, Henry thought as they met her
in the Crillon lobby--she was a golden brown woman, very trim and
what the French call "soignée"--which means washed and something
more.  She had an American painter and an Austrian sculptor with
her and Henry gathered that they were both a little in love with
her, or else exploiting her for money--money evident in the Renault
town car that took them to the exhibition of decorative arts that
ringed the Seine.

They walked along through the show, passed the chromium rails, the
shining economy of steel that was to change the furniture of an
era.  Henry, once art editor of the Harvard Lampoon, was not
without a seeing eye but he let the painter and sculptor talk.
When they sat down for an apéritif afterwards, Bessie sat very
close to him--Mary Tolliver smiled and saw.  She looked
appraisingly at Henry.

"Have you two known each other long?" she asked.

"Years," said Henry.  "She is a sister to me.  And now I must leave
you all--after a charming afternoon."

Bessie looked at him reproachfully, started to rise with him--
controlled herself.

"I told you there was a boat," he said gently.

"Ship," she answered.

As he walked away he saw the painter move to the chair he had
vacated by her side.

The Paris was still delayed at Southampton and Henry considered
what to do.  When you have been doing nothing in a pleasant way a
long time it is difficult to fill in stray hours.  More difficult
than for one who works.  In the country he might have exercised--
here there were only faces over tables.  And there must continue to
be faces over tables.

--I am become a contemptible drone, he thought.  I must give at
least a thought to duty.

He taxied over to the left bank--to the Rue Nôtre-Dame des Champs--
to call on a child he had endowed just after the war.  A beautiful
little orphan who begged in front of the Café du Dôme, Henry had
sent her for three years to convent.  He saw her once or twice each
summer--not now for almost a year.

"Hélène is out," said a new concierge whom Henry did not know.
"How should I guess where she is?  At the Café des Lilas?  At
Lipps?"

He was faintly shocked--then faintly reassured when he found her at
Lipps, the beer place which was, at least, a step more respectable
than the Dôme or the Rotonde.  She left the two Americans with whom
she was sitting and embraced him shyly.

"What are you preparing to do, Hélène?" he demanded kindly.  "What
profession do the nuns teach you?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"I shall marry," she said.  "A rich American if I can.  That young
man I just left for example--he is on the staff of the New York
Herald Tribune."

"Reporters are not rich," he reproved her, "and that one doesn't
look very promising."

"Oh, he is drunk now," said Hélène, "but at times he is all one
would desire."

Henry had been a romantic four years ago--right after the war.  He
had in no sense brought up this girl to marry or for anything else.
Yet the thought was in his mind then, What if she could continue to
be a great beauty.  And now as he looked at her he felt a surge of
jealousy toward the reporter.




THE NIGHT AT CHANCELLORSVILLE


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)



Esquire (February 1935)



I tell you I didn't have any notion what I was getting into or I
wouldn't of gone down there.  They can have their army--it seems to
me they were all a bunch of yella-bellies.  But my friend Nell said
to me:  "Nora, Philly, is as dead as Baltimore and we've got to eat
this summer."  She just got a letter from a girl that said they
were living fine down there in "Ole Virginia."  The soldiers were
getting big pay-offs and figuring maybe they'd stay there all
summer, at least till the Johnny Rebs gave up.  They got their pay
regular too, and a good clean-looking girl could ask--well, I
forget now, because, after what happened to us, I guess you can't
expect me to remember anything.

I've always been used to decent treatment--somehow when I meet a
man, no matter how fresh he is in the beginning, he comes to
respect me in the end, and I've never had things done to me like
some girls--getting left in a strange town or had my purse stolen.

Well, I started to tell you how I went down to the army in "Ole
Virginia."  Never again!  Wait'll you hear.

I was used to traveling nice--once when I was a little girl my
daddy took me on the cars to Baltimore--we lived in York, Pa.  And
we couldn't have been more comfortable; we had pillows and the men
came through with baskets of oranges and apples.  You know, singing
out:  "Want to buy some oranges or apples--or beer?"

You know what they sell--but I never took any beer because--

Oh I know, I'll go on--You only want to talk about the war, like
all you men.  But if this is your idea what a war is--

Well, they stuck us all in one car and a fresh fella took our
tickets, and winked and said:

"Oh you're going down to Hooker's army."

The lights were terrible in the car, smoky and full of bugs, so
everything looked sort of yella.  And say, that car was so old it
was falling to pieces.

There must of been forty gay girls in it, a lot of them from
Baltimore and Philly.  Only there were three or four that weren't
gay--I mean they were more, oh, you know, rich people, and sat up
front.  Every once an awhile an officer would pop in from the next
car and ask them if they wanted anything.  I was in the seat behind
with Nell and we heard him whisper:  "You're in terrible company,
but we'll be there in a few hours.  And we'll go right to
headquarters, and I guarantee you some solid comfort."

I never will forget that night.  None of us had any food except
some girls behind us had some sausages and bread, and they gave us
what they had left.  There was a spigot you turned but no water
came out.  After about two hours--stopping every two minutes it
seemed to me--a couple of lieutenants, drunk as monkeys, came in
from the next car and offered Nell and me some whiskey out of a
bottle.  Nell took some and I pretended to, and they set on the
side of our seats.  One of them started to make up to Nell, but
just then the officer that had spoken to the women, pretty high up
I guess, a major or a general, came back again and asked:

"You all right?  Anything I can do?"

One of the ladies kind of whispered to him, and he turned to the
one that was talking to Nell and made him go back in the other car.
After that there was only one officer with us; he wasn't really so
drunk, just feeling sick.

"This certainly is a happy looking gang," he said.  "It's good you
can hardly see them in this light.  They look as if their best
friend just died."

"What if they do," Nell answered back quick.  "How would you look
yourself if you come all the way from Philly and then got in a
buggy like this?"

"I come all the way from The Seven Days, sister," he answered.
"Maybe I'd be more pretty for you if I hadn't lost an eye at Games'
Mill."

Then we noticed he HAD lost an eye.  He kept it sort of closed so
we hadn't remarked it before.  Pretty soon he left and said he'd
try and get us some water or coffee, that was what we wanted most.

The car kept rocking and it made us both feel funny.  Some of the
girls was sick and some was asleep on each other's shoulders.

"Hey, where IS this army?" Nell said.  "Down in Mexico?"

I was kind of half asleep myself by that time and didn't answer.

The next thing I knew I was woke up by a storm, the car was stopped
again, and I said, "It's raining."

"Raining!" said Nell.  "That's cannons--they're having a battle."

"Oh!"  I got awake.  "Well, after THIS ride I don't care who wins."

It seemed to get louder all the time, but out the windows you
couldn't see anything on account of the mist.

In about half an hour another officer came in the car--he looked
pretty messy as if he'd just crawled out of bed: his coat was still
unbuttoned and he kept hitching up his trousers as if he didn't
have any suspenders on.

"All you ladies outside," he said.  "We need this car for wounded."

"Hey!"

"We paid for our tickets, didn't we?"

"We need all the cars for the wounded and the other cars are filled
up."

"Hey!  We didn't come down to fight in any battle!"

"It doesn't matter what you came down for--you're in a hell of a
battle."

I was scared, I can tell YOU.  I thought maybe the Rebs would
capture us and send us down to one of those prisons you hear about,
where they starve you to death unless you sing Dixie all the time
and kiss niggers.

"Hurry up!"

But another officer had come in who looked more nice.

"Stay where you are, ladies," he said.  And then he said to the
officer, "What do you want to do? leave them standing on the
siding!  If Sedgewick's Corps is broken, like they say, the Rebs
may come up in this direction!"

Some of the girls began crying out loud.

"These are northern women after all," he said.

"These are--"

"Shut up and go back to your command!  I'm detailed to this
transportation job--I'm taking these girls back to Washington with
us."

I thought they were going to hit each other, but they both walked
off together.  And we girls sat wondering what we were going to do.

What happened next I don't remember exact.  The cannons were
sometimes very loud and then sometimes more far away, but there was
firing of shots right near us--and a girl down the car had her
window smashed like a hole in the center, sort of, all smashed you
know, not like when you break a glass, more like ice in cold
weather, just a hole and streaks around--you know.  I heard a whole
bunch of horses gallop by our windows, but I still couldn't see
anything.

That went on half an hour--galloping and more shots.  We couldn't
tell how far away but they sounded like up by the engine.

Then it got quiet--and two men came into our car--we all knew right
away they were Rebels, not officers, just plain Private ones, with
muskets.  One had on a old brown blouse sort of thing and one had
on a blue thing--all spotted--I know I could never of let THAT man
make love to me.  It had spots--it was too short--anyway, it was
out of style.  Oh it was disgusting.  I was surprised because I
thought they always wore grey.  They were disgusting looking and
very dirty; one had a big pot of jam smeared all over his face and
the other one had a big box of crackers.

"Hi ladies."

"What you gals doin' down here?"

"Kain't you see, Steve, this is old Joe Hooker's staff."

"Reckin we ought to take em back to the General?"

They talked outlandish like that--I could hardly understand, they
talked so funny.

One of the girls got historical she was so scared, and that made
them kind of shy.  They were just kids under those beards, and one
of them tipped his hat or cap or whatever the old thing was.

"We're not fixin' to hurt you."

At that moment there was a whole bunch more shooting down by the
engine and the Rebs turned and ran.

We were glad, I can tell you.

Then, about fifteen minutes later, in came one of our officers.
This was another new one.

"You better duck down!" he shouted to us.  "They may fire on this
train.  We're starting you off as soon as we unload two more
ambulances."

Half of us was on the floor already.  The rich women sitting ahead
of Nell and me had gone up into the car ahead where the wounded
were--to see if they could do anything.  Nell thought she'd look in
too, but she came back holding her nose.  She said it smelled awful
in there.

It was lucky she didn't go in, because two of the girls did from
our car.  People that is sick can never seem to get much
consideration for other people who happen to be well.  The nurses
sent them right back--as if they was dirt under their feet.

After I don't know how long the train began to move.  A soldier
come in and poured oil out of all our lights except one, and took
it into the wounded car.  So now we could hardly see at all.

If the trip down was slow the trip back was slower--The wounded
began making so much noise, grunting and all, that we could hear it
and couldn't get a decent sleep.

We stopped everywhere.

When we got in Washington at last there was a lot of people in the
station and they were all anxious about what had happened to the
army, but I said You can search me.  All I wanted was my little old
room and my little old bed.  I never been treated like that in my
life.

One of the girls said she was going to write to President Lincoln
about it.

And in the papers next day they never said anything about how our
train got attacked, or about us girls at all!  Can you beat it?







ONE INTERNE


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)



The Saturday Evening Post (5 November, 1932)



Traditionally, the Coccidian Club show is given on the hottest
night of spring, and that year was no exception.  Two hundred
doctors and students sweltered in the reception rooms of the old
narrow house and another two hundred students pressed in at the
doors, effectually sealing out any breezes from the Maryland night.
The entertainment reached these latter clients only dimly, but
refreshment was relayed back to them by a busy bucket brigade.
Down cellar, the janitor made his annual guess that the sagging
floors would hold up one more time.

Bill Tulliver was the coolest man in the hall.  For no special
reason he wore a light tunic and carried a crook during the only
number in which he took part, the rendition of the witty,
scurrilous and interminable song which described the failings and
eccentricities of the medical faculty.  He sat in comparative
comfort on the platform and looked out over the hot sea of faces.
The most important doctors were in front--Doctor Ruff, the
ophthalmologist; Doctor Lane, the brain surgeon; Doctor Georgi, the
stomach specialist; Doctor Barnett, the alchemist of internal
medicine; and on the end of the row, with his saintlike face
undisturbed by the rivulets of perspiration that poured down the
long dome of his head, Doctor Norton, the diagnostician.

Like most young men who had sat under Norton, Bill Tulliver
followed him with the intuition of the belly, but with a
difference.  He knelt to him selfishly as a sort of great giver of
life.  He wanted less to win his approval than to compel it.
Engrossed in his own career, which would begin in earnest when he
entered the hospital as an interne in July, his whole life was
pointed toward the day when his own guess would be right and Doctor
Norton's would be wrong.  In that moment he would emancipate
himself--he need not base himself on the adding machine-calculating
machine-probability machine-St. Francis of Assisi machine any
longer.

Bill Tulliver had not arrived unprovoked at this pitch of egotism.
He was the fifth in an unbroken series of Dr. William Tullivers who
had practised with distinction in the city.  His father died last
winter; it was not unnatural that even from the womb of school this
last scion of a medical tradition should clamor for "self-
expression."

The faculty song, immemorially popular, went on and on.  There was
a verse about the sanguinary Doctor Lane, about the new names
Doctor Brune made up for the new diseases he invented, about the
personal idiosyncrasies of Doctor Schwartze and the domestic
embroilments of Doctor Gillespie.  Doctor Norton, as one of the
most popular men on the staff, got off easy.  There were some new
verses--several that Bill had written himself:


     "Herpes Zigler, sad and tired,
       Will flunk you out or kill ya,
     If you forget Alfonso wired
       For dope on hæmophilia.
     BUM-tiddy-bum-bum,
     Tiddy-bum-bum.
     Three thousand years ago,
     Three thousand years ago."


He watched Doctor Zigler and saw the wince that puckered up under
the laugh.  Bill wondered how soon there would be a verse about
him, Bill Tulliver, and he tentatively composed one as the chorus
thundered on.

After the show the older men departed, the floors were sloshed with
beer and the traditional roughhouse usurped the evening.  But Bill
had fallen solemn and, donning his linen suit, he watched for ten
minutes and then left the hot hall.  There was a group on the front
steps, breathing the sparse air, and another group singing around
the lamp-post at the corner.  Across the street arose the great
bulk of the hospital about which his life revolved.  Between the
Michael's Clinic and the Ward's Dispensary arose a round full moon.

The girl--she was hurrying--reached the loiterers at the lamppost
at the same moment as Bill.  She wore a dark dress and a dark,
flopping hat, but Bill got an impression that there was a gayety of
cut, if not of color, about her clothes.  The whole thing happened
in less than a minute; the man turning about--Bill saw that he was
not a member of the grand confraternity--and was simply hurling
himself into her arms, like a child at its mother.

The girl staggered backward with a frightened cry; and everyone in
the group acted at once.

"Are you sure you're all right?"

"Oh, yes," she gasped.  "I think he just passed out and didn't
realize he was grabbing at a girl."

"We'll take him over to the emergency ward and see if he can
swallow a stomach pump."

Bill Tulliver found himself walking along beside the girl.

"Are you sure you're all right?"

"Oh, yes."  She was still breathing hard; her bosom rose, putting
out its eternal promises, as if the breath she had taken in were
the last breather left in the world.

"Oh, catch it--oh, catch it and take it--oh, catch it," she sighed.
"I realized right away that they were students.  I shouldn't have
gone by there tonight."

Her hair, dark and drawn back to her ears, brushed her shoulders.
She laughed uncontrollably.

"He was so helpless," she said.  "Lord knows I've seen men helpless--
hundreds of them just helpless--but I'll never forget the
expression in his face when he decided to--to lean on me."

Her dark eyes shone with mirth and Bill saw that she was really
self-reliant.  He stared at her, and the impression of her beauty
grew until, uncommitted by a word, by even a formal introduction,
he felt himself going out toward her, watching the turn of her lips
and the shifting of her cheeks when she smiled . . .

All this was in the three or four minutes that he walked beside
her; not till afterward did he realize how profound the impression
had been.

As they passed the church-like bulk of the administration building,
an open cabriolet slowed down beside them and a man of about thirty-
five jumped out.  The girl ran toward him.

"Howard!" she cried with excited gayety.  "I was attacked.  There
were some students in front of the Coccidian Club building--"

The man swung sharply and menacingly toward Bill Tulliver.

"Is this one of them?" he demanded.

"No, no; he's all right."

Simultaneously Bill recognized him--it was Dr. Howard Durfee,
brilliant among the younger surgeons, heartbreaker and swashbuckler
of the staff.

"You haven't been bothering Miss--"

She stopped him, but not before Bill had answered angrily:

"I don't bother people."

Unappeased, as if Bill were in some way responsible, Doctor Durfee
got into his car; the girl got in beside him.

"So long," she said.  "And thanks."  Her eyes shone at Bill with
friendly interest, and then, just before the car shot away, she did
something else with them--narrowed them a little and then widened
them, recognizing by this sign the uniqueness of their relationship.
"I see you," it seemed to say.  "You registered. Everything's
possible."

With the faint fanfare of a new motor, she vanished back into the
spring night.


II


Bill was to enter the hospital in July with the first contingent of
newly created doctors.  He passed the intervening months at
Martha's Vineyard, swimming and fishing with Schoatze, his
classmate, and returned tense with health and enthusiasm to begin
his work.

The red square broiled under the Maryland sun.  Bill went in
through the administration building where a gigantic Christ
gestured in marble pity over the entrance hall.  It was by this
same portal that Bill's father had entered on his interneship
thirty years before.

Suddenly Bill was in a condition of shock, his tranquility was rent
asunder, he could not have given a rational account as to why he
was where he was.  A dark-haired girl with great, luminous eyes had
started up from the very shadow of the statue, stared at him just
long enough to effect this damage, and then with an explosive
"Hello!" vanished into one of the offices.

He was still gazing after her, stricken, haywire, scattered and
dissolved--when Doctor Norton hailed him:

"I believe I'm addressing William Tulliver the fifth--"

Bill was glad to be reminded who he was.

"--looking somewhat interested in Doctor Durfee's girl," continued
Norton.

"Is she?" Bill asked sharply.  Then:  "Oh, howdedo, Doctor?"

Dr. Norton decided to exercise his wit, of which he had plenty.
"In fact we know they spend their days together, and gossip adds
the evenings."

"Their days?  I should think he'd be too busy."

"He is.  As a matter of fact, Miss Singleton induces the state of
coma during which he performs his internal sculpture.  She's an
anaesthetist."

"I see.  Then they are--thrown together all day."

"If you regard that as a romantic situation."  Doctor Norton looked
at him closely.  "Are you settled yet?  Can you do something for me
right now?"

"Yes, indeed."

"I know you don't go on the ward till tomorrow, but I'd like you to
go to East Michael and take a P. E. and a history."

"Certainly."

"Room 312.  I've put your methodical friend Schoatze on the trail
of another mystery next door."

Bill hurried to his room on the top of Michael, jumped into a new
white uniform, equipped himself with instruments.  In his haste he
forgot that this was the first time he had performed an inquisition
unaided.  Outside the door he smoothed himself into a calm, serious
manner.  He was almost a white apostle when we walked into the
room; at least he tried to be.

A paunchy, sallow man of forty was smoking a cigarette in bed.

"Good morning," Bill said heartily.  "How are you this morning?"

"Rotten," the man said.  "That's why I'm here."

Bill set down his satchel and approached him like a young cat after
its first sparrow.

"What seems to be the trouble?"

"Everything.  My head aches, my bones ache, I can't sleep, I don't
eat, I've got fever.  My chauffeur ran over me, I mean ran over me,
I mean ran me, if you know what I mean.  I mean from Washington
this morning.  I can't stand those Washington doctors; they don't
talk about anything but politics."

Bill clapped a thermometer in his mouth and took his pulse.  Then
he made the routine examination of chest, stomach, throat and the
rest.  The reflexes were sluggish to the little rubber hammer.
Bill sat down beside the bed.

"I'd trade hearts with you any day," he promised.

"They all say I've got a good heart," agreed the man.  "What did
you think of Hoover's speech?"

"I thought you were tired of politics."

'That's true, but I got thinking of Hoover while you went over me."

"About Hoover?"

"About me.  What did you find out?"

"We'll want to make some tests.  But you seem pretty sound really."

"I'm not sound," the patient snapped.  "I'm not sound.  I'm a sick
man."

Bill took out a P. E. form and a fountain pen.

"What's your name?" he began.

"Paul B. Van Schaik."

"Your nearest relative?"

There was nothing in the case history on which to form any opinion.
Mr. Van Schaik had had several children's diseases.  Yesterday
morning he was unable to get out of bed and his valet had taken his
temperature and found fever.

Bill's thermometer registered no fever.

"Now we're going to make just a little prick in your thumb," he
said, preparing glass slides, and when this had been accomplished
to the tune of a short, dismal howl from the patient, he added:
"We want just a little specimen from your upper arm."

"You want everything but my tears," protested the patient.

"We have to investigate all the possibilities," said Bill sternly,
plunging the syringe into the soft upper arm, inspiring more
explosive protests from Mr. Van Schaik.

Reflectively Bill replaced his instruments.  He had obtained no
clue as to what was the matter and he eyed the patient reproachfully.

On a chance, he looked for enlarged cervical glands, and asked him
if his parents were alive, and took a last look at throat and
teeth.

"Eyes normally prominent," he wrote down, with a feeling of
futility.  "Pupils round and equal."

"That's all for the moment," he said.  "Try and get some rest."

"Rest!" cried Mr. Van Schaik indignantly.  "That's just the
trouble.  I haven't been able to sleep for three days.  I feel
worse every minute."

As Bill went out into the hall, George Schoatze was just emerging
from the room next door.  His eyes were uncertain and there was
sweat upon his brow.

"Finished?" Bill asked.

"Why, yes, in a way.  Did Doctor Norton set you a job too?"

"Yeah.  Kind of puzzling case in here--contradictory symptoms," he
lied.

"Same here," said George, wiping his brow.  "I'd rather have
started out on something more clearly defined, like the ones
Robinson gave us in class last year--you know, where there were two
possibilities and one probability."

"Unobliging lot of patients," agreed Bill.

A student nurse approached him.

"You were just in 312," she said in a low voice.  "I better tell
you.  I unpacked for the patient, and there was one empty bottle of
whisky and one half empty.  He asked me to pour him a drink, but I
didn't like to do that without asking a doctor."

"Quite right," said Bill stiffly, but he wanted to kiss her hand in
gratitude.

Dispatching the specimens to the laboratory, the two internes went
in search of Doctor Norton, whom they found in his office.

"Through already?  What luck, Tulliver?"

"He's been on a bust and he's got a hangover," Bill blurted out.
"I haven't got the laboratory reports yet, but my opinion is that's
all."

"I agree with you," said Doctor Norton.  "All right, Schoatze; how
about the lady in 314?"

"Well, unless it's too deep for me, there's nothing the matter with
her at all."

"Right you are," agreed Doctor Norton.  "Nerves--and not even
enough of them for the Ward clinic.  What'll we do with them?"

"Throw em out," said Bill promptly.

"Let them stay," corrected Doctor Norton.  "They can afford it.
They come to us for protection they don't need, so let them pay for
a couple of really sick people over in the free wards.  We're not
crowded."

Outside the office, Bill and George fastened eyes.

"Humbling us a little," said Bill rather resentfully.  "Let's go up
to the operating rooms; I want to convince myself all over again
that this is a serious profession."  He swore.  "I suppose for the
next few months we'll be feeling the bellies of four-flushers and
taking the case histories of women who aren't cases."

"Never mind," said George cautiously.  "I was just as glad to start
with something simple like--like--"

"Like what?"

"Why, like nothing."

"You're easily pleased," Bill commented.


Ascertaining from a bulletin board that Dr. Howard Durfee was at
work in No. 4, they took the elevator to the operating rooms.  As
they slipped on the gowns, caps, and then the masks, Bill realized
how quickly he was breathing.

He saw HER before he saw anything else in the room, except the
bright vermilion spot of the operation itself, breaking the
universal whiteness of the scene.  There was a sway of eyes toward
the two internes as they came into the gallery, and Bill picked out
her eyes, darker than ever in contrast with the snowy cap and mask,
as she sat working the gas machine at the patient's invisible head.
The room was small.  The platform on which they stood was raised
about four feet, and by leaning out on a glass screen like a
windshield, they brought their eyes to within two yards of the
surgeon's busy hands.

"It's a neat appendix--not a cut in the muscle," George whispered.
"That guy can play lacrosse tomorrow."

Doctor Durfee, busy with catgut, heard him.

"Not this patient," he said.  "Too many adhesions."

His hands, trying the catgut, were sure and firm, the fine hands of
a pianist, the tough hands of a pitcher combined.  Bill thought how
insecure, precariously involved, the patient would seem to a
layman, and yet how safe he was with those sure hands in an
atmosphere so made safe from time itself.  Time had stopped at the
door of the operating room, too profane to enter here.

Thea Singleton guarded the door of the patient's consciousness, a
hand on a pulse, another turning the wheels of the gas machine, as
if they were the stops on a silent organ.

There were others in attendance--an assisting surgeon, a nurse who
passed instruments, a nurse who made liaison between the table and
the supplies--but Bill was absorbed in what subtle relationship
there was between Howard Durfee and Thea Singleton; he felt a wild
jealousy toward the mask with the brilliant, agile hands.

"I'm going," he said to George.


He saw her that afternoon, and again it was in the shadow of the
great stone Christ in the entrance hall.  She was in street
clothes, and she looked slick and fresh and tantalizingly
excitable.

"Of course.  You're the man the night of the Coccidian show.  And
now you're an interne.  Wasn't it you who came into Room 4 this
morning?"

"Yes.  How did it go?"

"Fine.  It was Doctor Durfee."

"Yes," he said with emphasis.  "I know it was Doctor Durfee."

He met her by accident or contrivance half a dozen times in the
next fortnight, before he judged he could ask her for a date.

"Why, I suppose so."  She seemed a little surprised.  "Let's see.
How about next week--either Tuesday or Wednesday?"

"How about tonight?"

"Oh, not possibly."

When he called Tuesday at the little apartment she shared with a
woman musician from the Peabody Institute, he said:

"What would you like to do?  See a picture?"

"No," she answered emphatically.  "If I knew you better I'd say
let's drive about a thousand miles into the country and go swimming
in some quarry."  She looked at him quizzically.  "You're not one
of those very impulsive internes, are you, that just sweep poor
nurses off their feet?"

"On the contrary, I'm scared to death of you," Bill admitted.

It was a hot night, but the white roads were cool.  They found out
a little about each other:  She was the daughter of an Army officer
and had grown up in the Philippines, and in the black-and-silver
water of the abandoned quarry she surprised him with such diving as
he had never seen a girl do.  It was ghostly inside of the black
shadow that ringed the glaring moonlight, and their voices echoed
loud when they called to each other.

Afterward, with their heads wet and their bodies stung alive, they
sat for awhile, unwilling to start back.  Suddenly she smiled, and
then looked at him without speaking, her lips just barely parted.
There was the starlight set upon the brilliant darkness; and there
were her pale cool cheeks, and Bill let himself be lost in love for
her, as he had so wanted to do.

"We must go," she said presently.

"Not yet."

"Oh, YET--VERY yet--exceedingly yet."

"Because," he said after a moment, "you're Doctor Durfee's girl?"

"Yes," she admitted after a moment, "I suppose I'm Doctor Durfee's
girl."

"Why are you?" he cried.

"Are you in love with me?"

"I suppose I am.  Are you in love with Durfee?"

She shook her head.  "No, I'm not in love with anybody.  I'm just--
his girl."

So the evening that had been at first ecstatic was finally
unsatisfactory.  This feeling deepened when he found that for his
date he had to thank the fact that Durfee was out of town for a few
days.

With August and the departure of more doctors on vacation, he found
himself very busy.  During four years he had dreamed of such work
as he was doing, and now it was all disturbed by the ubiquity of
"Durfee's girl."  In vain he searched among the girls in the city,
on those Sundays when he could go into the city, for some who would
soften the hurt of his unreciprocated emotion.  But the city seemed
empty of girls, and in the hospital the little probationers in
short cuffs had no appeal for him.  The truth of his situation was
that his initial idealism which had been centred in Doctor Norton
had transferred itself to Thea.  Instead of a God, it was now a
Goddess who symbolized for him the glory and the devotion of his
profession; and that she was caught up in an entanglement that
bound her away from him, played havoc with his peace of mind.

Diagnosis had become a workaday matter--almost.  He had made a few
nice guesses and Doctor Norton had given him full credit.

"Nine times out of ten I'll be right," Norton said.  "The rare
thing is so rare that I'm out of the habit of looking for it.
That's where you young men come in; you're cocked for the rare
thing and that one time in ten you find it."

"It's a great feeling," said Bill.  "I got a big kick out of that
actinomycosis business."

"You look tired for your age," said Doctor Norton suddenly.  "At
twenty-five you shouldn't be existing entirely on nervous energy,
Bill, and that's what you're doing.  The people you grew up with
say they never see you.  Why not take a couple of hours a week away
from the hospital, if only for the sake of your patients?  You took
so many chemistry tests of Mr. Doremus that we almost had to give
him blood transfusions to build him up again."

"I was right," said Bill eagerly.

"But a little brutal.  Everything would have developed in a day or
two.  Take it gently, like your friend Schoatze.  You're going to
know a lot about internal medicine some day, but you're trying to
rush things."

But Bill was a man driven; he tried more Sunday afternoons with
current débutantes, but in the middle of a conversation he would
find his mind drifting back to those great red building blocks of
an Idea, where alone he could feel the pulse of life.

The news that a famous character in politics was leaving the Coast
and coming to the hospital for the diagnosis of some obscure malady
had the effect of giving him a sudden interest in politics.  He
looked up the record of the man and followed his journey east,
which occupied half a column daily in the newspapers; party issues
depended on his survival and eventual recovery.

Then one August afternoon there was an item in the society column
which announced the engagement of Helen, débutante daughter of Mrs.
Truby Ponsonby Day, to Dr. Howard Durfee.  Bill's reconciled world
turned upside down.  After an amount of very real suffering, he had
accepted the fact that Thea was the mistress of a brilliant
surgeon, but that Dr. Durfee should suddenly cut loose from her was
simply incredible.

Immediately he went in search of her, found her issuing from the
nurses' ward in street clothes.  Her lovely face, with the eyes
that held for him all the mystery of people trying, all the
splendor of a goal, all reward, all purpose, all satisfaction, was
harried with annoyance; she had been stared at and pitied.

"If you like," she answered, when he asked if he could run her
home, and then:  "Heaven help women!  The amount of groaning over
my body that took place this afternoon would have been plenty for a
war."

"I'm going to help you," he said.  "If that guy has let you down--"

"Oh, shut up!  Up to a few weeks ago I could have married Howard
Durfee by nodding my head--that's just what I wouldn't tell those
women this afternoon.  I think you've got discretion, and that'll
help you a lot when you're a doctor."

"I am a doctor," he said somewhat stiffly.

"No, you're just an interne."

He was indignant and they drove in silence.  Then, softening, she
turned toward him and touched his arm.

"You happen to be a gentleman," she said, "which is nice sometimes--
though I prefer a touch of genius."

"I've got that," Bill said doggedly.  "I've got everything, except
you."

"Come up to the apartment and I'll tell you something that no one
else in this city knows."

It was a modest apartment but it told him that at some time she had
lived in a more spacious world.  It was all reduced, as if she had
hung on to several cherished things, a Duncan Phyfe table, a brass
by Brancusi, two oil portraits of the '50's.

"I was engaged to John Gresham," she said.  "Do you know who he
was?"

"Of course," he said.  "I took up the subscription for the bronze
tablet to him."

John Gresham had died by inches from radium poisoning, got by his
own experiments.

"I was with him till the end," Thea went on quickly, "and just
before he died he wagged his last finger at me and said, 'I forbid
you to go to pieces.  That doesn't do any good.'  So, like a good
little girl, I didn't go to pieces, but I toughened up instead.
Anyhow, that's why I never could love Howard Durfee the way he
wanted to be loved, in spite of his nice swagger and his fine
hands."

"I see."  Overwhelmed by the revelation, Bill tried to adjust
himself to it.  "I knew there was something far off about you, some
sort of--oh, dedication to something I didn't know about."

"I'm pretty hard."  She got up impatiently.  "Anyhow, I've lost a
good friend today and I'm cross, so go before I show it.  Kiss me
good-by if you like."

"It wouldn't mean anything at this moment."

"Yes, it would," she insisted.  "I like to be close to you.  I like
your clothes."

Obediently he kissed her, but he felt far off from her and very
rebuffed and young as he went out the door.

He awoke next morning with the sense of something important hanging
over him; then he remembered.  Senator Billings, relayed by crack
trains, airplanes and ambulances, was due to arrive during the
morning, and the ponderous body which had housed and expelled so
much nonsense in thirty years was to be at the mercy of the
rational at last.

"I'll diagnose the old boy," he thought grimly, "if I have to
invent a new disease."

He went about his routine work with a sense of fatigue that
morning.  Perhaps Doctor Norton would keep this plum to himself and
Bill wouldn't have a chance at him.  But at eleven o'clock he met
his senior in a corridor.

"The senator's come," he said.  "I've formed a tentative opinion.
You might go in and get his history.  Go over him quickly and give
him the usual laboratory work-up."

"All right," said Bill, but there was no eagerness in his voice.
He seemed to have lost all his enthusiasm.  With his instruments
and a block of history paper, he repaired to the senator's room.

"Good morning," he began.  "Feeling a little tired after your
trip?"

The big barrel of a man rolled toward him.

"Exhausted," he squeaked unexpectedly.  "All in."

Bill didn't wonder; he felt rather that way himself, as if he had
travelled thousands of miles in all sorts of conveyances until his
insides, including his brains, were all shaken up together.

He took the case history.

"What's your profession?"

"Legislator."

"Do you use any alcohol?"

The senator raised himself on one arm and thundered, "See here,
young man; I'm not going to be heckled!  As long as the Eighteenth
Amendment--"  He subsided.

"Do you use any alcohol?" Bill asked again patiently.

"Why, yes."

"How much?"

"A few drinks every day.  I don't count them.  Say, if you look in
my suitcase you'll find an X-ray of my lungs, taken a few years
ago."

Bill found it and stared at it with a sudden feeling that
everything was getting a little crazy.

"This is an X-ray of a woman's stomach," he said.

"Oh--well, it must have got mixed up," said the senator.  "It must
be my wife's."

Bill went into the bathroom to wash his thermometer.  When he came
back he took the senator's pulse, and was puzzled to find himself
regarded in a curious way.

"What's the idea?" the senator demanded.  "Are you the patient or
am I?"  He jerked his hand angrily away from Bill.  "Your hand's
like ice.  And you've put the thermometer in your own mouth."

Only then did Bill realize how sick he was.  He pressed the nurse's
bell and staggered back to a chair with wave after wave of pain
chasing across his abdomen.


III


He awoke with a sense that he had been in bed for many hours.
There was fever bumping in his brain, a pervasive weakness in his
body, and what had wakened him was a new series of pains in his
stomach.  Across the room in an armchair sat Dr. George Schoatze,
and on his knee was the familiar case-history pad.

"What the hell," Bill said weakly.  "What the hell's the matter
with me?  What happened?"

"You're all right," said George.  "You just lie quiet."

Bill tried to sit upright, but found he was too weak.

"Lie quiet!" he repeated incredulously.  "What do you think I am--
some dumb patient?  I asked you what's the matter with me?"

"That's exactly what we're trying to find out.  Say, what is your
exact age?"

"My age!" Bill cried.  "A hundred and ten in the shade!  My name's
Al Capone and I'm an old hophead.  Stick that on your God damn
paper and mail it to Santa Claus.  I asked you what's the matter
with me."

"And I say that's what we're trying to find out," said George,
staunch, but a little nervous.  "Now, you take it easy."

"Take it easy!" cried Bill.  "When I'm burning up with fever and a
half-wit interne sits there and asks me how many fillings I've got
in my teeth!  You take my temperature, and take it right away!"

"All right--all right," said George conciliatingly.  "I was just
going to."

He put the thermometer in Bill's mouth and felt for the pulse, but
Bill mumbled, "I'll shake my ode pulse," and pulled his hand away.
After two minutes George deftly extracted the thermometer and
walked with it to the window, an act of treachery that brought
Bill's legs out of bed.

"I want to read that thermometer!" he cried.  "Now, you look here!
I want to know what's on that thermometer!"

George shook it down quickly and put it in its case.

"That isn't the way we do things here," he said.

"Oh, isn't it?  Well, then, I'll go somewhere where they've got
some sense."

George prepared a syringe and two small plates of glass.

Bill groaned.  "Do you think for a moment I'm going to let you do
that?  I taught you everything you know about blood chemistry.  By
God, I used to do your lessons for you, and you come here to make
some clumsy stab into my arm!"

Perspiring fluently, as was his wont under strain, George rang for
a nurse, with the hope that a female presence would have a calming
effect on Bill.  But it was not the right female.

"Another nitwit!" Bill cried as she came in.  "Do you think I'm
going to lie here and stand more of this nonsense?  Why doesn't
somebody do something?  Where's Doctor Norton?"

"He'll be here this afternoon."

"This afternoon!  I'll probably be dead by this afternoon.  Why
isn't he here this morning?  Off on some social bat and I lie here
surrounded by morons who've lost their heads and don't know what to
do about it.  What are you writing there--that my 'tongue protrudes
in mid-line without tremor'?  Give me my slippers and bathrobe.
I'm going to report you two as specimens for the nerve clinic."

They pressed him down in bed, whence he looked up at George with
infinite reproach.

"You, that I explained a whole book of toxicology to, you're
presuming to diagnose ME.  Well, then, DO it!  What have I got?
Why is my stomach burning up?  Is it appendicitis?  What's the
white count?"

"How can I find out the white count when--"

With a sigh of infinite despair at the stupidity of mankind, Bill
relaxed, exhausted.

Doctor Norton arrived at two o'clock.  His presence should have
been reassuring, but by this time the patient was too far gone in
nervous tension.

"Look here, Bill," he said sternly.  "What's all this about not
letting George look into your mouth?"

"Because he deliberately gagged me with that stick," Bill cried.
"When I get out of this I'm going to stick a plank down that ugly
trap of his."

"Now, that'll do.  Do you know little Miss Cary has been crying?
She says she's going to give up nursing.  She says she's never been
so disillusioned in her life."

"The same with me.  Tell her I'm going to give it up too.  After
this, I'm going to kill people instead of curing them.  Now when I
need it nobody has even tried to cure ME."

An hour later Doctor Norton stood up.

"Well, Bill, we're going to take you at your word and tell you
what's what.  I'm laying my cards on the table when I say we don't
know what's the matter with you.  We've just got the X-rays from
this morning, and it's pretty certain it's not the gall bladder.
There's a possibility of acute food poisoning or mesenteric
thrombosis, or it may be something we haven't thought of yet.  Give
us a chance, Bill."

With an effort and with the help of a sedative, Bill got himself in
comparative control; only to go to pieces again in the morning,
when George Schoatze arrived to give him a hypodermoclysis.

"But I can't stand it," he raged.  "I never could stand being
pricked, and you have as much right with a needle as a year-old
baby with a machine gun."

"Doctor Norton has ordered that you get nothing by mouth."

"Then give it intravenously."

"This is best."

"What I'll do to you when I get well!  I'll inject stuff into you
until you're as big as a barrel!  I will!  I'll hire somebody to
hold you down!"

Forty-eight hours later, Doctor Norton and Doctor Schoatze had a
conference in the former's office.

"So there we are," George was saying gloomily.  "He just flatly
refuses to submit to the operation."

"H'm."  Doctor Norton considered.  "That' bad."

"There's certainly danger of a perforation."

"And you say that his chief objection--"

"--that it was my diagnosis.  He says I remembered the word
'volvulus' from some lecture and I'm trying to wish it on him."
George added uncomfortably:  "He always was domineering, but I
never saw anything like THIS.  Today he claims it's acute
pancreatitis, but he doesn't have any convincing reasons."

"Does he know I agree with your opinion?"

"He doesn't seem to believe in anybody," said George uncomfortably.
"He keeps fretting about his father; he keeps thinking he could
help him if he was alive."

"I wish that there was someone outside the hospital he had some
faith in," Norton said.  An idea came to him:  "I wonder--"  He
picked up the telephone and said to the operator:  "I wish you'd
locate Miss Singleton, Doctor Durfee's anaesthetist.  And when
she's free, ask her to come and see me."


Bill opened his eyes wearily when Thea came into his room at eight
that night.

"Oh, it's you," he murmured.

She sat on the side of his bed and put her hand on his arm.

"H'lo, Bill," she said.

"H'lo."

Suddenly he turned in bed and put both arms around her arm.  Her
free hand touched his hair.

"You've been bad," she said.

"I can't help it."

She sat with him silently for half an hour; then she changed her
position so that her arm was under his head.  Stooping over him,
she kissed him on the brow.  He said:

"Being close to you is the first rest I've had in four days."

After a while she said:  "Three months ago Doctor Durfee did an
operation for volvulus and it was entirely successful."

"But it isn't volvulus!" he cried.  "Volvulus is when a loop of the
intestine gets twisted on itself.  It's a crazy idea of Schoatze's!
He wants to make a trick diagnosis and get a lot of credit."

"Doctor Norton agrees with him.  You must give in, Bill.  I'll be
right beside you, as close as I am now."

Her soft voice was a sedative; he felt his resistance growing
weaker; two long tears rolled from his eyes.  "I feel so helpless,"
he admitted.  "How do I know whether George Schoatze has any
sense?"

"That's just childish," she answered gently.  "You'll profit more
by submitting to this than Doctor Schoatze will from his lucky
guess."

He clung to her suddenly.  "Afterward, will you be my girl?"

She laughed.  "The selfishness!  The bargainer!  You wouldn't be
very cheerful company if you went around with a twisted intestine."

He was silent for a moment.  "Yesterday I made my will," he said.
"I divided what I have between an old aunt and you."

She put her face against his.  "You'll make me weep, and it really
isn't that serious at all."

"All right then."  His white, pinched face relaxed.  "Get it over
with."


Bill was wheeled upstairs an hour later.  Once the matter was
decided, all nervousness left him, and he remembered how the hands
of Doctor Durfee had given him such a sense of surety last July,
and remembered who would be at his head watching over him.  He last
thought as the gas began was sudden jealousy that Thea and Howard
Durfee would be awake and near each other while he was asleep . . .

. . . When he awoke he was being wheeled down a corridor to his
room.  Doctor Norton and Doctor Schoatze, seeming very cheerful,
were by his side.

"H'lo, hello," cried Bill in a daze.  "Say, what did they finally
discover about Senator Billings?"

"It was only a common cold, Bill," said Doctor Norton.  "They've
shipped him back west--by dirigible, helicopter and freight
elevator."

"Oh," said Bill; and then, after a moment, "I feel terrible."

"You're not terrible," Doctor Norton assured him.  "You'll be up on
deck in a week.  George here is certainly a swell guesser."

"It was a beautiful operation," said George modestly.  "That loop
would have perforated in another six hours."

"Good anaesthesia job, too," said Doctor Norton, winking at George.
"Like a lullaby."

Thea slipped in to see Bill next morning, when he was rested and
the soreness was eased and he felt weak but himself again.  She sat
beside him on the bed.

"I made an awful fool of myself," he confessed.

"A lot of doctors do when they get sick the first time.  They go
neurotic."

"I guess everybody's off me."

"Not at all.  You'll be in for some kidding probably.  Some bright
young one wrote this for the Coccidian Club show."  She read from a
scrap of paper:


     "Interne Tulliver, chloroformed,
       Had dreams above his station;
     He woke up thinking he'd performed
       His own li'l operation."


"I guess I can stand it," said Bill.  "I can stand anything when
you're around; I'm so in love with you.  But I suppose after this
you'll always see me as about high-school age."

"If you'd had your first sickness at forty you'd have acted the
same way."

"I hear your friend Durfee did a brilliant job, as usual," he said
resentfully.

"Yes," she agreed; after a minute she added:  "He wants to break
his engagement and marry me on my own terms."

His heart stopped beating.  "And what did you say?"

"I said No."

Life resumed itself again.

"Come closer," he whispered.  "Where's your hand?  Will you,
anyhow, go swimming with me every night all the rest of September?"

"Every other night."

"Every night."

"Well, every hot night," she compromised.

Thea stood up.

He saw her eyes fix momentarily on some distant spot, linger there
for a moment as if she were drawing support from it; then she
leaned over him and kissed his hungry lips good-by, and faded back
into her own mystery, into those woods where she hunted, with an
old suffering and with a memory he could not share.

But what was valuable in it she had distilled; she knew how to pass
it along so that it would not disappear.  For the moment Bill had
had more than his share, and reluctantly he relinquished her.

"This has been my biggest case so far," he thought sleepily.

The verse to the Coccidian Club song passed through his mind, and
the chorus echoed on, singing him into deep sleep:


     Bumtiddy, bum-bum,
     Tiddy-bum-bum.
     Three thousand years ago,
     Three thousand years ago.






ONE TRIP ABROAD


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (11 October 1930)



In the afternoon the air became black with locusts, and some of the
women shrieked, sinking to the floor of the motorbus and covering
their hair with traveling rugs.  The locusts were coming north,
eating everything in their path, which was not so much in that part
of the world; they were flying silently and in straight lines,
flakes of black snow.  But none struck the windshield or tumbled
into the car, and presently humorists began holding out their
hands, trying to catch some.  After ten minutes the cloud thinned
out, passed, and the women emerged from the blankets, disheveled
and feeling silly.  And everyone talked together.

Everyone talked; it would have been absurd not to talk after having
been through a swarm of locusts on the edge of the Sahara.  The
Smyrna-American talked to the British widow going down to Biskra to
have one last fling with an as-yet-unencountered sheik.  The member
of the San Francisco Stock Exchange talked shyly to the author.
"Aren't you an author?" he said.  The father and daughter from
Wilmington talked to the cockney airman who was going to fly to
Timbuctoo.  Even the French chauffeur turned about and explained in
a loud, clear voice:  "Bumblebees," which sent the trained nurse
from New York into shriek after shriek of hysterical laughter.

Amongst the unsubtle rushing together of the travelers there was
one interchange more carefully considered.  Mr. and Mrs. Liddell
Miles, turning as one person, smiled and spoke to the young
American couple in the seat behind:

"Didn't catch any in your hair?"

The young couple smiled back politely.

"No.  We survived that plague."

They were in their twenties, and there was still a pleasant touch
of bride and groom upon them.  A handsome couple; the man rather
intense and sensitive, the girl arrestingly light of hue in eyes
and hair, her face without shadows, its living freshness modulated
by a lovely confident calm.  Mr. and Mrs. Miles did not fail to
notice their air of good breeding, of a specifically "swell"
background, expressed both by their unsophistication and by their
ingrained reticence that was not stiffness.  If they held aloof, it
was because they were sufficient to each other, while Mr. and Mrs.
Miles' aloofness toward the other passengers was a conscious mask,
a social attitude, quite as public an affair in its essence as the
ubiquitous advances of the Smyrna-American, who was snubbed by all.

The Mileses had, in fact, decided that the young couple were
"possible" and, bored with themselves, were frankly approaching
them.

"Have you been to Africa before?  It's been so utterly fascinating!
Are you going on to Tunis?"

The Mileses, if somewhat worn away inside by fifteen years of a
particular set in Paris, had undeniable style, even charm, and
before the evening arrival at the little oasis town of Bou Saada
they had all four become companionable.  They uncovered mutual
friends in New York and, meeting for a cocktail in the bar of the
Hotel Transatlantique, decided to have dinner together.

As the young Kellys came downstairs later, Nicole was conscious of
a certain regret that they had accepted, realizing that now they
were probably committed to seeing a certain amount of their new
acquaintances as far as Constantine, where their routes diverged.

In the eight months of their marriage she had been so very happy
that it seemed like spoiling something.  On the Italian liner that
had brought them to Gibraltar they had not joined the groups that
leaned desperately on one another in the bar; instead, they
seriously studied French, and Nelson worked on business contingent
on his recent inheritance of half a million dollars.  Also he
painted a picture of a smokestack.  When one member of the gay
crowd in the bar disappeared permanently into the Atlantic just
this side of the Azores, the young Kellys were almost glad, for it
justified their aloof attitude.

But there was another reason Nicole was sorry they had committed
themselves.  She spoke to Nelson about it:  "I passed that couple
in the hall just now."

"Who--the Mileses?"

"No, that young couple--about our age--the ones that were on the
other motorbus, that we thought looked so nice, in Bir Rabalou
after lunch, in the camel market."

"They did look nice."

"Charming," she said emphatically; "the girl and man, both.  I'm
almost sure I've met the girl somewhere before."

The couple referred to were sitting across the room at dinner, and
Nicole found her eyes drawn irresistibly toward them.  They, too,
now had companions, and again Nicole, who had not talked to a girl
of her own age for two months, felt a faint regret.  The Mileses,
being formally sophisticated and frankly snobbish, were a different
matter.  They had been to an alarming number of places and seemed
to know all the flashing phantoms of the newspapers.

They dined on the hotel veranda under a sky that was low and full
of the presence of a strange and watchful God; around the corners
of the hotel the night already stirred with the sounds of which
they had so often read but that were even so hysterically
unfamiliar--drums from Senegal, a native flute, the selfish,
effeminate whine of a camel, the Arabs pattering past in shoes made
of old automobile tires, the wail of Magian prayer.

At the desk in the hotel, a fellow passenger was arguing
monotonously with the clerk about the rate of exchange, and the
inappropriateness added to the detachment which had increased
steadily as they went south.

Mrs. Miles was the first to break the lingering silence; with a
sort of impatience she pulled them with her, in from the night and
up to the table.

"We really should have dressed.  Dinner's more amusing if people
dress, because they feel differently in formal clothes.  The
English know that."

"Dress here?" her husband objected.  "I'd feel like that man in the
ragged dress suit we passed today, driving the flock of sheep."

"I always feel like a tourist if I'm not dressed."

"Well, we are, aren't we?" asked Nelson.

"I don't consider myself a tourist.  A tourist is somebody who gets
up early and goes to cathedrals and talks about scenery."

Nicole and Nelson, having seen all the official sights from Fez to
Algiers, and taken reels of moving pictures and felt improved,
confessed themselves, but decided that their experiences on the
trip would not interest Mrs. Miles.

"Every place is the same," Mrs. Miles continued.  "The only thing
that matters is who's there.  New scenery is fine for half an hour,
but after that you want your own kind to see.  That's why some
places have a certain vogue, and then the vogue changes and the
people move on somewhere else.  The place itself really never
matters."

"But doesn't somebody first decide that the place is nice?"
objected Nelson.  "The first ones go there because they like the
place."

"Where were you going this spring?" Mrs. Miles asked.

"We thought of San Remo, or maybe Sorrento.  We've never been to
Europe before."

"My children, I know both Sorrento and San Remo, and you won't
stand either of them for a week.  They're full of the most awful
English, reading the Daily Mail and waiting for letters and talking
about the most incredibly dull things.  You might as well go to
Brighton or Bournemouth and buy a white poodle and a sunshade and
walk on the pier.  How long are you staying in Europe?"

"We don't know; perhaps several years."  Nicole hesitated.  "Nelson
came into a little money, and we wanted a change.  When I was
young, my father had asthma and I had to live in the most
depressing health resorts with him for years; and Nelson was in the
fur business in Alaska and he loathed it; so when we were free we
came abroad.  Nelson's going to paint and I'm going to study
singing."  She looked triumphantly at her husband.  "So far, it's
been absolutely gorgeous."

Mrs. Miles decided, from the evidence of the younger woman's
clothes, that it was quite a bit of money, and their enthusiasm was
infectious.

"You really must go to Biarritz," she advised them.  "Or else come
to Monte Carlo."

"They tell me there's a great show here," said Miles, ordering
champagne.  "The Ouled Naïls.  The concierge says they're some kind
of tribe of girls who come down from the mountains and learn to be
dancers, and what not, till they've collected enough gold to go
back to their mountains and marry.  Well, they give a performance
tonight."

Walking over to the Café of the Ouled Naïls afterward, Nicole
regretted that she and Nelson were not strolling alone through the
ever-lower, ever-softer, ever-brighter night.  Nelson had
reciprocated the bottle of champagne at dinner, and neither of them
was accustomed to so much.  As they drew near the sad flute she
didn't want to go inside, but rather to climb to the top of a low
hill where a white mosque shone clear as a planet through the
night.  Life was better than any show; closing in toward Nelson,
she pressed his hand.

The little cave of a café was filled with the passengers from the
two busses.  The girls--light-brown, flat-nosed Berbers with fine,
deep-shaded eyes--were already doing each one her solo on the
platform.  They wore cotton dresses, faintly reminiscent of
Southern mammies; under these their bodies writhed in a slow
nautch, culminating in a stomach dance, with silver belts bobbing
wildly and their strings of real gold coins tinkling on their necks
and arms.  The flute player was also a comedian; he danced,
burlesquing the girls.  The drummer, swathed in goatskins like a
witch doctor, was a true black from the Sudan.

Through the smoke of cigarettes each girl went in turn through the
finger movement, like piano playing in the air--outwardly facile,
yet, after a few moments, so obviously exacting--and then through
the very simply languid yet equally precise steps of the feet--
these were but preparation to the wild sensuality of the culminated
dance.

Afterward there was a lull.  Though the performance seemed not
quite over, most of the audience gradually got up to go, but there
was a whispering in the air.

"What is it?" Nicole asked her husband.

"Why, I believe--it appears that for a consideration the Ouled
Naïls dance in more or less--ah--Oriental style--in very little
except jewelry."

"Oh."

"We're all staying," Mr. Miles assured her jovially.  "After all,
we're here to see the real customs and manners of the country; a
little prudishness shouldn't stand in our way."

Most of the men remained, and several of the women.  Nicole stood
up suddenly.

"I'll wait outside," she said.

"Why not stay, Nicole?  After all, Mrs. Miles is staying."

The flute player was making preliminary flourishes.  Upon the
raised dais two pale brown children of perhaps fourteen were taking
off their cotton dresses.  For an instant Nicole hesitated, torn
between repulsion and the desire not to appear to be a prig.  Then
she saw another young American woman get up quickly and start for
the door.  Recognizing the attractive young wife from the other
bus, her own decision came quickly and she followed.

Nelson hurried after her.  "I'm going if you go," he said, but with
evident reluctance.

"Please don't bother.  I'll wait with the guide outside."

"Well--"  The drum was starting.  He compromised:  "I'll only stay
a minute.  I want to see what it's like."

Waiting in the fresh night, she found that the incident had hurt
her--Nelson's not coming with her at once, giving as an argument
the fact that Mrs. Miles was staying.  From being hurt, she grew
angry and made signs to the guide that she wanted to return to the
hotel.

Twenty minutes later, Nelson appeared, angry with the anxiety at
finding her gone, as well as to hide his guilt at having left her.
Incredulous with themselves, they were suddenly in a quarrel.

Much later, when there were no sounds at all in Bou Saada and the
nomads in the market place were only motionless bundles rolled up
in their burnouses, she was asleep upon his shoulder.  Life is
progressive, no matter what our intentions, but something was
harmed, some precedent of possible nonagreement was set.  It was a
love match, though, and it could stand a great deal.  She and
Nelson had passed lonely youths, and now they wanted the taste and
smell of the living world; for the present they were finding it in
each other.

A month later they were in Sorrento, where Nicole took singing
lessons and Nelson tried to paint something new into the Bay of
Naples.  It was the existence they had planned and often read
about.  But they found, as so many have found, that the charm of
idyllic interludes depends upon one person's "giving the party"--
which is to say, furnishing the background, the experience, the
patience, against which the other seems to enjoy again the spells
of pastoral tranquillity recollected from childhood.  Nicole and
Nelson were at once too old and too young, and too American, to
fall into immediate soft agreement with a strange land.  Their
vitality made them restless, for as yet his painting had no
direction and her singing no immediate prospect of becoming
serious.  They said they were not "getting anywhere"--the evenings
were long, so they began to drink a lot of vin de Capri at dinner.

The English owned the hotel.  They were aged, come South for good
weather and tranquillity; Nelson and Nicole resented the mild tenor
of their days.  Could people be content to talk eternally about the
weather, promenade the same walks, face the same variant of
macaroni at dinner month after month?  They grew bored, and
Americans bored are already in sight of excitement.  Things came to
head all in one night.

Over a flask of wine at dinner they decided to go to Paris, settle
in an apartment and work seriously.  Paris promised metropolitan
diversion, friends of their own age, a general intensity that Italy
lacked.  Eager with new hopes, they strolled into the salon after
dinner, when, for the tenth time, Nelson noticed an ancient and
enormous mechanical piano and was moved to try it.

Across the salon sat the only English people with whom they had had
any connection--Gen. Sir Evelyne Fragelle and Lady Fragelle.  The
connection had been brief and unpleasant--seeing them walking out
of the hotel in peignoirs to swim, she had announced, over quite a
few yards of floor space, that it was disgusting and shouldn't be
allowed.

But that was nothing compared with her response to the first
terrific bursts of sound from the electric piano.  As the dust of
years trembled off the keyboard at the vibration, she shot
galvanically forward with the sort of jerk associated with the
electric chair.  Somewhat stunned himself by the sudden din of
Waiting for the Robert E. Lee, Nelson had scarcely sat down when
she projected herself across the room, her train quivering behind
her, and, without glancing at the Kellys, turned off the
instrument.

It was one of those gestures that are either plainly justified, or
else outrageous.  For a moment Nelson hesitated uncertainly; then,
remembering Lady Fragelle's arrogant remark about his bathing suit,
he returned to the instrument in her still-billowing wake and
turned it on again.

The incident had become international.  The eyes of the entire
salon fell eagerly upon the protagonists, watching for the next
move.  Nicole hurried after Nelson, urging him to let the matter
pass, but it was too late.  From the outraged English table there
arose, joint by joint, Gen. Sir Evelyne Fragelle, faced with
perhaps his most crucial situation since the relief of Ladysmith.

"'T'lee outrageous!--'t'lee outrageous!"

"I beg your pardon," said Nelson.

"Here for fifteen years!" screamed Sir Evelyne to himself.  "Never
heard of anyone doing such a thing before!"

"I gathered that this was put here for the amusement of the
guests."

Scorning to answer, Sir Evelyne knelt, reached for the catch,
pushed it the wrong way, whereupon the speed and volume of the
instrument tripled until they stood in a wild pandemonium of sound;
Sir Evelyne livid with military emotions, Nelson on the point of
maniacal laughter.

In a moment the firm hand of the hotel manager settled the matter;
the instrument gulped and stopped, trembling a little from its
unaccustomed outburst, leaving behind it a great silence in which
Sir Evelyne turned to the manager.

"Most outrageous affair ever heard of in my life.  My wife turned
it off once, and he"--this was his first acknowledgment of Nelson's
identity as distinct from the instrument--"he put it on again!"

"This is a public room in a hotel," Nelson protested.  "The
instrument is apparently here to be used."

"Don't get in an argument," Nicole whispered.  "They're old."

But Nelson said, "If there's any apology, it's certainly due to
me."

Sir Evelyne's eye was fixed menacingly upon the manager, waiting
for him to do his duty.  The latter thought of Sir Evelyne's
fifteen years of residence, and cringed.

"It is not the habitude to play the instrument in the evening.  The
clients are each one quiet on his or her table."

"American cheek!" snapped Sir Evelyne.

"Very well," Nelson said; "we'll relieve the hotel of our presence
tomorrow."

As a reaction from this incident, as a sort of protest against Sir
Evelyne Fragelle, they went not to Paris but to Monte Carlo after
all.  They were through with being alone.


II


A little more than two years after the Kellys' first visit to Monte
Carlo, Nicole woke up one morning into what, though it bore the
same name, had become to her a different place altogether.

In spite of hurried months in Paris or Biarritz, it was now home to
them.  They had a villa, they had a large acquaintance among the
spring and summer crowd--a crowd which, naturally, did not include
people on charted trips or the shore parties from Mediterranean
cruises; these latter had become for them "tourists."

They loved the Riviera in full summer with many friends there and
the nights open and full of music.  Before the maid drew the
curtains this morning to shut out the glare, Nicole saw from her
window the yacht of T. F. Golding, placid among the swells of the
Monacan Bay, as if constantly bound on a romantic voyage not
dependent upon actual motion.

The yacht had taken the slow tempo of the coast; it had gone no
farther than to Cannes and back all summer, though it might have
toured the world.  The Kellys were dining on board that night.

Nicole spoke excellent French; she had five new evening dresses and
four others that would do; she had her husband; she had two men in
love with her, and she felt sad for one of them.  She had her
pretty face.  At 10:30 she was meeting a third man, who was just
beginning to be in love with her "in a harmless way."  At one she
was having a dozen charming people to luncheon.  All that.

"I'm happy," she brooded toward the bright blinds.  "I'm young and
good-looking, and my name is often in the paper as having been here
and there, but really I don't care about shi-shi.  I think it's all
awfully silly, but if you do want to see people, you might as well
see the chic, amusing ones; and if people call you a snob, it's
envy, and they know it and everybody knows it."

She repeated the substance of this to Oscar Dane on the Mont Agel
golf course two hours later, and he cursed her quietly.

"Not at all," he said.  "You're just getting to be an old snob.  Do
you call that crowd of drunks you run with amusing people?  Why,
they're not even very swell.  They're so hard that they've shifted
down through Europe like nails in a sack of wheat, till they stick
out of it a little into the Mediterranean Sea."

Annoyed, Nicole fired a name at him, but he answered:  "Class C.  A
good solid article for beginners."

"The Colbys--anyway, her."

"Third flight."

"Marquis and Marquise de Kalb."

"If she didn't happen to take dope and he didn't have other
peculiarities."

"Well, then, where are the amusing people?" she demanded
impatiently.

"Off by themselves somewhere.  They don't hunt in herds, except
occasionally."

"How about you?  You'd snap up an invitation from every person I
named.  I've heard stories about you wilder than any you can make
up.  There's not a man that's known you six months that would take
your check for ten dollars.  You're a sponge and a parasite and
everything--"

"Shut up for a minute," he interrupted.  "I don't want to spoil
this drive. . . .  I just don't like to see you kid yourself," he
continued.  "What passes with you for international society is just
about as hard to enter nowadays as the public rooms at the Casino;
and if I can make my living by sponging off it, I'm still giving
twenty times more than I get.  We dead heats are about the only
people in it with any stuff, and we stay with it because we have
to."

She laughed, liking him immensely, wondering how angry Nelson would
be when he found that Oscar had walked off with his nail scissors
and his copy of the New York Herald this morning.

"Anyhow," she thought afterward, as she drove home toward luncheon,
"we're getting out of it all soon, and we'll be serious and have a
baby.  After this last summer."

Stopping for a moment at a florist's, she saw a young woman coming
out with an armful of flowers.  The young woman glanced at her over
the heap of color, and Nicole perceived that she was extremely
smart, and then that her face was familiar.  It was someone she had
known once, but only slightly; the name had escaped her, so she did
not nod, and forgot the incident until that afternoon.

They were twelve for luncheon:  The Goldings' party from the yacht,
Liddell and Cardine Miles, Mr. Dane--seven different nationalities
she counted; among them an exquisite young French-woman, Madame
Delauney, whom Nicole referred to lightly as "Nelson's girl."  Noel
Delauney was perhaps her closest friend; when they made up
foursomes for golf or for trips, she paired off with Nelson; but
today, as Nicole introduced her to someone as "Nelson's girl," the
bantering phrase filled Nicole with distaste.

She said aloud at luncheon:  "Nelson and I are going to get away
from it all."

Everybody agreed that they, too, were going to get away from it
all.

"It's all right for the English," someone said, "because they're
doing a sort of dance of death--you know, gayety in the doomed
fort, with the Sepoys at the gate.  You can see it by their faces
when they dance--the intensity.  They know it and they want it, and
they don't see any future.  But you Americans, you're having a
rotten time.  If you want to wear the green hat or the crushed hat,
or whatever it is, you always have to get a little tipsy."

"We're going to get away from it all," Nicole said firmly, but
something within her argued:  "What a pity--this lovely blue sea,
this happy time."  What came afterward?  Did one just accept a
lessening of tension?  It was somehow Nelson's business to answer
that.  His growing discontent that he wasn't getting anywhere ought
to explode into a new life for both of them, or rather a new hope
and content with life.  That secret should be his masculine
contribution.

"Well, children, good-by."

"It was a great luncheon."

"Don't forget about getting away from it all."

"See you when--"

The guests walked down the path toward their cars.  Only Oscar,
just faintly flushed on liqueurs, stood with Nicole on the veranda,
talking on and on about the girl he had invited up to see his stamp
collection.  Momentarily tired of people, impatient to be alone,
Nicole listened for a moment and then, taking a glass vase of
flowers from the luncheon table, went through the French windows
into the dark, shadowy villa, his voice following her as he talked
on and on out there.

It was when she crossed the first salon, still hearing Oscar's
monologue on the veranda, that she began to hear another voice in
the next room, cutting sharply across Oscar's voice.

"Ah, but kiss me again," it said, stopped; Nicole stopped, too,
rigid in the silence, now broken only by the voice on the porch.

"Be careful."  Nicole recognized the faint French accent of Noel
Delauney.

"I'm tired of being careful.  Anyhow, they're on the veranda."

"No, better the usual place."

"Darling, sweet darling."

The voice of Oscar Dane on the veranda grew weary and stopped and,
as if thereby released from her paralysis, Nicole took a step--
forward or backward, she did not know which.  At the sound of her
heel on the floor, she heard the two people in the next room
breaking swiftly apart.

Then she went in.  Nelson was lighting a cigarette; Noel, with her
back turned, was apparently hunting for hat or purse on a chair.
With blind horror rather than anger, Nicole threw, or rather pushed
away from her, the glass vase which she carried.  If at anyone, it
was at Nelson she threw it, but the force of her feeling had
entered the inanimate thing; it flew past him, and Noel Delauney,
just turning about, was struck full on the side of her head and
face.

"Say, there!" Nelson cried.  Noel sank slowly into the chair before
which she stood, her hand slowly rising to cover the side of her
face.  The jar rolled unbroken on the thick carpet, scattering its
flowers.

"You look out!"  Nelson was at Noel's side, trying to take the hand
away to see what had happened.

"C'est liquide," gasped Noel in a whisper.  "Est-ce que c'est le
sang?"

He forced her hand away, and cried breathlessly, "No, it's just
water!" and then, to Oscar, who had appeared in the doorway:  "Get
some cognac!" and to Nicole:  "You fool, you must be crazy!"

Nicole, breathing hard, said nothing.  When the brandy arrived,
there was a continuing silence, like that of people watching an
operation, while Nelson poured a glass down Noel's throat.  Nicole
signaled to Oscar for a drink, and, as if afraid to break the
silence without it, they all had a brandy.  Then Noel and Nelson
spoke at once:

"If you can find my hat--"

"This is the silliest--"

"--I shall go immediately."

"--thing I ever saw; I--"

They all looked at Nicole, who said:  "Have her car drive right up
to the door."  Oscar departed quickly.

"Are you sure you don't want to see a doctor?" asked Nelson
anxiously.

"I want to go."

A minute later, when the car had driven away, Nelson came in and
poured himself another glass of brandy.  A wave of subsiding
tension flowed over him, showing in his face; Nicole saw it, and
saw also his gathering will to make the best he could of it.

"I want to know just why you did that," he demanded.  "No, don't
go, Oscar."  He saw the story starting out into the world.

"What possible reason--"

"Oh, shut up!" snapped Nicole.

"If I kissed Noel, there's nothing so terrible about it.  It's of
absolutely no significance."

She made a contemptuous sound.  "I heard what you said to her."

"You're crazy."

He said it as if she were crazy, and wild rage filled her.

"You liar!  All this time pretending to be so square, and so
particular what I did, and all the time behind my back you've been
playing around with that little--"

She used a serious word, and as if maddened with the sound of it,
she sprang toward his chair.  In protection against this sudden
attack, he flung up his arm quickly, and the knuckles of his open
hand struck across the socket of her eye.  Covering her face with
her hand as Noel had done ten minutes previously, she fell sobbing
to the floor.

"Hasn't this gone far enough?" Oscar cried.

"Yes," admitted Nelson, "I guess it has."

"You go on out on the veranda and cool off."

He got Nicole to a couch and sat beside her, holding her hand.

"Brace up--brace up, baby," he said, over and over.  "What are you--
Jack Dempsey?  You can't go around hitting French women; they'll
sue you."

"He told her he loved her," she gasped hysterically.  "She said
she'd meet him at the same place. . . .  Has he gone there now?"

"He's out on the porch, walking up and down, sorry as the devil
that he accidentally hit you, and sorry he ever saw Noel Delauney."

"Oh, yes!"

"You might have heard wrong, and it doesn't prove a thing, anyhow."

After twenty minutes, Nelson came in suddenly and sank down on his
knees by the side of his wife.  Mr. Oscar Dane, reënforced in his
idea that he gave much more than he got, backed discreetly and far
from unwillingly to the door.

In another hour, Nelson and Nicole, arm in arm, emerged from their
villa and walked slowly down to the Café de Paris.  They walked
instead of driving, as if trying to return to the simplicity they
had once possessed, as if they were trying to unwind something that
had become visibly tangled.  Nicole accepted his explanations, not
because they were credible, but because she wanted passionately to
believe them.  They were both very quiet and sorry.

The Café de Paris was pleasant at that hour, with sunset drooping
through the yellow awnings and the red parasols as through stained
glass.  Glancing about, Nicole saw the young woman she had
encountered that morning.  She was with a man now, and Nelson
placed them immediately as the young couple they had seen in
Algeria, almost three years ago.

"They've changed," he commented.  "I suppose we have, too, but not
so much.  They're harder-looking and he looks dissipated.
Dissipation always shows in light eyes rather than in dark ones.
The girl is tout ce qu'il y a de chic, as they say, but there's a
hard look in her face too."

"I like her."

"Do you want me to go and ask them if they are that same couple?"

"No!  That'd be like lonesome tourists do.  They have their own
friends."

At that moment people were joining them at their table.

"Nelson, how about tonight?" Nicole asked a little later.  "Do you
think we can appear at the Goldings' after what's happened?"

"We not only can but we've got to.  If the story's around and we're
not there, we'll just be handing them a nice juicy subject of
conversation. . . .  Hello!  What on earth--"

Something strident and violent had happened across the café; a
woman screamed and the people at one table were all on their feet,
surging back and forth like one person.  Then the people at the
other tables were standing and crowding forward; for just a moment
the Kellys saw the face of the girl they had been watching, pale
now, and distorted with anger.  Panic-stricken, Nicole plucked at
Nelson's sleeve.

"I want to get out.  I can't stand any more today.  Take me home.
Is everybody going crazy?"

On the way home, Nelson glanced at Nicole's face and perceived with
a start that they were not going to dinner on the Goldings' yacht
after all.  For Nicole had the beginnings of a well-defined and
unmistakable black eye--an eye that by eleven o'clock would be
beyond the aid of all the cosmetics in the principality.  His heart
sank and he decided to say nothing about it until they reached
home.


III


There is some wise advice in the catechism about avoiding the
occasions of sin, and when the Kellys went up to Paris a month
later they made a conscientious list of the places they wouldn't
visit any more and the people they didn't want to see again.  The
places included several famous bars, all the night clubs except one
or two that were highly decorous, all the early-morning clubs of
every description, and all summer resorts that made whoopee for its
own sake--whoopee triumphant and unrestrained--the main attraction
of the season.

The people they were through with included three-fourths of those
with whom they had passed the last two years.  They did this not in
snobbishness, but for self-preservation, and not without a certain
fear in their hearts that they were cutting themselves off from
human contacts forever.

But the world is always curious, and people become valuable merely
for their inaccessibility.  They found that there were others in
Paris who were only interested in those who had separated from the
many.  The first crowd they had known was largely American, salted
with Europeans; the second was largely European, peppered with
Americans.  This latter crowd was "society," and here and there it
touched the ultimate milieu, made up of individuals of high
position, of great fortune, very occasionally of genius, and always
of power.  Without being intimate with the great, they made new
friends of a more conservative type.  Moreover, Nelson began to
paint again; he had a studio, and they visited the studios of
Brancusi and Leger and Deschamps.  It seemed that they were more
part of something than before, and when certain gaudy rendezvous
were mentioned, they felt a contempt for their first two years in
Europe, speaking of their former acquaintances as "that crowd" and
as "people who waste your time."

So, although they kept their rules, they entertained frequently at
home and they went out to the houses of others.  They were young
and handsome and intelligent; they came to know what did go and
what did not go, and adapted themselves accordingly.  Moreover,
they were naturally generous and willing, within the limits of
common sense, to pay.

When one went out one generally drank.  This meant little to
Nicole, who had a horror of losing her soigné air, losing a touch
of bloom or a ray of admiration, but Nelson, thwarted somewhere,
found himself quite as tempted to drink at these small dinners as
in the more frankly rowdy world.  He was not a drunk, he did
nothing conspicuous or sodden, but he was no longer willing to go
out socially without the stimulus of liquor.  It was with the idea
of bringing him to a serious and responsible attitude that Nicole
decided after a year in Paris, that the time had come to have a
baby.

This was coincidental with their meeting Count Chiki Sarolai.  He
was an attractive relic of the Austrian court, with no fortune or
pretense to any, but with solid social and financial connections in
France.  His sister was married to the Marquis de la Clos
d'Hirondelle, who, in addition to being of the ancient noblesse,
was a successful banker in Paris.  Count Chiki roved here and
there, frankly sponging, rather like Oscar Dane, but in a different
sphere.

His penchant was Americans; he hung on their words with a pathetic
eagerness, as if they would sooner or later let slip their
mysterious formula for making money.  After a casual meeting, his
interest gravitated to the Kellys.  During Nicole's months of
waiting he was in the house continually, tirelessly interested in
anything that concerned American crime, slang, finance or manners.
He came in for a luncheon or dinner when he had no other place to
go, and with tacit gratitude he persuaded his sister to call on
Nicole, who was immensely flattered.

It was arranged that when Nicole went to the hospital he would stay
at the appartement and keep Nelson company--an arrangement of which
Nicole didn't approve, since they were inclined to drink together.
But the day on which it was decided, he arrived with news of one of
his brother-in-law's famous canal-boat parties on the Seine, to
which the Kellys were to be invited and which, conveniently enough,
was to occur three weeks after the arrival of the baby.  So, when
Nicole moved out to the American Hospital Count Chiki moved in.

The baby was a boy.  For a while Nicole forgot all about people and
their human status and their value.  She even wondered at the fact
that she had become such a snob, since everything seemed trivial
compared with the new individual that, eight times a day, they
carried to her breast.

After two weeks she and the baby went back to the apartment, but
Chiki and his valet stayed on.  It was understood, with that
subtlety the Kellys had only recently begun to appreciate, that he
was merely staying until after his brother-in-law's party, but the
apartment was crowded and Nicole wished him gone.  But her old
idea, that if one had to see people they might as well be the best,
was carried out in being invited to the De la Clos d'Hirondelles'.

As she lay in her chaise longue the day before the event, Chiki
explained the arrangements, in which he had evidently aided.

"Everyone who arrives must drink two cocktails in the American
style before they can come aboard--as a ticket of admission."

"But I thought that very fashionable French--Faubourg St. Germain
and all that--didn't drink cocktails."

"Oh, but my family is very modern.  We adopt many American
customs."

"Who'll be there?"

"Everyone!  Everyone in Paris."

Great names swam before her eyes.  Next day she could not resist
dragging the affair into conversation with her doctor.  But she was
rather offended at the look of astonishment and incredulity that
came into his eyes.

"Did I understand you aright?" he demanded.  "Did I understand you
to say that you were going to a ball tomorrow?"

"Why, yes," she faltered.  "Why not?"

"My dear lady, you are not going to stir out of the house for two
more weeks; you are not going to dance or do anything strenuous for
two more after that."

"That's ridiculous!" she cried.  "It's been three weeks already!
Esther Sherman went to America after--"

"Never mind," he interrupted.  "Every case is different.  There is
a complication which makes it positively necessary for you to
follow my orders."

"But the idea is that I'll just go for two hours, because of course
I'll have to come home to Sonny--"

"You'll not go for two minutes."

She knew, from the seriousness of his tone, that he was right, but,
perversely, she did not mention the matter to Nelson.  She said,
instead, that she was tired, that possibly she might not go, and
lay awake that night measuring her disappointment against her fear.
She woke up for Sonny's first feeding, thinking to herself:  "But
if I just take ten steps from a limousine to a chair and just sit
half an hour--"

At the last minute the pale green evening dress from Callets,
draped across a chair in her bedroom, decided her.  She went.

Somewhere, during the shuffle and delay on the gangplank while the
guests went aboard and were challenged and drank down their
cocktails with attendant gayety, Nicole realized that she had made
a mistake.  There was, at any rate, no formal receiving line and,
after greeting their hosts, Nelson found her a chair on deck, where
presently her faintness disappeared.

Then she was glad she had come.  The boat was hung with fragile
lanterns, which blended with the pastels of the bridges and the
reflected stars in the dark Seine, like a child's dream out of the
Arabian Nights.  A crowd of hungry-eyed spectators were gathered on
the banks.  Champagne moved past in platoons like a drill of
bottles, while the music, instead of being loud and obtrusive,
drifted down from the upper deck like frosting dripping over a
cake.  She became aware presently that they were not the only
Americans there--across the deck were the Liddell Mileses, whom she
had not seen for several years.

Other people from that crowd were present, and she felt a faint
disappointment.  What if this was not the marquis' best party?  She
remembered her mother's second days at home.  She asked Chiki, who
was at her side, to point out celebrities, but when she inquired
about several people whom she associated with that set, he replied
vaguely that they were away, or coming later, or could not be
there.  It seemed to her that she saw across the room the girl who
had made the scene in the Café de Paris at Monte Carlo, but she
could not be sure, for with the faint almost imperceptible movement
of the boat, she realized that she was growing faint again.  She
sent for Nelson to take her home.

"You can come right back, of course.  You needn't wait for me,
because I'm going right to bed."

He left her in the hands of the nurse, who helped her upstairs and
aided her to undress quickly.

"I'm desperately tired," Nicole said.  "Will you put my pearls
away?"

"Where?"

"In the jewel box on the dressing table."

"I don't see it," said the nurse after a minute.

"Then it's in a drawer."

There was a thorough rummaging of the dressing table, without
result.

"But of course it's there."  Nicole attempted to rise, but fell
back, exhausted.  "Look for it, please, again.  Everything is in it--
all my mother's things and my engagement things."

"I'm sorry, Mrs. Kelly.  There's nothing in this room that answers
to that description."

"Wake up the maid."

The maid knew nothing; then, after a persistent cross-examination,
she did know something.  Count Sarolai's valet had gone out,
carrying his suitcase, half an hour after madame left the house.

Writhing in sharp and sudden pain, with a hastily summoned doctor
at her side, it seemed to Nicole hours before Nelson came home.
When he arrived, his face was deathly pale and his eyes were wild.
He came directly into her room.

"What do you think?" he said savagely.  Then he saw the doctor.
"Why, what's the matter?"

"Oh, Nelson, I'm sick as a dog and my jewel box is gone, and
Chiki's valet has gone.  I've told the police. . . .  Perhaps Chiki
would know where the man--"

"Chiki will never come in this house again," he said slowly.  "Do
you know whose party that was?  Have you got any idea whose party
that was?"  He burst into wild laughter.  "It was our party--our
party, do you understand?  We gave it--we didn't know it, but we
did."

"Maintenant, monsieur, il ne faut pas exciter madame--" the doctor
began.

"I thought it was odd when the marquis went home early, but I
didn't suspect till the end.  They were just guests--Chiki invited
all the people.  After it was over, the caterers and musicians
began to come up and ask me where to send their bills.  And that
damn Chiki had the nerve to tell me he thought I knew all the time.
He said that all he'd promised was that it would be his brother-in-
law's sort of party, and that his sister would be there.  He said
perhaps I was drunk, or perhaps I didn't understand French--as if
we'd ever talked anything but English to him."

"Don't pay!" she said.  "I wouldn't think of paying."

"So I said, but they're going to sue--the boat people and the
others.  They want twelve thousand dollars."

She relaxed suddenly.  "Oh, go away!" she cried.  "I don't care!
I've lost my jewels and I'm sick, sick!"


IV


This is the story of a trip abroad, and the geographical element
must not be slighted.  Having visited North Africa, Italy, the
Riviera, Paris and points in between, it was not surprising that
eventually the Kellys should go to Switzerland.  Switzerland is a
country where very few things begin, but many things end.

Though there was an element of choice in their other ports of call,
the Kellys went to Switzerland because they had to.  They had been
married a little more than four years when they arrived one spring
day at the lake that is the center of Europe--a placid, smiling
spot with pastoral hillsides, a backdrop of mountains and waters of
postcard blue, waters that are a little sinister beneath the
surface with all the misery that has dragged itself here from every
corner of Europe.  Weariness to recuperate and death to die.  There
are schools, too, and young people splashing at the sunny plages;
there is Bonivard's dungeon and Calvin's city, and the ghosts of
Byron and Shelley still sail the dim shores by night; but the Lake
Geneva that Nelson and Nicole came to was the dreary one of
sanatoriums and rest hotels.

For, as if by some profound sympathy that had continued to exist
beneath the unlucky destiny that had pursued their affairs, health
had failed them both at the same time; Nicole lay on the balcony of
a hotel coming slowly back to life after two successive operations,
while Nelson fought for life against jaundice in a hospital two
miles away.  Even after the reserve force of twenty-nine years had
pulled him through, there were months ahead during which he must
live quietly.  Often they wondered why, of all those who sought
pleasure over the face of Europe, this misfortune should have come
to them.

"There've been too many people in our lives," Nelson said.  "We've
never been able to resist people.  We were so happy the first year
when there weren't any people."

Nicole agreed.  "If we could ever be alone--really alone--we could
make up some kind of life for ourselves.  We'll try, won't we,
Nelson?"

But there were other days when they both wanted company
desperately, concealing it from each other.  Days when they eyed
the obese, the wasted, the crippled and the broken of all
nationalities who filled the hotel, seeking for one who might be
amusing.  It was a new life for them, turning on the daily visits
of their two doctors, the arrival of the mail and newspapers from
Paris, the little walk into the hillside village or occasionally
the descent by funicular to the pale resort on the lake, with its
Kursaal, its grass beach, its tennis clubs and sight-seeing busses.
They read Tauchnitz editions and yellow-jacketed Edgar Wallaces; at
a certain hour each day they watched the baby being given its bath;
three nights a week there was a tired and patient orchestra in the
lounge after dinner, that was all.

And sometimes there was a booming from the vine-covered hills on
the other side of the lake, which meant that cannons were shooting
at hail-bearing clouds, to save the vineyard from an approaching
storm; it came swiftly, first falling from the heavens and then
falling again in torrents from the mountains, washing loudly down
the roads and stone ditches; it came with a dark, frightening sky
and savage filaments of lightning and crashing, world-splitting
thunder, while ragged and destroyed clouds fled along before the
wind past the hotel.  The mountains and the lake disappeared
completely; the hotel crouched alone amid tumult and chaos and
darkness.

It was during such a storm, when the mere opening of a door
admitted a tornado of rain and wind into the hall, that the Kellys
for the first time in months saw someone they knew.  Sitting
downstairs with other victims of frayed nerves, they became aware
of two new arrivals--a man and woman whom they recognized as the
couple, first seen in Algiers, who had crossed their path several
times since.  A single unexpressed thought flashed through Nelson
and Nicole.  It seemed like destiny that at last here in this
desolate place they should know them, and watching, they saw other
couples eying them in the same tentative way.  Yet something held
the Kellys back.  Had they not just been complaining that there
were too many people in their lives?

Later, when the storm had dozed off into a quiet rain, Nicole found
herself near the girl on the glass veranda.  Under cover of reading
a book, she inspected the face closely.  It was an inquisitive
face, she saw at once, possibly calculating; the eyes, intelligent
enough, but with no peace in them, swept over people in a single
quick glance as though estimating their value.  "Terrible egoist,"
Nicole thought, with a certain distaste.  For the rest, the cheeks
were wan, and there were little pouches of ill health under the
eyes; these combining with a certain flabbiness of arms and legs to
give an impression of unwholesomeness.  She was dressed
expensively, but with a hint of slovenliness, as if she did not
consider the people of the hotel important.

On the whole, Nicole decided she did not like her; she was glad
that they had not spoken, but she was rather surprised that she had
not noticed these things when the girl crossed her path before.

Telling Nelson her impression at dinner, he agreed with her.

"I ran into the man in the bar, and I noticed we both took nothing
but mineral water, so I started to say something.  But I got a good
look at his face in the mirror and I decided not to.  His face is
so weak and self-indulgent that it's almost mean--the kind of face
that needs half a dozen drinks really to open the eyes and stiffen
the mouth up to normal."

After dinner the rain stopped and the night was fine outside.
Eager for the air, the Kellys wandered down into the dark garden;
on their way they passed the subjects of their late discussion, who
withdrew abruptly down a side path.

"I don't think they want to know us any more than we do them,"
Nicole laughed.

They loitered among the wild rosebushes and the beds of damp-sweet,
indistinguishable flowers.  Below the hotel, where the terrace fell
a thousand feet to the lake, stretched a necklace of lights that
was Montreux and Vevey, and then, in a dim pendant, Lausanne; a
blurred twinkling across the lake was Evian and France.  From
somewhere below--probably the Kursaal--came the sound of full-
bodied dance music--American, they guessed, though now they heard
American tunes months late, mere distant echoes of what was
happening far away.

Over the Dent du Midi, over a black bank of clouds that was the
rearguard of the receding storm, the moon lifted itself and the
lake brightened; the music and the far-away lights were like hope,
like the enchanted distance from which children see things.  In
their separate hearts Nelson and Nicole gazed backward to a time
when life was all like this.  Her arm went through his quietly and
drew him close.

"We can have it all again," she whispered.  "Can't we try, Nelson?"

She paused as two dark forms came into the shadows nearby and stood
looking down at the lake below.

Nelson put his arm around Nicole and pulled her closer.

"It's just that we don't understand what's the matter," she said.
"Why did we lose peace and love and health, one after the other?
If we knew, if there was anybody to tell us, I believe we could
try.  I'd try so hard."

The last clouds were lifting themselves over the Bernese Alps.
Suddenly, with a final intensity, the west flared with pale white
lightning.  Nelson and Nicole turned, and simultaneously the other
couple turned, while for an instant the night was as bright as day.
Then darkness and a last low peal of thunder, and from Nicole a
sharp, terrified cry.  She flung herself against Nelson; even in
the darkness she saw that his face was as white and strained as her
own.

"Did you see?" she cried in a whisper.  "Did you see them?"

"Yes!"

"They're us!  They're us!  Don't you see?"

Trembling, they clung together.  The clouds merged into the dark
mass of mountains; looking around after a moment, Nelson and Nicole
saw that they were alone together in the tranquil moonlight.




OUTSIDE THE CABINET-MAKER'S

by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


The Century Magazine (December, 1928)



The automobile stopped at the corner of Sixteenth and some dingy-
looking street.  The lady got out.  The man and the little girl
stayed in the car.

"I'm going to tell him it can't cost more than twenty dollars,"
said the lady.

"All right.  Have you the plans?"

"Oh, yes"--she reached for her bag in the back seat--"at least I
have now."

"Dites qu'il ne faut pas avoir les forts placards," said the man.
"Ni le bon bois."

"All right."

"I wish you wouldn't talk French," said the little girl.

"Et il faut avoir un bon 'height.'  L'un des Murphys était comme
ça."

He held his hand five feet from the ground.  The lady went through
a door lettered "Cabinet-Maker" and disappeared up a small stairs.

The man and the little girl looked around unexpectantly.  The
neighborhood was red brick, vague, quiet.  There were a few darkies
doing something or other up the street and an occasional automobile
went by.  It was a fine November day.

"Listen," said the man to the little girl, "I love you."

"I love you too," said the little girl, smiling politely.

"Listen," the man continued.  "Do you see that house over the way?"

The little girl looked.  It was a flat in back of a shop.  Curtains
masked most of its interior, but there was a faint stir behind
them.  On one window a loose shutter banged from back to forth
every few minutes.  Neither the man nor the little girl had ever
seen the place before.

"There's a Fairy Princess behind those curtains," said the man.
"You can't see her but she's there, kept concealed by an Ogre.  Do
you know what an Ogre is?"

"Yes."

"Well, this Princess is very beautiful with long golden hair."

They both regarded the house.  Part of a yellow dress appeared
momentarily in the window.

"That's her," the man said.  "The people who live there are
guarding her for the Ogre.  He's keeping the King and Queen
prisoner ten thousand miles below the earth.  She can't get out
until the Prince finds the three--"  He hesitated.

"And what, Daddy?  The three what?"

"The three--Look!  There she is again."

"The three what?"

"The three--the three stones that will release the King and Queen."

He yawned.

"And what then?"

"Then he can come and tap three times on each window and that will
set her free."

The lady's head emerged from the upper story of the cabinetmaker's.

"He's busy," she called down.  "Gosh, what a nice day!"

"And what, Daddy?" asked the little girl.  "Why does the Ogre want
to keep her there?"

"Because he wasn't invited to the christening.  The Prince has
already found one stone in President Coolidge's collar-box.  He's
looking for the second in Iceland.  Every time he finds a stone the
room where the Princess is kept turns blue.  GOSH!"

"What, Daddy?"

"Just as you turned away I could see the room turn blue.  That
means he's found the second stone."

"Gosh!" said the little girl.  "Look!  It turned blue again, that
means he's found the third stone."

Aroused by the competition the man looked around cautiously and his
voice grew tense.

"Do you see what I see?" he demanded.  "Coming up the street--
there's the Ogre himself, disguised--you know: transformed, like
Mombi in 'The Land of Oz.'"

"I know."

They both watched.  The small boy, extraordinarily small and taking
very long steps, went to the door of the flat and knocked; no one
answered but he didn't seem to expect it or to be greatly
disappointed.  He took some chalk from his pocket and began drawing
pictures under the door-bell.

"He's making magic signs," whispered the man.  "He wants to be sure
that the Princess doesn't get out this door.  He must know that the
Prince has set the King and Queen free and will be along for her
pretty soon."



The small boy lingered for a moment; then he went to a window and
called an unintelligible word.  After a while a woman threw the
window open and made an answer that the crisp wind blew away.

"She says she's got the Princess locked up," explained the man.

"Look at the Ogre," said the little girl.  "He's making magic signs
under the window too.  And on the sidewalk.  Why?"

"He wants to keep her from getting out, of course.  That's why he's
dancing.  That's a charm too--it's a magic dance."

The Ogre went away, taking very big steps.  Two men crossed the
street ahead and passed out of sight.

"Who are they, Daddy?"

"They're two of the King's soldiers.  I think the army must be
gathering over on Market Street to surround the house.  Do you know
what 'surround' means?"

"Yes.  Are those men soldiers too?"

"Those too.  And I believe that the old one just behind is the King
himself.  He's keeping bent down low like that so that the Ogre's
people won't recognize him."

"Who is the lady?"

"She's a Witch, a friend of the Ogre's."

The shutter blew closed with a bang and then slowly opened again.

"That's done by the good and bad fairies," the man explained.
"They're invisible, but the bad fairies want to close the shutter
so nobody can see in and the good ones want to open it."

"The good fairies are winning now."

"Yes."  He looked at the little girl.  "You're my good fairy."

"Yes.  Look, Daddy!  What is that man?"

"He's in the King's army too."  The clerk of Mr. Miller, the
jeweler, went by with a somewhat unmartial aspect.  "Hear the
whistle?  That means they're gathering.  And listen--there goes the
drum."

"There's the Queen, Daddy.  Look at there.  Is that the Queen?"

"No, that's a girl called Miss Television."  He yawned.  He began
to think of something pleasant that had happened yesterday.  He
went into a trance.  Then he looked at the little girl and saw that
she was quite happy.  She was six and lovely to look at.  He kissed
her.

"That man carrying the cake of ice is also one of the King's
soldiers," he said.  "He's going to put the ice on the Ogre's head
and freeze his brains so he can't do any more harm."

Her eyes followed the man down street.  Other men passed.  A darky
in a yellow darky's overcoat drove by with a cart marked The Del
Upholstery Co.  The shutter banged again and then slowly opened.

"See, Daddy, the good fairies are winning again."

The man was old enough to know that he would look back to that time--
the tranquil street and the pleasant weather and the mystery
playing before the child's eyes, mystery which he had created, but
whose luster and texture he could never see or touch any more
himself.  Again he touched his daughter's cheek instead and in
payment fitted another small boy and limping man into the story.

"Oh, I love you," he said.

"I know, Daddy," she answered, abstractedly.  She was staring at
the house.  For a moment he closed his eyes and tried to see with
her but he couldn't see--those ragged blinds were drawn against him
forever.  There were only the occasional darkies and the small boys
and the weather that reminded him of more glamorous mornings in the
past.

The lady came out of the cabinet-maker's shop.

"How did it go?" he asked.

"Good.  Il dit qu'il a fait les maisons de poupée pour les Du
Ponts.  Il va le faire."

"Combien?"

"Vingt-cinq.  I'm sorry I was so long."

"Look, Daddy, there go a lot more soldiers!"



They drove off.  When they had gone a few miles the man turned
around and said, "We saw the most remarkable thing while you were
there."  He summarized the episode.  "It's too bad we couldn't wait
and see the rescue."

"But we did," the child cried.  "They had the rescue in the next
street.  And there's the Ogre's body in that yard there.  The King
and Queen and Prince were killed and now the Princess is queen."

He had liked his King and Queen and felt that they had been too
summarily disposed of.

"You had to have a heroine," he said rather impatiently.

"She'll marry somebody and make him Prince."

They rode on abstractedly.  The lady thought about the doll's
house, for she had been poor and had never had one as a child, the
man thought how he had almost a million dollars and the little girl
thought about the odd doings on the dingy street that they had left
behind.




THE PAT HOBBY STORIES


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)




CONTENTS


Pat Hobby's Christmas Wish
Esquire (January 1940)

A Man in the Way Esquire
(February 1940)

"Boil Some Water--Lots of It"
Esquire (March 1940)

Teamed with Genius
Esquire (April 1940)

Pat Hobby and Orson Welles
Esquire (May 1940)

Pat Hobby's Secret
Esquire (June 1940)

Pat Hobby, Putative Father
Esquire (July 1940)

The Homes of the Stars
Esquire (August 1940)

Pat Hobby Does His Bit
Esquire (September 1940)

Pat Hobby's Preview
Esquire (October 1940)

No Harm Trying
Esquire (November 1940)

A Patriotic Short
Esquire (December 1940)

On the Trail of Pat Hobby
Esquire (January 1941)

Fun in an Artist's Studio
Esquire (February 1941)

Two Old-Timers
Esquire (March 1941)

Mightier than the Sword
Esquire (April 1941)

Pat Hobby's College Days
Esquire (May 1941)




PAT HOBBY'S CHRISTMAS WISH

Esquire (January 1940)


I


It was Christmas Eve in the studio.  By eleven o'clock in the
morning, Santa Claus had called on most of the huge population
according to each one's deserts.

Sumptuous gifts from producers to stars, and from agents to
producers arrived at offices and studio bungalows: on every stage
one heard of the roguish gifts of casts to directors or directors
to casts; champagne had gone out from publicity office to the
press.  And tips of fifties, tens and fives from producers,
directors and writers fell like manna upon the white collar class.

In this sort of transaction there were exceptions.  Pat Hobby, for
example, who knew the game from twenty years' experience, had had
the idea of getting rid of his secretary the day before.  They were
sending over a new one any minute--but she would scarcely expect a
present the first day.

Waiting for her, he walked the corridor, glancing into open offices
for signs of life.  He stopped to chat with Joe Hopper from the
scenario department.

'Not like the old days,' he mourned, 'Then there was a bottle on
every desk.'

'There're a few around.'

'Not many.'  Pat sighed.  'And afterwards we'd run a picture--made
up out of cutting-room scraps.'

'I've heard.  All the suppressed stuff,' said Hopper.

Pat nodded, his eyes glistening.

'Oh, it was juicy.  You darned near ripped your guts laughing--'

He broke off as the sight of a woman, pad in hand, entering his
office down the hall recalled him to the sorry present.

'Gooddorf has me working over the holiday,' he complained bitterly.

'I wouldn't do it.'

'I wouldn't either except my four weeks are up next Friday, and if
I bucked him he wouldn't extend me.'

As he turned away Hopper knew that Pat was not being extended
anyhow.  He had been hired to script an old-fashioned horse-opera
and the boys who were 'writing behind him'--that is working over
his stuff--said that all of it was old and some didn't make sense.

'I'm Miss Kagle,' said Pat's new secretary.

She was about thirty-six, handsome, faded, tired, efficient.  She
went to the typewriter, examined it, sat down and burst into sobs.

Pat started.  Self-control, from below anyhow, was the rule around
here.  Wasn't it bad enough to be working on Christmas Eve?  Well--
less bad than not working at all.  He walked over and shut the door--
someone might suspect him of insulting the girl.

'Cheer up,' he advised her.  'This is Christmas.'

Her burst of emotion had died away.  She sat upright now, choking
and wiping her eyes.

'Nothing's as bad as it seems,' he assured her unconvincingly.
'What's it, anyhow?  They going to lay you off?'

She shook her head, did a sniffle to end sniffles, and opened her
note book.

'Who you been working for?'

She answered between suddenly gritted teeth.

'Mr Harry Gooddorf.'

Pat widened his permanently bloodshot eyes.  Now he remembered he
had seen her in Harry's outer office,

'Since 1921.  Eighteen years.  And yesterday he sent me back to the
department.  He said I depressed him--I reminded him he was getting
on.'  Her face was grim.  'That isn't the way he talked after hours
eighteen years ago.'

'Yeah, he was a skirt chaser then,' said Pat.

'I should have done something then when I had the chance.'

Pat felt righteous stirrings.

'Breach of promise?  That's no angle!'

'But I had something to clinch it.  Something bigger than breach of
promise.  I still have too.  But then, you see, I thought I was in
love with him.'  She brooded for a moment.  'Do you want to dictate
something now?'

Pat remembered his job and opened a script.

'It's an insert,' he began, 'Scene 114A.'

Pat paced the office.

'Ext.  Long Shot of the Plains,' he decreed.  'Buck and Mexicans
approaching the hyacenda.'

'The what?'

'The hyacenda--the ranch house.'  He looked at her reproachfully,
'114 B.  Two Shot:  Buck and Pedro.  Buck:  "The dirty son-of-a-
bitch.  I'll tear his guts out!"'

Miss Kagle looked up, startled.

'You want me to write that down?'

'Sure.'

'It won't get by.'

'I'm writing this.  Of course, it won't get by.  But if I put "you
rat" the scene won't have any force.'

'But won't somebody have to change it to "you rat"?'

He glared at her--he didn't want to change secretaries every day.

'Harry Gooddorf can worry about that.'

'Are you working for Mr Gooddorf?' Miss Kagle asked in alarm.

'Until he throws me out.'

'I shouldn't have said--'

'Don't worry,' he assured her.  'He's no pal of mine anymore.  Not
at three-fifty a week, when I used to get two thousand . . .  Where
was I?'

He paced the floor again, repeating his last line aloud with
relish.  But now it seemed to apply not to a personage of the story
but to Harry Gooddorf.  Suddenly he stood still, lost in thought.
'Say, what is it you got on him?  You know where the body is
buried?'

'That's too true to be funny.'

'He knock somebody off?'

'Mr Hobby, I'm sorry I ever opened my mouth.'

'Just call me Pat.  What's your first name?'

'Helen.'

'Married?'

'Not now.'

'Well, listen Helen:  What do you say we have dinner?'


II


On the afternoon of Christmas Day he was still trying to get the
secret out of her.  They had the studio almost to themselves--only
a skeleton staff of technical men dotted the walks and the
commissary.  They had exchanged Christmas presents.  Pat gave her a
five dollar bill, Helen bought him a white linen handkerchief.
Very well he could remember the day when many dozen such
handkerchiefs had been his Christmas harvest.

The script was progressing at a snail's pace but their friendship
had considerably ripened.  Her secret, he considered, was a very
valuable asset, and he wondered how many careers had turned on just
such an asset.  Some, he felt sure, had been thus raised to
affluence.  Why, it was almost as good as being in the family, and
he pictured an imaginary conversation with Harry Gooddorf.

'Harry, it's this way.  I don't think my experience is being made
use of.  It's the young squirts who ought to do the writing--I
ought to do more supervising.'

'Or--?'

'Or else,' said Pat firmly.

He was in the midst of his day dream when Harry Gooddorf
unexpectedly walked in.

'Merry Christmas, Pat,' he said jovially.  His smile was less
robust when he saw Helen, 'Oh, hello Helen--didn't know you and Pat
had got together.  I sent you a remembrance over to the script
department.'

'You shouldn't have done that.'

Harry turned swiftly to Pat.

'The boss is on my neck,' he said.  'I've got to have a finished
script Thursday.'

'Well, here I am,' said Pat.  'You'll have it.  Did I ever fail
you?'

'Usually,' said Harry.  'Usually.'

He seemed about to add more when a call boy entered with an
envelope and handed it to Helen Kagle--whereupon Harry turned and
hurried out.

'He'd better get out!' burst forth Miss Kagle, after opening the
envelope.  'Ten bucks--just TEN BUCKS--from an executive--after
eighteen years.'

It was Pat's chance.  Sitting on her desk he told her his plan.

'It's soft jobs for you and me,' he said.  'You the head of a
script department, me an associate producer.  We're on the gravy
train for life--no more writing--no more pounding the keys.  We
might even--we might even--if things go good we could get married.'

She hesitated a long time.  When she put a fresh sheet in the
typewriter Pat feared he had lost.

'I can write it from memory,' she said.  'This was a letter he
typed HIMSELF on February 3rd, 1921.  He sealed it and gave it to
me to mail--but there was a blonde he was interested in, and I
wondered why he should be so secret about a letter.'

Helen had been typing as she talked, and now she handed Pat a note.


To Will Bronson
First National Studios
Personal

Dear Bill:

We killed Taylor.  We should have cracked down on him sooner.  So
why not shut up.

Yours, Harry


'Get it?' Helen said.  'On February 1st, 1921, somebody knocked off
William Desmond Taylor, the director.  And they've never found out
who.'


III


For eighteen years she had kept the original note, envelope and
all.  She had sent only a copy to Bronson, tracing Harry Gooddorf's
signature.

'Baby, we're set!' said Pat.  'I always thought it was a GIRL got
Taylor.'

He was so elated that he opened a drawer and brought forth a half-
pint of whiskey.  Then, with an afterthought, he demanded:

'Is it in a safe place?'

'You bet it is.  He'd never guess where.'

'Baby, we've got him!'

Cash, cars, girls, swimming pools swam in a glittering montage
before Pat's eye.

He folded the note, put it in his pocket, took another drink and
reached for his hat.

'You going to see him now?' Helen demanded in some alarm.  'Hey,
wait till I get off the lot.  _I_ don't want to get murdered.'

'Don't worry!  Listen I'll meet you in "the Muncherie" at Fifth and
La Brea--in one hour.'

As he walked to Gooddorf's office he decided to mention no facts or
names within the walls of the studio.  Back in the brief period
when he had headed a scenario department Pat had conceived a plan
to put a dictaphone in every writer's office.  Thus their loyalty
to the studio executives could be checked several times a day.

The idea had been laughed at.  But later, when he had been 'reduced
back to a writer', he often wondered if his plan was secretly
followed.  Perhaps some indiscreet remark of his own was
responsible for the doghouse where he had been interred for the
past decade.  So it was with the idea of concealed dictaphones in
mind, dictaphones which could be turned on by the pressure of a
toe, that he entered Harry Gooddorf's office.

'Harry--' he chose his words carefully, 'do you remember the night
of February 1st, 1921?'

Somewhat flabbergasted, Gooddorf leaned back in his swivel chair.

'WHAT?'

'Try and think.  It's something very important to you.'

Pat's expression as he watched his friend was that of an anxious
undertaker.

'February 1st, 1921.'  Gooddorf mused.  'No.  How could I remember?
You think I keep a diary?  I don't even know where I was then.'

'You were right here in Hollywood.'

'Probably.  If you know, tell me.'

'You'll remember.'

'Let's see.  I came out to the coast in sixteen.  I was with
Biograph till 1920.  Was I making some comedies?  That's it.  I was
making a piece called Knuckleduster--on location.'

'You weren't always on location.  You were in town February 1st.'

'What is this?' Gooddorf demanded.  'The third degree?'

'No--but I've got some information about your doings on that date.'

Gooddorf's face reddened; for a moment it looked as if he were
going to throw Pat out of the room--then suddenly he gasped, licked
his lips and stared at his desk.

'Oh,' he said, and after a minute:  'But I don't see what business
it is of yours.'

'It's the business of every decent man.'

'Since when have you been decent?'

'All my life,' said Pat.  'And, even if I haven't, I never did
anything like that.'

'My foot!' said Harry contemptuously.  'YOU showing up here with a
halo!  Anyhow, what's the evidence?  You'd think you had a written
confession.  It's all forgotten long ago.'

'Not in the memory of decent men,' said Pat.  'And as for a written
confession--I've got it.'

'I doubt you.  And I doubt if it would stand in any court.  You've
been taken in.'

'I've seen it,' said Pat with growing confidence.  'And it's enough
to hang you.'

'Well, by God, if there's any publicity I'll run you out of town.'

'You'll run ME out of town.'

'I don't want any publicity.'

'Then I think you'd better come along with me.  Without talking to
anybody.'

'Where are we going?'

'I know a bar where we can be alone.'

The Muncherie was in fact deserted, save for the bartender and
Helen Kagle who sat at a table, jumpy with alarm.  Seeing her,
Gooddorf's expression changed to one of infinite reproach.

'This is a hell of a Christmas,' he said, 'with my family expecting
me home an hour ago.  I want to know the idea.  You say you've got
something in my writing.'

Pat took the paper from his pocket and read the date aloud.  Then
he looked up hastily:

'This is just a copy, so don't try and snatch it.'

He knew the technique of such scenes as this.  When the vogue for
Westerns had temporarily subsided he had sweated over many an orgy
of crime.

'To William Bronson, Dear Bill:  We killed Taylor.  We should have
cracked down on him sooner.  So why not shut up.  Yours, Harry.'

Pat paused.  'You wrote this on February 3rd, 1921.'

Silence.  Gooddorf turned to Helen Kagle.

'Did YOU do this?  Did I dictate that to you?'

'No,' she admitted in an awed voice.  'You wrote it yourself.  I
opened the letter.'

'I see.  Well, what do you want?'

'Plenty,' said Pat, and found himself pleased with the sound of the
word.

'What exactly?'

Pat launched into the description of a career suitable to a man of
forty-nine.  A glowing career.  It expanded rapidly in beauty and
power during the time it took him to drink three large whiskeys.
But one demand he returned to again and again.

He wanted to be made a producer tomorrow.

'Why tomorrow?' demanded Gooddorf.  'Can't it wait?'

There were sudden tears in Pat's eyes--real tears.

'This is Christmas,' he said.  'It's my Christmas wish.  I've had a
hell of a time.  I've waited so long.'

Gooddorf got to his feet suddenly.

'Nope,' he said.  'I won't make you a producer.  I couldn't do it
in fairness to the company.  I'd rather stand trial.'

Pat's mouth fell open.

'What?  You won't?'

'Not a chance.  I'd rather swing.'

He turned away, his face set, and started toward the door.

'All right!' Pat called after him.  'It's your last chance.'

Suddenly he was amazed to see Helen Kagle spring up and run after
Gooddorf--try to throw her arms around him.

'Don't worry!' she cried.  'I'll tear it up, Harry!  It was a joke
Harry--'

Her voice trailed off rather abruptly.  She had discovered that
Gooddorf was shaking with laughter.

'What's the joke?' she demanded, growing angry again.  'Do you
think I haven't got it?'

'Oh, you've got it all right,' Gooddorf howled.  'You've got it--
but it isn't what you think it is.'

He came back to the table, sat down and addressed Pat.

'Do you know what I thought that date meant?  I thought maybe it
was the date Helen and I first fell for each other.  That's what I
thought.  And I thought she was going to raise Cain about it.  I
thought she was nuts.  She's been married twice since then, and so
have I.'

'That doesn't explain the note,' said Pat sternly but with a sinky
feeling.  'You admit you killed Taylor.'

Gooddorf nodded.

'I still think a lot of us did,' he said.  'We were a wild crowd--
Taylor and Bronson and me and half the boys in the big money.  So a
bunch of us got together in an agreement to go slow.  The country
was waiting for somebody to hang.  We tried to get Taylor to watch
his step but he wouldn't.  So instead of cracking down on him, we
let him "go the pace".  And some rat shot him--who did it I don't
know.'

He stood up.

'Like somebody should have cracked down on YOU, Pat.  But you were
an amusing guy in those days, and besides we were all too busy.'

Pat sniffled suddenly.

'I've BEEN cracked down on,' he said.  'Plenty.'

'But too late,' said Gooddorf, and added, 'you've probably got a
new Christmas wish by now, and I'll grant it to you.  I won't say
anything about this afternoon.'

When he had gone, Pat and Helen sat in silence.  Presently Pat took
out the note again and looked it over.

'"So why not shut up?"' he read aloud.  'He didn't explain that.'

'Why NOT shut up?' Helen said.




A MAN IN THE WAY

Esquire (February 1940)


I


Pat Hobby could always get on the lot.  He had worked there fifteen
years on and off--chiefly off during the past five--and most of the
studio police knew him.  If tough customers on watch asked to see
his studio card he could get in by phoning Lou, the bookie.  For
Lou also, the studio had been home for many years.

Pat was forty-nine.  He was a writer but he had never written much,
nor even read all the 'originals' he worked from, because it made
his head bang to read much.  But the good old silent days you got
somebody's plot and a smart secretary and gulped benzedrine
'structure' at her six or eight hours every week.  The director
took care of the gags.  After talkies came he always teamed up with
some man who wrote dialogue.  Some young man who liked to work.

'I've got a list of credits second to none,' he told Jack Berners.
'All I need is an idea and to work with somebody who isn't all
wet.'

He had buttonholed Jack outside the production office as Jack was
going to lunch and they walked together in the direction of the
commissary.

'You bring me an idea,' said Jack Berners.  'Things are tight.  We
can't put a man on salary unless he's got an idea.'

'How can you get ideas off salary?' Pat demanded--then he added
hastily:  'Anyhow I got the germ of an idea that I could be telling
you all about at lunch.'

Something might come to him at lunch.  There was Baer's notion
about the boy scout.  But Jack said cheerfully:

'I've got a date for lunch, Pat.  Write it out and send it around,
eh?'

He felt cruel because he knew Pat couldn't write anything out but
he was having story trouble himself.  The war had just broken out
and every producer on the lot wanted to end their current stories
with the hero going to war.  And Jack Berners felt he had thought
of that first for his production.

'So write it out, eh?'

When Pat didn't answer Jack looked at him--he saw a sort of whipped
misery in Pat's eye that reminded him of his own father.  Pat had
been in the money before Jack was out of college--with three cars
and a chicken over every garage.  Now his clothes looked as if he'd
been standing at Hollywood and Vine for three years.

'Scout around and talk to some of the writers on the lot,' he said.
'If you can get one of them interested in your idea, bring him up
to see me.'

'I hate to give an idea without money on the line,' Pat brooded
pessimistically, 'These young squirts'll lift the shirt off your
back.'

They had reached the commissary door.

'Good luck, Pat.  Anyhow we're not in Poland.'

--Good YOU'RE not, said Pat under his breath.  They'd slit your
gizzard.

Now what to do?  He went up and wandered along the cell block of
writers.  Almost everyone had gone to lunch and those who were in
he didn't know.  Always there were more and more unfamiliar faces.
And he had thirty credits; he had been in the business, publicity
and script-writing, for twenty years.

The last door in the line belonged to a man he didn't like.  But he
wanted a place to sit a minute so with a knock he pushed it open.
The man wasn't there--only a very pretty, frail-looking girl sat
reading a book.

'I think he's left Hollywood,' she said in answer to his question.
'They gave me his office but they forgot to put up my name.'

'You a writer?' Pat asked in surprise.

'I work at it.'

'You ought to get 'em to give you a test.'

'No--I like writing.'

'What's that you're reading.'

She showed him.

'Let me give you a tip,' he said.  'That's not the way to get the
guts out of a book.'

'Oh.'

'I've been here for years--I'm Pat Hobby--and I KNOW.  Give the
book to four of your friends to read it.  Get them to tell you what
stuck in their minds.  Write it down and you've got a picture--
see?'

The girl smiled.

'Well, that's very--very original advice, Mr Hobby.'

'Pat Hobby,' he said.  'Can I wait here a minute?  Man I came to
see is at lunch.'

He sat down across from her and picked up a copy of a photo
magazine.

'Oh, just let me mark that,' she said quickly.

He looked at the page which she checked.  It showed paintings being
boxed and carted away to safety from an art gallery in Europe.

'How'll you use it?' he said.

'Well, I thought it would be dramatic if there was an old man
around while they were packing the pictures.  A poor old man,
trying to get a job helping them.  But they can't use him--he's in
the way--not even good cannon fodder.  They want strong young
people in the world.  And it turns out he's the man who painted the
pictures many years ago.'

Pat considered.

'It's good but I don't get it,' he said.

'Oh, it's nothing, a short short maybe.'

'Got any good picture ideas?  I'm in with all the markets here.'

'I'm under contract.'

'Use another name.'

Her phone rang.

'Yes, this is Pricilla Smith,' the girl said.

After a minute she turned to Pat.

'Will you excuse me?  This is a private call.'

He got it and walked out, and along the corridor.  Finding an
office with no name on it he went in and fell asleep on the couch.


II


Late that afternoon he returned to Jack Berners' waiting rooms.  He
had an idea about a man who meets a girl in an office and he thinks
she's a stenographer but she turns out to be a writer.  He engages
her as a stenographer, though, and they start for the South Seas.
It was a beginning, it was something to tell Jack, he thought--and,
picturing Pricilla Smith, he refurbished some old business he
hadn't seen used for years.

He became quite excited about it--felt quite young for a moment and
walked up and down the waiting room mentally rehearsing the first
sequence.  'So here we have a situation like It Happened One Night--
only NEW.  I see Hedy Lamarr--'

Oh, he knew how to talk to these boys if he could get to them, with
something to say.

'Mr Berners still busy?' he asked for the fifth time.

'Oh, yes, Mr Hobby.  Mr Bill Costello and Mr Bach are in there.'

He thought quickly.  It was half-past five.  In the old days he had
just busted in sometimes and sold an idea, an idea good for a
couple of grand because it was just the moment when they were very
tired of what they were doing at present.

He walked innocently out and to another door in the hall.  He knew
it led through a bathroom right in to Jack Berners' office.
Drawing a quick breath he plunged . . .

'. . . So that's the notion,' he concluded after five minutes.
'It's just a flash--nothing really worked out, but you could give
me an office and a girl and I could have something on paper for you
in three days.'

Berners, Costello and Bach did not even have to look at each other.
Berners spoke for them all as he said firmly and gently:

'That's no idea, Pat.  I can't put you on salary for that.'

'Why don't you work it out further by yourself,' suggested Bill
Costello.  'And then let's see it.  We're looking for ideas--
especially about the war.'

'A man can think better on salary,' said Pat.

There was silence.  Costello and Bach had drunk with him, played
poker with him, gone to the races with him.  They'd honestly be
glad to see him placed.

'The war, eh,' he said gloomily.  'Everything is war now, no matter
how many credits a man has.  Do you know what it makes me think of?
It makes me think of a well-known painter in the discard.  It's war
time and he's useless--just a man in the way.'  He warmed to his
conception of himself, '--but all the time they're carting away his
OWN PAINTINGS as the most valuable thing worth saving.  And they
won't even let me help.  That's what it reminds me of.'

There was again silence for a moment.

'That isn't a bad idea,' said Bach thoughtfully.  He turned to the
others.  'You know?  In itself?'

Bill Costello nodded

'Not bad at all.  And I know where we could spot it.  Right at the
end of the fourth sequence.  We just change old Ames to a painter.'

Presently they talked money.

'I'll give you two weeks on it,' said Berners to Pat.  'At two-
fifty.'

'Two-fifty!' objected Pat.  'Say there was one time you paid me ten
times that!'

'That was ten years ago,' Jack reminded him.  'Sorry.  Best we can
do now.'

'You make me feel like that old painter--'

'Don't oversell it,' said Jack, rising and smiling.  'You're on the
payroll.'

Pat went out with a quick step and confidence in his eyes.  Half a
grand--that would take the pressure off for a month and you could
often stretch two weeks into three--sometimes four.  He left the
studio proudly through the front entrance, stopping at the liquor
store for a half-pint to take back to his room.

By seven o'clock things were even better.  Santa Anita tomorrow, if
he could get an advance.  And tonight--something festive ought to
be done tonight.  With a sudden rush of pleasure he went down to
the phone in the lower hall, called the studio and asked for Miss
Pricilla Smith's number.  He hadn't met anyone so pretty for
years . . .

In her apartment Pricilla Smith spoke rather firmly into the phone.

'I'm awfully sorry,' she said, 'but I couldn't possibly . . .  No--
and I'm tied up all the rest of the week.'

As she hung up, Jack Berners spoke from the couch.

'Who was it?'

'Oh, some man who came in the office,' she laughed, 'and told me
never to read the story I was working on.'

'Shall I believe you?'

'You certainly shall.  I'll even think of his name in a minute.
But first I want to tell you about an idea I had this morning.  I
was looking at a photo in a magazine where they were packing up
some works of art in the Tate Gallery in London.  And I thought--'





"BOIL SOME WATER--LOTS OF IT"


Esquire (March 1940)



Pat Hobby sat in his office in the writers' building and looked at
his morning's work, just come back from the script department.  He
was on a "polish job," about the only kind he ever got nowadays.
He was to repair a messy sequence in a hurry, but the word "hurry"
neither frightened nor inspired him for Pat had been in Hollywood
since he was thirty--now he was forty-nine.  All the work he had
done this morning (except a little changing around of lines so he
could claim them as his own)--all he had actually invented was a
single imperative sentence, spoken by a doctor.

"Boil some water--lots of it."

It was a good line.  It had sprung into his mind full grown as soon
as he had read the script.  In the old silent days Pat would have
used it as a spoken title and ended his dialogue worries for a
space, but he needed some spoken words for other people in the
scene.  Nothing came.

"Boil some water," he repeated to himself.  "Lots of it."

The word boil brought a quick glad thought of the commissary.  A
reverent thought too--for an old-timer like Pat, what people you
sat with at lunch was more important in getting along than what you
dictated in your office.  This was no art, as he often said--this
was an industry.

"This is no art," he remarked to Max Learn who was leisurely
drinking at a corridor water cooler.  "This is an industry."

Max had flung him this timely bone of three weeks at three-fifty.

"Say look, Pat!  Have you got anything down on paper yet?"

"Say I've got some stuff already that'll make 'em--"  He named a
familiar biological function with the somewhat startling assurance
that it would take place in the theater.

Max tried to gauge his sincerity.

"Want to read it to me now?" he asked.

"Not yet.  But it's got the old guts if you know what I mean."

Max was full of doubts.

"Well, go to it.  And if you run into any medical snags check with
the doctor over at the First Aid Station.  It's got to be right."

The spirit of Pasteur shone firmly in Pat's eyes.

"It will be."

He felt good walking across the lot with Max--so good that he
decided to glue himself to the producer and sit down with him at
the Big Table.  But Max foiled his intention by cooing "See you
later" and slipping into the barber shop.

Once Pat had been a familiar figure at the Big Table; often in his
golden prime he had dined in the private canteens of executives.
Being of the older Hollywood he understood their jokes, their
vanities, their social system with its swift fluctuations.  But
there were too many new faces at the Big Table now--faces that
looked at him with the universal Hollywood suspicion.  And at the
little tables where the young writers sat they seemed to take work
so seriously.  As for just sitting down anywhere, even with
secretaries or extras--Pat would rather catch a sandwich at the
corner.

Detouring to the Red Cross Station he asked for the doctor.  A
girl, a nurse, answered from a wall mirror where she was hastily
drawing her lips, "He's out.  What is it?"

"Oh.  Then I'll come back."

She had finished, and now she turned--vivid and young and with a
bright consoling smile.

"Miss Stacey will help you.  I'm about to go to lunch."

He was aware of an old, old feeling--left over from the time when
he had had wives--a feeling that to invite this little beauty to
lunch might cause trouble.  But he remembered quickly that he
didn't have any wives now--they had both given up asking for
alimony.

"I'm working on a medical," he said.  "I need some help."

"A medical?"

"Writing it--idea about a doc.  Listen--let me buy you lunch.  I
want to ask you some medical questions."

The nurse hesitated.

"I don't know.  It's my first day out here."

"It's all right," he assured her, "studios are democratic;
everybody is just 'Joe' or 'Mary'--from the big shots right down to
the prop boys."

He proved it magnificently on their way to lunch by greeting a male
star and getting his own name back in return.  And in the
commissary, where they were placed hard by the Big Table, his
producer, Max Leam, looked up, did a little "takem" and winked.

The nurse--her name was Helen Earle--peered about eagerly.

"I don't see anybody," she said.  "Except oh, there's Ronald
Colman.  I didn't know Ronald Colman looked like that."

Pat pointed suddenly to the floor.

"And there's Mickey Mouse!"

She jumped and Pat laughed at his joke--but Helen Earle was already
staring starry-eyed at the costume extras who filled the hall with
the colors of the First Empire.  Pat was piqued to see her interest
go out to these nonentities.

"The big shots are at this next table," he said solemnly,
wistfully, "directors and all except the biggest executives.  They
could have Ronald Colman pressing pants.  I usually sit over there
but they don't want ladies.  At lunch, that is, they don't want
ladies."

"Oh," said Helen Earle, polite but unimpressed.  "It must be
wonderful to be a writer too.  It's so very interesting."

"It has its points," he said . . . he had thought for years it was
a dog's life.

"What is it you want to ask me about a doctor?"

Here was toil again.  Something in Pat's mind snapped off when he
thought of the story.

"Well, Max Leam--that man facing us--Max Leam and I have a script
about a Doc.  You know?  Like a hospital picture?"

"I know."  And she added after a moment, "That's the reason that I
went in training."

"And we've got to have it RIGHT because a hundred million people
would check on it.  So this doctor in the script he tells them to
boil some water.  He says, 'Boil some water--lots of it.'  And we
were wondering what the people would do then."

"Why--they'd probably boil it," Helen said, and then, somewhat
confused by the question, "What people?"

"Well, somebody's daughter and the man that lived there and an
attorney and the man that was hurt."

Helen tried to digest this before answering.

"--and some other guy I'm going to cut out," he finished.

There was a pause.  The waitress set down tuna fish sandwiches.

"Well, when a doctor gives orders they're orders," Helen decided.

"Hm."  Pat's interest had wandered to an odd little scene at the
Big Table while he inquired absently, "You married?"

"No."

"Neither am I."

Beside the Big Table stood an extra.  A Russian Cossack with a
fierce moustache.  He stood resting his hand on the back of an
empty chair between Director Paterson and Producer Leam.

"Is this taken?" he asked, with a thick Central European accent.

All along the Big Table faces stared suddenly at him.  Until after
the first look the supposition was that he must be some well-known
actor.  But he was not--he was dressed in one of the many-colored
uniforms that dotted the room.

Someone at the table said:  "That's taken."  But the man drew out
the chair and sat down.

"Got to eat somewhere," he remarked with a grin.

A shiver went over the near-by tables.  Pat Hobby stared with his
mouth ajar.  It was as if someone had crayoned Donald Duck into the
Last Supper.

"Look at that," he advised Helen.  "What they'll do to him!  Boy!"

The flabbergasted silence at the Big Table was broken by Ned
Harman, the Production Manager.

"This table is reserved," he said.

The extra looked up from a menu.

"They told me sit anywhere."

He beckoned a waitress--who hesitated, looking for an answer in the
faces of her superiors.

"Extras don't eat here," said Max Leam, still politely.  "This is
a--"

"I got to eat," said the Cossack doggedly.  "I been standing around
six hours while they shoot this stinking mess and now I got to
eat."

The silence had extended--from Pat's angle all within range seemed
to be poised in mid-air.

The extra shook his head wearily.

"I dunno who cooked it up--" he said--and Max Leam sat forward in
his chair--"but it's the lousiest tripe I ever seen shot in
Hollywood."

--At his table Pat was thinking why didn't they do something?
Knock him down, drag him away.  If they were yellow themselves they
could call the studio police.

"Who is that?"  Helen Earle was following his eyes innocently,
"Somebody I ought to know?"

He was listening attentively to Max Leam's voice, raised in anger.

"Get up and get out of here, buddy, and get out quick!"

The extra frowned.

"Who's telling me?" he demanded.

"You'll see."  Max appealed to the table at large, "Where's Cushman--
where's the Personnel man?"

"You try to move me," said the extra, lifting the hilt of his
scabbard above the level of the table, "and I'll hang this on your
ear.  I know my rights."

The dozen men at the table, representing a thousand dollars an hour
in salaries, sat stunned.  Far down by the door one of the studio
police caught wind of what was happening and started to elbow
through the crowded room.  And Big Jack Wilson, another director,
was on his feet in an instant coming around the table.

But they were too late--Pat Hobby could stand no more.  He had
jumped up, seizing a big heavy tray from the serving stand nearby.
In two springs he reached the scene of action--lifting the tray he
brought it down upon the extra's head with all the strength of his
forty-nine years.  The extra, who had been in the act of rising to
meet Wilson's threatened assault, got the blow full on his face and
temple and as he collapsed a dozen red streaks sprang into sight
through the heavy grease paint.  He crashed sideways between the
chairs.

Pat stood over him panting--the tray in his hand.

"The dirty rat!" he cried.  "Where does he think--"

The studio policeman pushed past; Wilson pushed past--two aghast
men from another table rushed up to survey the situation.

"It was a gag!" one of them shouted.  "That's Walter Herrick, the
writer.  It's his picture."

"My God!"

"He was kidding Max Leam.  It was a gag I tell you!"

"Pull him out . . .  Get a doctor . . .  Look out, there!"

Now Helen Earle hurried over; Walter Herrick was dragged out into a
cleared space on the floor and there were yells of "Who did it?--
Who beaned him?"

Pat let the tray lapse to a chair, its sound unnoticed in the
confusion.

He saw Helen Earle working swiftly at the man's head with a pile of
clean napkins.

"Why did they have to do this to him?" someone shouted.

Pat caught Max Leam's eye but Max happened to look away at the
moment and a sense of injustice came over Pat.  He alone in this
crisis, real or imaginary, had ACTED.  He alone had played the man,
while those stuffed shirts let themselves be insulted and abused.
And now he would have to take the rap--because Walter Herrick was
powerful and popular, a three thousand a week man who wrote hit
shows in New York.  How could anyone have guessed that it was a
gag?

There was a doctor now.  Pat saw him say something to the
manageress and her shrill voice sent the waitresses scattering like
leaves toward the kitchen.

"Boil some water!  Lots of it!"

The words fell wild and unreal on Pat's burdened soul.  But even
though he now knew at first hand what came next, he did not think
that he could go on from there.




TEAMED WITH GENIUS


Esquire (April 1940)



"I took a chance in sending for you," said Jack Berners.  "But
there's a job that you just MAY be able to help out with."

Though Pat Hobby was not offended, either as man or writer, a
formal protest was called for.

"I been in the industry fifteen years, Jack.  I've got more screen
credits than a dog has got fleas."

"Maybe I chose the wrong word," said Jack.  "What I mean is, that
was a long time ago.  About money we'll pay you just what Republic
paid you last month--three-fifty a week.  Now--did you ever hear of
a writer named René Wilcox?"

The name was unfamiliar.  Pat had scarcely opened a book in a
decade.

"She's pretty good," he ventured.

"It's a man, an English playwright.  He's only here in L. A. for
his health.  Well--we've had a Russian Ballet picture kicking
around for a year--three bad scripts on it.  So last week we signed
up René Wilcox--he seemed just the person."

Pat considered.

"You mean he's--"

"I don't know and I don't care," interrupted Berners sharply.  "We
think we can borrow Zorina, so we want to hurry things up--do a
shooting script instead of just a treatment.  Wilcox is
inexperienced and that's where you come in.  You used to be a good
man for structure."

"USED to be!"

"All right, maybe you still are."  Jack beamed with momentary
encouragement.  "Find yourself an office and get together with René
Wilcox."  As Pat started out he called him back and put a bill in
his hand.  "First of all, get a new hat.  You used to be quite a
boy around the secretaries in the old days.  Don't give up at forty-
nine!"

Over in the Writers' Building Pat glanced at the directory in the
hall and knocked at the door of 216.  No answer, but he went in to
discover a blond, willowy youth of twenty-five staring moodily out
the window.

"Hello, René!" Pat said.  "I'm your partner."

Wilcox's regard questioned even his existence, but Pat continued
heartily, "I hear we're going to lick some stuff into shape.  Ever
collaborate before?"

"I have never written for the cinema before."

While this increased Pat's chance for a screen credit he badly
needed, it meant that he might have to do some work.  The very
thought made him thirsty.

"This is different from playwriting," he suggested, with suitable
gravity.

"Yes--I read a book about it."

Pat wanted to laugh.  In 1928 he and another man had concocted such
a sucker-trap, Secrets of Film Writing.  It would have made money
if pictures hadn't started to talk.

"It all seems simple enough," said Wilcox.  Suddenly he took his
hat from the rack.  "I'll be running along now."

"Don't you want to talk about the script?" demanded Pat.  "What
have you done so far?"

"I've not done anything," said Wilcox deliberately.  "That idiot,
Berners, gave me some trash and told me to go on from there.  But
it's too dismal."  His blue eyes narrowed.  "I say, what's a boom
shot?"

"A boom shot?  Why, that's when the camera's on a crane."

Pat leaned over the desk and picked up a blue-jacketed "Treatment."
On the cover he read:


                        BALLET SHOES

                         A Treatment
                             by
                       Consuela Martin
         An Original from an idea by Consuela Martin


Pat glanced at the beginning and then at the end.

"I'd like it better if we could get the war in somewhere," he said
frowning.  "Have the dancer go as a Red Cross nurse and then she
could get regenerated.  See what I mean?"

There was no answer.  Pat turned and saw the door softly closing.

What is this? he exclaimed.  What kind of collaborating can a man
do if he walks out?  Wilcox had not even given the legitimate
excuse--the races at Santa Anita!

The door opened again, a pretty girl's face, rather frightened,
showed itself momentarily, said "Oh," and disappeared.  Then it
returned.

"Why it's Mr. Hobby!" she exclaimed.  "I was looking for Mr.
Wilcox."

He fumbled for her name but she supplied it.

"Katherine Hodge.  I was your secretary when I worked here three
years ago."

Pat knew she had once worked with him, but for the moment could not
remember whether there had been a deeper relation.  It did not seem
to him that it had been love--but looking at her now, that appeared
rather too bad.

"Sit down," said Pat.  "You assigned to Wilcox?"

"I thought so--but he hasn't given me any work yet."

"I think he's nuts," Pat said gloomily.  "He asked me what a boom
shot was.  Maybe he's sick--that's why he's out here.  He'll
probably start throwing up all over the office."

"He's well now," Katherine ventured.

"He doesn't look like it to me.  Come on in my office.  You can
work for ME this afternoon."

Pat lay on his couch while Miss Katherine Hodge read the script of
Ballet Shoes aloud to him.  About midway in the second sequence he
fell asleep with his new hat on his chest.



Except for the hat, that was the identical position in which he
found René next day at eleven.  And it was that way for three
straight days--one was asleep or else the other--and sometimes
both.  On the fourth day they had several conferences in which Pat
again put forward his idea about the war as a regenerating force
for ballet dancers.

"Couldn't we NOT talk about the war?" suggested René.  "I have two
brothers in the Guards."

"You're lucky to be here in Hollywood."

"That's as it may be."

"Well, what's your idea of the start of the picture?"

"I do not like the present beginning.  It gives me an almost
physical nausea."

"So then, we got to have something in its place.  That's why I want
to plant the war--"

"I'm late to luncheon," said René Wilcox.  "Good-bye, Mike."

Pat grumbled to Katherine Hodge:

"He can call me anything he likes, but somebody's got to write this
picture.  I'd go to Jack Berners and tell him--but I think we'd
both be out on our ears."

For two days more he camped in René's office, trying to rouse him
to action, but with no avail.  Desperate on the following day--when
the playwright did not even come to the studio--Pat took a
benzedrine tablet and attacked the story alone.  Pacing his office
with the treatment in his hand he dictated to Katherine--
interspersing the dictation with a short, biased history of his
life in Hollywood.  At the day's end he had two pages of script.

The ensuing week was the toughest in his life--not even a moment to
make a pass at Katherine Hodge.  Gradually with many creaks, his
battered hulk got in motion.  Benzedrine and great drafts of coffee
woke him in the morning, whiskey anesthetized him at night.  Into
his feet crept an old neuritis and as his nerves began to crackle
he developed a hatred against René Wilcox, which served him as a
sort of ersatz fuel.  He was going to finish the script by himself
and hand it to Berners with the statement that Wilcox had not
contributed a single line.

But it was too much--Pat was too far gone.  He blew up when he was
half through and went on a twenty-four-hour bat--and next morning
arrived back at the studio to find a message that Mr. Berners
wanted to see the script at four.  Pat was in a sick and confused
state when his door opened and René Wilcox came in with a
typescript in one hand, and a copy of Berners' note in the other.

"It's all right," said Wilcox.  "I've finished it."

"WHAT?  Have you been WORKING?"

"I always work at night."

"What've you done?  A treatment?"

"No, a shooting script.  At first I was held back by personal
worries, but once I got started it was very simple.  You just get
behind the camera and dream."

Pat stood up aghast.

"But we were supposed to collaborate.  Jack'll be wild."

"I've always worked alone," said Wilcox gently.  "I'll explain to
Berners this afternoon."

Pat sat in a daze.  If Wilcox's script was good--but how could a
first script be good?  Wilcox should have fed it to him as he
wrote; then they might have HAD something.

Fear started his mind working--he was struck by his first original
idea since he had been on the job.  He phoned to the script
department for Katherine Hodge and when she came over told her what
he wanted.  Katherine hesitated.

"I just want to READ it," Pat said hastily.  "If Wilcox is there
you can't take it, of course.  But he just might be out."

He waited nervously.  In five minutes she was back with the script.

"It isn't mimeographed or even bound," she said.

He was at the typewriter, trembling as he picked out a letter with
two fingers.

"Can I help?" she asked.

"Find me a plain envelope and a used stamp and some paste."

Pat sealed the letter himself and then gave directions:

"Listen outside Wilcox's office.  If he's in, push it under his
door.  If he's out get a call boy to deliver it to him, wherever he
is.  Say it's from the mail room.  Then you better go off the lot
for the afternoon.  So he won't catch on, see?"

As she went out Pat wished he had kept a copy of the note.  He was
proud of it--there was a ring of factual sincerity in it too often
missing from his work.


"Dear Mr. Wilcox:

I am sorry to tell you your two brothers were killed in action
today by a long range Tommy-gun.  You are wanted at home in England
right away.

John Smythe
The British Consulate, New York"


But Pat realized that this was no time for self-applause.  He
opened Wilcox's script.

To his vast surprise it was technically proficient--the dissolves,
fades, cuts, pans and trucking shots were correctly detailed.  This
simplified everything.  Turning back to the first page he wrote at
the top:


BALLET SHOES

First Revise

From Pat Hobby and René Wilcox--presently changing this to read:
From René Wilcox and Pat Hobby.


Then, working frantically, he made several dozen small changes.  He
substituted the word "Scram!" for "Get out of my sight!", he put
"Behind the eight-ball" instead of "in trouble," and replaced
"you'll be sorry" with the apt coinage "Or else!"  Then he phoned
the script department.

"This is Pat Hobby.  I've been working on a script with René
Wilcox, and Mr. Berners would like to have it mimeographed by half-
past three."

This would give him an hour's start on his unconscious
collaborator.

"Is it an emergency?"

"I'll say."

"We'll have to split it up between several girls."

Pat continued to improve the script till the call boy arrived.  He
wanted to put in his war idea but time was short--still, he finally
told the call boy to sit down, while he wrote laboriously in pencil
on the last page.


CLOSE SHOT: Boris and Rita

Rita: What does anything matter now!  I have enlisted as a trained
nurse in the war.

Boris: (moved) War purifies and regenerates!

(He puts his arms around her in a wild embrace as the music soars
way up and we FADE OUT)


Limp and exhausted by his effort he needed a drink, so he left the
lot and slipped cautiously into the bar across from the studio
where he ordered gin and water.

With the glow, he thought warm thoughts.  He had done ALMOST what
he had been hired to do--though his hand had accidentally fallen
upon the dialogue rather than the structure.  But how could Berners
tell that the structure wasn't Pat's?  Katherine Hodge would say
nothing, for fear of implicating herself.  They were all guilty but
guiltiest of all was René Wilcox for refusing to play the game.
Always, according to his lights, Pat had played the game.

He had another drink, bought breath tablets and for awhile amused
himself at the nickel machine in the drugstore.  Louie, the studio
bookie, asked if he was interested in wagers on a bigger scale.

"Not today, Louie."

"What are they paying you, Pat?"

"Thousand a week."

"Not so bad."

"Oh, a lot of us old-timers are coming back," Pat prophesied.  "In
silent days was where you got real training--with directors
shooting off the cuff and needing a gag in a split second.  Now
it's a sis job.  They got English teachers working in pictures!
What do they know?"

"How about a little something on 'Quaker Girl'?"

"No," said Pat.  "This afternoon I got an important angle to work
on.  I don't want to worry about horses."

At three-fifteen he returned to his office to find two copies of
his script in bright new covers.


                        BALLET SHOES

                            from
                  René Wilcox and Pat Hobby
                        First Revise


It reassured him to see his name in type.  As he waited in Jack
Berners' anteroom he almost wished he had reversed the names.  With
the right director this might be another It Happened One Night, and
if he got his name on something like that it meant a three or four
year gravy ride.  But this time he'd save his money--go to Santa
Anita only once a week--get himself a girl along the type of
Katherine Hodge, who wouldn't expect a mansion in Beverly Hills.

Berners' secretary interrupted his reverie, telling him to go in.
As he entered he saw with gratification that a copy of the new
script lay on Berners' desk.

"Did you ever--" asked Berners suddenly "--go to a psychoanalyst?"

"No," admitted Pat.  "But I suppose I could get up on it.  Is it a
new assignment?"

"Not exactly.  It's just that I think you've lost your grip.  Even
larceny requires a certain cunning.  I've just talked to Wilcox on
the phone."

"Wilcox must be nuts," said Pat, aggressively.  "I didn't steal
anything from him.  His name's on it, isn't it?  Two weeks ago I
laid out all his structure--every scene.  I even wrote one whole
scene--at the end about the war."

"Oh yes, the war," said Berners as if he was thinking of something
else.

"But if you like Wilcox's ending better--"

"Yes, I like his ending better.  I never saw a man pick up this
work so fast."  He paused.  "Pat, you've told the truth just once
since you came in this room--that you didn't steal anything from
Wilcox."

"I certainly did not.  I GAVE him stuff."

But a certain dreariness, a grey malaise, crept over him as Berners
continued:

"I told you we had three scripts.  You used an old one we discarded
a year ago.  Wilcox was in when your secretary arrived, and he sent
one of them to you.  Clever, eh?"

Pat was speechless.

"You see, he and that girl like each other.  Seems she typed a play
for him this summer."

"They like each other," said Pat incredulously.  "Why, he--"

"Hold it, Pat.  You've had trouble enough today."

"He's responsible," Pat cried.  "He wouldn't collaborate--and all
the time--"

"--he was writing a swell script.  And he can write his own ticket
if we can persuade him to stay here and do another."

Pat could stand no more.  He stood up.

"Anyhow thank you, Jack," he faltered.  "Call my agent if anything
turns up."  Then he bolted suddenly and surprisingly for the door.

Jack Berners signaled on the Dictograph for the President's office.

"Get a chance to read it?" he asked in a tone of eagerness.

"It's swell.  Better than you said.  Wilcox is with me now."

"Have you signed him up?"

"I'm going to.  Seems he wants to work with Hobby.  Here, you talk
to him."

Wilcox's rather high voice came over the wire.

"Must have Mike Hobby," he said.  "Grateful to him.  Had a quarrel
with a certain young lady just before he came, but today Hobby
brought us together.  Besides I want to write a play about him.  So
give him to me--you fellows don't want him any more."

Berners picked up his secretary's phone.

"Go after Pat Hobby.  He's probably in the bar across the street.
We're putting him on salary again but we'll be sorry."  He switched
off, switched on again.  "Oh!  Take him his hat.  He forgot his
hat."




PAT HOBBY AND ORSON WELLES

Esquire (May 1940)


I


'Who's this Welles?' Pat asked of Louie, the studio bookie.  'Every
time I pick up a paper they got about this Welles.'

'You know, he's that beard,' explained Louie.

'Sure, I know he's that beard, you couldn't miss that.  But what
credits's he got?  What's he done to draw one hundred and fifty
grand a picture?'

What indeed?  Had he, like Pat, been in Hollywood over twenty
years?  Did he have credits that would knock your eye out,
extending up to--well, up to five years ago when Pat's credits had
begun to be few and far between?

'Listen--they don't last long,' said Louie consolingly, 'We've seen
'em come and we've seen 'em go.  Hey, Pat?'

Yes--but meanwhile those who had toiled in the vineyard through the
heat of the day were lucky to get a few weeks at three-fifty.  Men
who had once had wives and Filipinos and swimming pools.

'Maybe it's the beard,' said Louie.  'Maybe you and I should grow a
beard.  My father had a beard but it never got him off Grand
Street.'

The gift of hope had remained with Pat through his misfortunes--and
the valuable alloy of his hope was proximity.  Above all things one
must stick around, one must be there when the glazed, tired mind of
the producer grappled with the question 'Who?'  So presently Pat
wandered out of the drug-store, and crossed the street to the lot
that was home.

As he passed through the side entrance an unfamiliar studio
policeman stood in his way.

'Everybody in the front entrance now.'

'I'm Hobby, the writer,' Pat said.

The Cossack was unimpressed.

'Got your card?'

'I'm between pictures.  But I've got an engagement with Jack
Berners.'

'Front gate.'

As he turned away Pat thought savagely:  'Lousy Keystone Cop!'  In
his mind he shot it out with him.  Plunk! the stomach.  Plunk!
plunk! plunk!

At the main entrance, too, there was a new face.

'Where's Ike?' Pat demanded.

'Ike's gone.'

'Well, it's all right, I'm Pat Hobby.  Ike always passes me.'

'That's why he's gone,' said the guardian blandly.  'Who's your
business with?'

Pat hesitated.  He hated to disturb a producer.

'Call Jack Berners' office,' he said.  'Just speak to his
secretary.'

After a minute the man turned from the phone.

'What about?' he said.

'About a picture.'

He waited for an answer.

'She wants to know what picture?'

'To hell with it,' said Pat disgustedly.  'Look--call Louie
Griebel.  What's all this about?'

'Orders from Mr Kasper,' said the clerk.  'Last week a visitor from
Chicago fell in the wind machine--Hello.  Mr Louie Griebel?'

'I'll talk to him,' said Pat, taking the phone.

'I can't do nothing, Pat,' mourned Louie.  'I had trouble getting
my boy in this morning.  Some twirp from Chicago fell in the wind
machine.'

'What's that got to do with me?' demanded Pat vehemently.

He walked, a little faster than his wont, along the studio wall to
the point where it joined the back lot.  There was a guard there
but there were always people passing to and fro and he joined one
of the groups.  Once inside he would see Jack and have himself
excepted from this absurd ban.  Why, he had known this lot when the
first shacks were rising on it, when this was considered the edge
of the desert.

'Sorry mister, you with this party?'

'I'm in a hurry,' said Pat.  'I've lost my card.'

'Yeah?  Well, for all I know you may be a plain clothes man.'  He
held open a copy of a photo magazine under Pat's nose.  'I wouldn't
let you in even if you told me you was this here Orson Welles.'


II


There is an old Chaplin picture about a crowded street car where
the entrance of one man at the rear forces another out in front.  A
similar image came into Pat's mind in the ensuing days whenever he
thought of Orson Welles.  Welles was in; Hobby was out.  Never
before had the studio been barred to Pat and though Welles was on
another lot it seemed as if his large body, pushing in brashly from
nowhere, had edged Pat out the gate.

'Now where do you go?' Pat thought.  He had worked in the other
studios but they were not his.  At this studio he never felt
unemployed--in recent times of stress he had eaten property food on
its stages--half a cold lobster during a scene from The Divine Miss
Carstairs; he had often slept on the sets and last winter made use
of a Chesterfield overcoat from the costume department.  Orson
Welles had no business edging him out of this.  Orson Welles
belonged with the rest of the snobs back in New York.

On the third day he was frantic with gloom.  He had sent note after
note to Jack Berners and even asked Louie to intercede--now word
came that Jack had left town.  There were so few friends left.
Desolate, he stood in front of the automobile gate with a crowd of
staring children, feeling that he had reached the end at last.

A great limousine rolled out, in the back of which Pat recognized
the great overstuffed Roman face of Harold Marcus.  The car rolled
toward the children and, as one of them ran in front of it, slowed
down.  The old man spoke into the tube and the car halted.  He
leaned out blinking.

'Is there no policeman here?' he asked of Pat.

'No, Mr Marcus,' said Pat quickly.  'There should be.  I'm Pat
Hobby, the writer--could you give me a lift down the street?'

It was unprecedented--it was an act of desperation but Pat's need
was great.

Mr Marcus looked at him closely.

'Oh yes, I remember you,' he said.  'Get in.'

He might possibly have meant get up in front with the chauffeur.
Pat compromised by opening one of the little seats.  Mr Marcus was
one of the most powerful men in the whole picture world.  He did
not occupy himself with production any longer.  He spent most of
his time rocking from coast to coast on fast trains, merging and
launching, launching and merging, like a much divorced woman.

'Some day those children'll get hurt.'

'Yes, Mr Marcus,' agreed Pat heartily, 'Mr Marcus--'

'They ought to have a policeman there.'

'Yes.  Mr Marcus.  Mr Marcus--'

'Hm-m-m!' said Mr Marcus.  'Where do you want to be dropped?'

Pat geared himself to work fast.

'Mr Marcus, when I was your press agent--'

'I know,' said Mr Marcus.  'You wanted a ten dollar a week raise.'

'What a memory!' cried Pat in gladness.  'What a memory!  But Mr
Marcus, now I don't want anything at all.'

'This is a miracle.'

'I've got modest wants, see, and I've saved enough to retire.'

He thrust his shoes slightly forward under a hanging blanket, The
Chesterfield coat effectively concealed the rest.

'That's what I'd like,' said Mr Marcus gloomily.  'A farm--with
chickens.  Maybe a little nine-hole course.  Not even a stock
ticker.'

'I want to retire, but different,' said Pat earnestly.  'Pictures
have been my life.  I want to watch them grow and grow--'

Mr Marcus groaned.

'Till they explode,' he said.  'Look at Fox!  I cried for him.'  He
pointed to his eyes, 'Tears!'

Pat nodded very sympathetically.

'I want only one thing.'  From the long familiarity he went into
the foreign locution.  'I should go on the lot anytime.  From
nothing.  Only to be there.  Should bother nobody.  Only help a
little from nothing if any young person wants advice.'

'See Berners,' said Marcus.

'He said see you.'

'Then you did want something,' Marcus smiled.  'All right, all
right by me.  Where do you get off now?'

'Could you write me a pass?' Pat pleaded.  'Just a word on your
card?'

'I'll look into it,' said Mr Marcus.  'Just now I've got things on
my mind.  I'm going to a luncheon.'  He sighed profoundly.  'They
want I should meet this new Orson Welles that's in Hollywood.'

Pat's heart winced.  There it was again--that name, sinister and
remorseless, spreading like a dark cloud over all his skies.

'Mr Marcus,' he said so sincerely that his voice trembled, 'I
wouldn't be surprised if Orson Welles is the biggest menace that's
come to Hollywood for years.  He gets a hundred and fifty grand a
picture and I wouldn't be surprised if he was so radical that you
had to have all new equipment and start all over again like you did
with sound in 1928.'

'Oh my God!' groaned Mr Marcus.

'And me,' said Pat, 'all I want is a pass and no money--to leave
things as they are.'

Mr Marcus reached for his card case.


III


To those grouped together under the name 'talent', the atmosphere
of a studio is not unfailingly bright--one fluctuates too quickly
between high hope and grave apprehension.  Those few who decide
things are happy in their work and sure that they are worthy of
their hire--the rest live in a mist of doubt as to when their vast
inadequacy will be disclosed.

Pat's psychology was, oddly, that of the masters and for the most
part he was unworried even though he was off salary.  But there was
one large fly in the ointment--for the first time in his life he
began to feel a loss of identity.  Due to reasons that he did not
quite understand, though it might have been traced to his
conversation, a number of people began to address him as 'Orson'.

Now to lose one's identity is a careless thing in any case.  But to
lose it to an enemy, or at least to one who has become scapegoat
for our misfortunes--that is a hardship.  Pat was NOT Orson.  Any
resemblance must be faint and far-fetched and he was aware of the
fact.  The final effect was to make him, in that regard, something
of an eccentric.

'Pat,' said Joe the barber, 'Orson was in here today and asked me
to trim his beard.'

'I hope you set fire to it,' said Pat.

'I did,' Joe winked at waiting customers over a hot towel.  'He
asked for a singe so I took it all off.  Now his face is as bald as
yours.  In fact you look a bit alike.'

This was the morning the kidding was so ubiquitous that, to avoid
it, Pat lingered in Mario's bar across the street.  He was not
drinking--at the bar, that is, for he was down to his last thirty
cents, but he refreshed himself frequently from a half-pint in his
back pocket.  He needed the stimulus for he had to make a touch
presently and he knew that money was easier to borrow when one
didn't have an air of urgent need.

His quarry, Jeff Boldini, was in an unsympathetic state of mind.
He too was an artist, albeit a successful one, and a certain great
lady of the screen had just burned him up by criticizing a wig he
had made for her.  He told the story to Pat at length and the
latter waited until it was all out before broaching his request.

'No soap,' said Jeff.  'Hell, you never paid me back what you
borrowed last month.'

'But I got a job now,' lied Pat.  'This is just to tide me over.  I
start tomorrow.'

'If they don't give the job to Orson Welles,' said Jeff humorously.

Pat's eyes narrowed but he managed to utter a polite, borrower's
laugh.

'Hold it,' said Jeff.  'You know I think you look like him?'

'Yeah.'

'Honest.  Anyhow I could make you look like him.  I could make you
a beard that would be his double.'

'I wouldn't be his double for fifty grand.'

With his head on one side Jeff regarded Pat.

'I could,' he said.  'Come on in to my chair and let me see.'

'Like hell.'

'Come on.  I'd like to try it.  You haven't got anything to do.
You don't work till tomorrow.'

'I don't want a beard.'

'It'll come off.'

'I don't want it.'

'It won't cost you anything.  In fact I'll be paying YOU--I'll loan
you the ten smackers if you'll let me make you a beard.'

Half an hour later Jeff looked at his completed work.

'It's perfect,' he said.  'Not only the beard but the eyes and
everything.'

'All right.  Now take it off,' said Pat moodily.

'What's the hurry?  That's a fine muff.  That's a work of art.  We
ought to put a camera on it.  Too bad you're working tomorrow--
they're using a dozen beards out on Sam Jones' set and one of them
went to jail in a homo raid.  I bet with that muff you could get
the job.'

It was weeks since Pat had heard the word job and he could not
himself say how he managed to exist and eat.  Jeff saw the light in
his eye.

'What say?  Let me drive you out there just for fun,' pleaded Jeff.
'I'd like to see if Sam could tell it was a phony muff.'

'I'm a writer, not a ham.'

'Come on!  Nobody would never know you back of that.  And you'd
draw another ten bucks.'

As they left the make-up department Jeff lingered behind a minute.
On a strip of cardboard he crayoned the name Orson Welles in large
block letters.  And outside, without Pat's notice, he stuck it in
the windshield of his car.

He did not go directly to the back lot.  Instead he drove not too
swiftly up the main studio street.  In front of the administration
building he stopped on the pretext that the engine was missing, and
almost in no time a small but definitely interested crowd began to
gather.  But Jeff's plans did not include stopping anywhere long,
so he hopped in and they started on a tour around the commissary.

'Where are we going?' demanded Pat.

He had already made one nervous attempt to tear the beard from him,
but to his surprise it did not come away.

He complained of this to Jeff.

'Sure,' Jeff explained.  'That's made to last.  You'll have to soak
it off.'

The car paused momentarily at the door of the commissary.  Pat saw
blank eyes staring at him and he stared back at them blankly from
the rear seat.

'You'd think I was the only beard on the lot,' he said gloomily.

'You can sympathize with Orson Welles.'

'To hell with him.'

This colloquy would have puzzled those without, to whom he was
nothing less than the real McCoy.

Jeff drove on slowly up the street.  Ahead of them a little group
of men were walking--one of them, turning, saw the car and drew the
attention of the others to it.  Whereupon the most elderly member
of the party threw up his arms in what appeared to be a defensive
gesture, and plunged to the sidewalk as the car went past.

'My God, did you see that?' exclaimed Jeff.  'That was Mr Marcus.'

He came to a stop.  An excited man ran up and put his head in the
car window.

'Mr Welles, our Mr Marcus has had a heart attack.  Can we use your
car to get him to the infirmary?'

Pat stared.  Then very quickly he opened the door on the other side
and dashed from the car.  Not even the beard could impede his
streamlined flight.  The policeman at the gate, not recognizing the
incarnation, tried to have words with him but Pat shook him off
with the ease of a triple-threat back and never paused till he
reached Mario's bar.

Three extras with beards stood at the rail, and with relief Pat
merged himself into their corporate whiskers.  With a trembling
hand he took the hard-earned ten dollar bill from his pocket.

'Set 'em up,' he cried hoarsely.  'Every muff has a drink on me.'




PAT HOBBY'S SECRET

Esquire (June 1940)


I


Distress in Hollywood is endemic and always acute.  Scarcely an
executive but is being gnawed at by some insoluble problem and in a
democratic way he will let you in on it, with no charge.  The
problem, be it one of health or of production, is faced
courageously and with groans at from one to five thousand a week.
That's how pictures are made.

'But this one has got me down,' said Mr Banizon, '--because how did
the artillery shell get in the trunk of Claudette Colbert or Betty
Field or whoever we decide to use?  We got to explain it so the
audience will believe it.'

He was in the office of Louie the studio bookie and his present
audience also included Pat Hobby, venerable script-stooge of forty-
nine.  Mr Banizon did not expect a suggestion from either of them
but he had been talking aloud to himself about the problem for a
week now and was unable to stop.

'Who's your writer on it?' asked Louie.

'R. Parke Woll,' said Banizon indignantly.  'First I buy this
opening from another writer, see.  A grand notion but only a
notion.  Then I call in R. Parke Woll, the playwright, and we meet
a couple of times and develop it.  Then when we get the end in
sight, his agent horns in and says he won't let Woll talk any more
unless I give him a contract--eight weeks at $3,000!  And all I
need him for is one more day!'

The sum brought a glitter into Pat's old eyes.  Ten years ago he
had camped beatifically in range of such a salary--now he was lucky
to get a few weeks at $250.  His inflamed and burnt over talent had
failed to produce a second growth.

'The worse part of it is that Woll told me the ending,' continued
the producer.

'Then what are you waiting for?' demanded Pat.  'You don't need to
pay him a cent.'

'I forgot it!' groaned Mr Banizon.  'Two phones were ringing at
once in my office--one from a working director.  And while I was
talking Woll had to run along.  Now I can't remember it and I can't
get him back.'

Perversely Pat Hobby's sense of justice was with the producer, not
the writer.  Banizon had almost outsmarted Woll and then been
cheated by a tough break.  And now the playwright, with the
insolence of an Eastern snob, was holding him up for twenty-four
grand.  What with the European market gone.  What with the war.

'Now he's on a big bat,' said Banizon.  'I know because I got a man
tailing him.  It's enough to drive you nuts--here I got the whole
story except the pay-off.  What good is it to me like that?'

'If he's drunk maybe he'd spill it,' suggested Louie practically.

'Not to me,' said Mr Banizon.  'I thought of it but he would
recognize my face.'

Having reached the end of his current blind alley, Mr Banizon
picked a horse in the third and one in the seventh and prepared to
depart.

'I got an idea,' said Pat.

Mr Banizon looked suspiciously at the red old eyes.

'I got no time to hear it now,' he said.

'I'm not selling anything,' Pat reassured him.  'I got a deal
almost ready over at Paramount.  But once I worked with this R.
Parke Woll and maybe I could find what you want to know.'

He and Mr Banizon went out of the office together and walked slowly
across the lot.  An hour later, for an advance consideration of
fifty dollars, Pat was employed to discover how a live artillery
shell got into Claudette Colbert's trunk or Betty Field's trunk or
whosoever's trunk it should be.


II


The swath which R. Parke Woll was now cutting through the City of
the Angels would have attracted no special notice in the twenties;
in the fearful forties it rang out like laughter in church.  He was
easy to follow: his absence had been requested from two hotels but
he had settled down into a routine where he carried his sleeping
quarters in his elbow.  A small but alert band of rats and weasels
were furnishing him moral support in his journey--a journey which
Pat caught up with at two a.m. in Conk's Old Fashioned Bar.

Conk's Bar was haughtier than its name, boasting cigarette girls
and a doorman-bouncer named Smith who had once stayed a full hour
with Tarzan White.  Mr Smith was an embittered man who expressed
himself by goosing the patrons on their way in and out and this was
Pat's introduction.  When he recovered himself he discovered R.
Parke Woll in a mixed company around a table, and sauntered up with
an air of surprise.

'Hello, good looking,' he said to Woll.  'Remember me--Pat Hobby?'

R. Parke Woll brought him with difficulty into focus, turning his
head first on one side then on the other, letting it sink, snap up
and then lash forward like a cobra taking a candid snapshot.
Evidently it recorded for he said:

'Pat Hobby!  Sit down and wha'll you have.  Genlemen, this is Pat
Hobby--best left-handed writer in Hollywood.  Pat h'are you?'

Pat sat down, amid suspicious looks from a dozen predatory eyes.
Was Pat an old friend sent to get the playwright home?

Pat saw this and waited until a half-hour later when he found
himself alone with Woll in the washroom.

'Listen Parke, Banizon is having you followed,' he said.  'I don't
know why he's doing it.  Louie at the studio tipped me off.'

'You don't know why?' cried Parke.  'Well, I know why.  I got
something he wants--that's why!'

'You owe him money?'

'Owe him money.  Why that--he owes ME money!  He owes me for three
long, hard conferences--I outlined a whole damn picture for him.'
His vague finger tapped his forehead in several places.  'What he
wants is in here.'

An hour passed at the turbulent orgiastic table.  Pat waited--and
then inevitably in the slow, limited cycle of the lush, Woll's mind
returned to the subject.

'The funny thing is I told him who put the shell in the trunk and
why.  And then the Master Mind forgot.'

Pat had an inspiration.

'But his secretary remembered.'

'She did?'  Woll was flabbergasted.  'Secretary--don't remember
secretary.'

'She came in,' ventured Pat uneasily.

'Well then by God he's got to pay me or I'll sue him.'

'Banizon says he's got a better idea.'

'The hell he has.  My idea was a pip.  Listen--'

He spoke for two minutes.

'You like it?' he demanded.  He looked at Pat for applause--then he
must have seen something in Pat's eye that he was not intended to
see.  'Why you little skunk,' he cried.  'You've talked to Banizon--
he sent you here.'

Pat rose and tore like a rabbit for the door.  He would have been
out into the street before Woll could overtake him had it not been
for the intervention of Mr Smith, the doorman.

'Where you going?' he demanded, catching Pat by his lapels.

'Hold him!' cried Woll, coming up.  He aimed a blow at Pat which
missed and landed full in Mr Smith's mouth.

It has been mentioned that Mr Smith was an embittered as well as a
powerful man.  He dropped Pat, picked up R. Parke Woll by crotch
and shoulder, held him high and then in one gigantic pound brought
his body down against the floor.  Three minutes later Woll was
dead.


III


Except in great scandals like the Arbuckle case the industry
protects its own--and the industry included Pat, however
intermittently.  He was let out of prison next morning without
bail, wanted only as a material witness.  If anything, the
publicity was advantageous--for the first time in a year his name
appeared in the trade journals.  Moreover he was now the only
living man who knew how the shell got into Claudette Colbert's (or
Betty Field's) trunk.

'When can you come up and see me?' said Mr Banizon.

'After the inquest tomorrow,' said Pat enjoying himself.  'I feel
kind of shaken--it gave me an earache.'

That too indicated power.  Only those who were 'in' could speak of
their health and be listened to.

'Woll really did tell you?' questioned Banizon.

'He told me,' said Pat.  'And it's worth more than fifty smackers.
I'm going to get me a new agent and bring him to your office.'

'I tell you a better plan.' said Banizon hastily, 'I'll get you on
the payroll.  Four weeks at your regular price.'

'What's my price?' demanded Pat gloomily.  'I've drawn everything
from four thousand to zero.'  And he added ambiguously, 'As
Shakespeare says, "Every man has his price."'

The attendant rodents of R. Parke Woll had vanished with their
small plunder into convenient rat holes, leaving as the defendant
Mr Smith, and, as witnesses, Pat and two frightened cigarette
girls.  Mr Smith's defence was that he had been attacked.  At the
inquest one cigarette girl agreed with him--one condemned him for
unnecessary roughness.  Pat Hobby's turn was next, but before his
name was called he started as a voice spoke to him from behind.

'You talk against my husband and I'll twist your tongue out by the
roots.'

A huge dinosaur of a woman, fully six feet tall and broad in
proportion, was leaning forward against his chair.

'Pat Hobby, step forward please . . . now Mr Hobby tell us exactly
what happened.'

The eyes of Mr Smith were fixed balefully on his and he felt the
eyes of the bouncer's mate reaching in for his tongue through the
back of his head.  He was full of natural hesitation.

'I don't know exactly,' he said, and then with quick inspiration,
'All I know is everything went white!'

'WHAT?'

'That's the way it was.  I saw white.  Just like some guys see red
or black I saw white.'

There was some consultation among the authorities.

'Well, what happened from when you came into the restaurant--up to
the time you saw white?'

'Well--' said Pat fighting for time.  'It was all kind of that way.
I came and sat down and then it began to go black.'

'You mean white.'

'Black AND white.'

There was a general titter.

'Witness dismissed.  Defendant remanded for trial.'

What was a little joking to endure when the stakes were so high--
all that night a mountainous Amazon pursued him through his dreams
and he needed a strong drink before appearing at Mr Banizon's
office next morning.  He was accompanied by one of the few
Hollywood agents who had not yet taken him on and shaken him off.

'A flat sum of five hundred,' offered Banizon.  'Or four weeks at
two-fifty to work on another picture.'

'How bad do you want this?' asked the agent.  'My client seems to
think it's worth three thousand.'

'Of my own money?' cried Banizon.  'And it isn't even HIS idea.
Now that Woll is dead it's in the Public Remains.'

'Not quite,' said the agent.  'I think like you do that ideas are
sort of in the air.  They belong to whoever's got them at the time--
like balloons.'

'Well, how much?' asked Mr Banizon fearfully.  'How do I know he's
got the idea?'

The agent turned to Pat.

'Shall we let him find out--for a thousand dollars?'

After a moment Pat nodded.  Something was bothering him.

'All right,' said Banizon.  'This strain is driving me nuts.  One
thousand.'

There was silence.

'Spill it Pat,' said the agent.

Still no word from Pat.  They waited.  When Pat spoke at last his
voice seemed to come from afar.

'Everything's white,' he gasped.

'WHAT?'

'I can't help it--everything has gone white.  I can see it--white.
I remember going into the joint but after that it all goes white.'

For a moment they thought he was holding out.  Then the agent
realized that Pat actually had drawn a psychological blank.  The
secret of R. Parke Woll was safe forever.  Too late Pat realized
that a thousand dollars was slipping away and tried desperately to
recover.

'I remember, I remember!  It was put in by some Nazi dictator.'

'Maybe the girl put it in the trunk herself,' said Banizon
ironically.  'For her bracelet.'

For many years Mr Banizon would be somewhat gnawed by this
insoluble problem.  And as he glowered at Pat he wished that
writers could be dispensed with altogether.  If only ideas could be
plucked from the inexpensive air!




PAT HOBBY, PUTATIVE FATHER

Esquire (July 1940)


I


Most writers look like writers whether they want to or not.  It is
hard to say why--for they model their exteriors whimsically on Wall
Street brokers, cattle kings or English explorers--but they all
turn out looking like writers, as definitely typed as 'The Public'
or 'The Profiteers' in the cartoons.

Pat Hobby was the exception.  He did not look like a writer.  And
only in one corner of the Republic could he have been identified as
a member of the entertainment world.  Even there the first guess
would have been that he was an extra down on his luck, or a bit
player who specialized in the sort of father who should NEVER come
home.  But a writer he was: he had collaborated in over two dozen
moving picture scripts, most of them, it must be admitted, prior to
1929.

A writer?  He had a desk in the Writers' Building at the studio; he
had pencils, paper, a secretary, paper clips, a pad for office
memoranda.  And he sat in an overstuffed chair, his eyes not so
very bloodshot taking in the morning's Reporter.

'I got to get to work,' he told Miss Raudenbush at eleven.  And
again at twelve:

'I got to get to work.'

At quarter to one, he began to feel hungry--up to this point every
move, or rather every moment, was in the writer's tradition.  Even
to the faint irritation that no one had annoyed him, no one had
bothered him, no one had interfered with the long empty dream which
constituted his average day.

He was about to accuse his secretary of staring at him when the
welcome interruption came.  A studio guide tapped at his door and
brought him a note from his boss, Jack Berners:


Dear Pat:

Please take some time off and show these people around the lot.

                                                       Jack


'My God!' Pat exclaimed.  'How can I be expected to get anything
done and show people around the lot at the same time.  Who are
they?' he demanded of the guide.

'I don't know.  One of them seems to be kind of coloured.  He looks
like the extras they had at Paramount for Bengal Lancer.  He can't
speak English.  The other--'

Pat was putting on his coat to see for himself.

'Will you be wanting me this afternoon?' asked Miss Raudenbush.

He looked at her with infinite reproach and went out in front of
the Writers' Building.

The visitors were there.  The sultry person was tall and of a fine
carriage, dressed in excellent English clothes except for a turban.
The other was a youth of fifteen, quite light of hue.  He also wore
a turban with beautifully cut jodhpurs and riding coat.

They bowed formally.

'Hear you want to go on some sets,' said Pat, 'You friends of Jack
Berners?'

'Acquaintances,' said the youth.  'May I present you to my uncle:
Sir Singrim Dak Raj.'

Probably, thought Pat, the company was cooking up a Bengal Lancers,
and this man would play the heavy who owned the Khyber Pass.  Maybe
they'd put Pat on it--at three-fifty a week.  Why not?  He knew how
to write that stuff:

Beautiful Long Shot.  The Gorge.  Show Tribesman firing from behind
rocks.

Medium Shot.  Tribesman hit by bullet making nose dive over high
rock.  (use stunt man)

Medium Long Shot.  The Valley.  British troops wheeling out cannon.

'You going to be long in Hollywood?' he asked shrewdly.

'My uncle doesn't speak English,' said the youth in a measured
voice.  'We are here only a few days.  You see--I am your putative
son.'


II


'--And I would very much like to see Bonita Granville,' continued
the youth.  'I find she has been borrowed by your studio.'

They had been walking toward the production office and it took Pat
a minute to grasp what the young man had said.

'You're my what?' he asked.

'Your putative son,' said the young man, in a sort of sing-song.
'Legally I am the son and heir of the Rajah Dak Raj Indore.  But I
was born John Brown Hobby.'

'Yes?' said Pat.  'Go on!  What's this?'

'My mother was Delia Brown.  You married her in 1926.  And she
divorced you in 1927 when I was a few months old.  Later she took
me to India, where she married my present legal father.'

'Oh,' said Pat.  They had reached the production office.  'You want
to see Bonita Granville.'

'Yes,' said John Hobby Indore.  'If it is convenient.'

Pat looked at the shooting schedule on the wall.

'It may be,' he said heavily.  'We can go and see.'

As they started toward Stage 4, he exploded.

'What do you mean, "my potato son"?  I'm glad to see you and all
that, but say, are you really the kid Delia had in 1926?'

'Putatively,' John Indore said.  'At that time you and she were
legally married.'

He turned to his uncle and spoke rapidly in Hindustani, whereupon
the latter bent forward, looked with cold examination upon Pat and
threw up his shoulders without comment.  The whole business was
making Pat vaguely uncomfortable.

When he pointed out the commissary, John wanted to stop there 'to
buy his uncle a hot dog'.  It seemed that Sir Singrim had conceived
a passion for them at the World's Fair in New York, whence they had
just come.  They were taking ship for Madras tomorrow.

'--whether or not,' said John, sombrely.  'I get to see Bonita
Granville.  I do not care if I MEET her.  I am too young for her.
She is already an old woman by our standards.  But I'd like to SEE
her.'

It was one of those bad days for showing people around.  Only one
of the directors shooting today was an old timer, on whom Pat could
count for a welcome--and at the door of that stage he received word
that the star kept blowing up in his lines and had demanded that
the set be cleared.

In desperation he took his charges out to the back lot and walked
them past the false fronts of ships and cities and village streets,
and medieval gates--a sight in which the boy showed a certain
interest but which Sir Singrim found disappointing.  Each time that
Pat led them around behind to demonstrate that it was all phony Sir
Singrim's expression would change to disappointment and faint
contempt.

'What's he say?' Pat asked his offspring, after Sir Singrim had
walked eagerly into a Fifth Avenue jewellery store, to find nothing
but carpenter's rubble inside.

'He is the third richest man in India,' said John.  'He is
disgusted.  He says he will never enjoy an American picture again.
He says he will buy one of our picture companies in India and make
every set as solid as the Taj Mahal.  He thinks perhaps the
actresses just have a false front too, and that's why you won't let
us see them.'

The first sentence had rung a sort of carillon in Pat's head.  If
there was anything he liked it was a good piece of money--not this
miserable, uncertain two-fifty a week which purchased his freedom.

'I'll tell you,' he said with sudden decision.  'We'll try Stage 4,
and peek at Bonita Granville.'

Stage 4 was double locked and barred, for the day--the director
hated visitors, and it was a process stage besides.  'Process' was
a generic name for trick photography in which every studio competed
with other studios, and lived in terror of spies.  More
specifically it meant that a projecting machine threw a moving
background upon a transparent screen.  On the other side of the
screen, a scene was played and recorded against this moving
background.  The projector on one side of the screen and the camera
on the other were so synchronized that the result could show a star
standing on his head before an indifferent crowd on 42nd Street--a
REAL crowd and a REAL star--and the poor eye could only conclude
that it was being deluded and never quite guess how.

Pat tried to explain this to John, but John was peering for Bonita
Granville from behind the great mass of coiled ropes and pails
where they hid.  They had not got there by the front entrance, but
by a little side door for technicians that Pat knew.

Wearied by the long jaunt over the back lot, Pat took a pint flask
from his hip and offered it to Sir Singrim who declined.  He did
not offer it to John.

'Stunt your growth,' he said solemnly, taking a long pull.

'I do not want any,' said John with dignity.

He was suddenly alert.  He had spotted an idol more glamorous than
Siva not twenty feet away--her back, her profile, her voice.  Then
she moved off.

Watching his face, Pat was rather touched.

'We can go nearer,' he said.  'We might get to that ballroom set.
They're not using it--they got covers on the furniture.'

On tip toe they started, Pat in the lead, then Sir Singrim, then
John.  As they moved softly forward Pat heard the word 'Lights' and
stopped in his tracks.  Then, as a blinding white glow struck at
their eyes and the voice shouted 'Quiet!  We're rolling!' Pat began
to run, followed quickly through the white silence by the others.

The silence did not endure.

'CUT!' screamed a voice, 'What the living, blazing hell!'

From the director's angle something had happened on the screen
which, for the moment, was inexplicable.  Three gigantic
silhouettes, two with huge Indian turbans, had danced across what
was intended to be a New England harbour--they had blundered into
the line of the process shot.  Prince John Indore had not only seen
Bonita Granville--he had acted in the same picture.  His
silhouetted foot seemed to pass miraculously through her blonde
young head.


III


They sat for some time in the guard-room before word could be
gotten to Jack Berners, who was off the lot.  So there was leisure
for talk.  This consisted of a longish harangue from Sir Singrim to
John, which the latter--modifying its tone if not its words--
translated to Pat.

'My uncle says his brother wanted to do something for you.  He
thought perhaps if you were a great writer he might invite you to
come to his kingdom and write his life.'

'I never claimed to be--'

'My uncle says you are an ignominious writer--in your own land you
permitted him to be touched by those dogs of the policemen.'

'Aw--bananas,' muttered Pat uncomfortably.

'He says my mother always wished you well.  But now she is a high
and sacred lady and should never see you again.  He says we will go
to our chambers in the Ambassador Hotel and meditate and pray and
let you know what we decide.'

When they were released, and the two moguls were escorted
apologetically to their car by a studio yes-man, it seemed to Pat
that it had been pretty well decided already.  He was angry.  For
the sake of getting his son a peek at Miss Granville, he had quite
possibly lost his job--though he didn't really think so.  Or rather
he was pretty sure that when his week was up he would have lost it
anyhow.  But though it was a pretty bad break he remembered most
clearly from the afternoon that Sir Singrim was 'the third richest
man in India', and after dinner at a bar on La Cienega he decided
to go down to the Ambassador Hotel and find out the result of the
prayer and meditation.

It was early dark of a September evening.  The Ambassador was full
of memories to Pat--the Coconut Grove in the great days, when
directors found pretty girls in the afternoon and made stars of
them by night.  There was some activity in front of the door and
Pat watched it idly.  Such a quantity of baggage he had seldom
seen, even in the train of Gloria Swanson or Joan Crawford.  Then
he started as he saw two or three men in turbans moving around
among the baggage.  So--they were running out on him.

Sir Singrim Dak Raj and his nephew Prince John, both pulling on
gloves as if at a command, appeared at the door, as Pat stepped
forward out of the darkness.

'Taking a powder, eh?' he said.  'Say, when you get back there,
tell them that one American could lick--'

'I have left a note for you,' said Prince John, turning from his
Uncle's side.  'I say, you WERE nice this afternoon and it really
was too bad.'

'Yes, it was,' agreed Pat.

'But we are providing for you,' John said.  'After our prayers we
decided that you will receive fifty sovereigns a month--two hundred
and fifty dollars--for the rest of your natural life.'

'What will I have to do for it?' questioned Pat suspiciously.

'It will only be withdrawn in case--'

John leaned and whispered in Pat's ear, and relief crept into Pat's
eyes.  The condition had nothing to do with drink and blondes,
really nothing to do with him at all.

John began to get in the limousine.

'Goodbye, putative father,' he said, almost with affection.

Pat stood looking after him.

'Goodbye son,' he said.  He stood watching the limousine go out of
sight.  Then he turned away--feeling like--like Stella Dallas.
There were tears in his eyes.

Potato Father--whatever that meant.  After some consideration he
added to himself: it's better than not being a father at all.


IV


He awoke late next afternoon with a happy hangover--the cause of
which he could not determine until young John's voice seemed to
spring into his ears, repeating:  'Fifty sovereigns a month, with
just one condition--that it be withdrawn in case of war, when all
revenues of our state will revert to the British Empire.'

With a cry Pat sprang to the door.  No Los Angeles Times lay
against it, no Examiner--only Toddy's Daily Form Sheet.  He
searched the orange pages frantically.  Below the form sheets, the
past performances, the endless oracles for endless racetracks, his
eye was caught by a one-inch item:


LONDON.  SEPTEMBER 3RD.  ON THIS MORNING'S DECLARATION BY
CHAMBERLAIN, DOUGIE CABLES 'ENGLAND TO WIN.  FRANCE TO PLACE.
RUSSIA TO SHOW'.





THE HOMES OF THE STARS

Esquire (August 1940)


Beneath a great striped umbrella at the side of a boulevard in a
Hollywood heat wave, sat a man.  His name was Gus Venske (no
relation to the runner) and he wore magenta pants, cerise shoes and
a sport article from Vine Street which resembled nothing so much as
a cerulean blue pajama top.

Gus Venske was not a freak nor were his clothes at all extraordinary
for his time and place.  He had a profession--on a pole beside the
umbrella was a placard:


                VISIT THE HOMES OF THE STARS


Business was bad or Gus would not have hailed the unprosperous man
who stood in the street beside a panting, steaming car, anxiously
watching its efforts to cool.

'Hey fella,' said Gus, without much hope.  'Wanna visit the homes
of the stars?'

The red-rimmed eyes of the watcher turned from the automobile and
looked superciliously upon Gus.

'I'm IN pictures,' said the man, 'I'm in 'em myself.'

'Actor?'

'No.  Writer.'

Pat Hobby turned back to his car, which was whistling like a peanut
wagon.  He had told the truth--or what was once the truth.  Often
in the old days his name had flashed on the screen for the few
seconds allotted to authorship, but for the past five years his
services had been less and less in demand.

Presently Gus Venske shut up shop for lunch by putting his folders
and maps into a briefcase and walking off with it under his arm.
As the sun grew hotter moment by moment, Pat Hobby took refuge
under the faint protection of the umbrella and inspected a soiled
folder which had been dropped by Mr Venske.  If Pat had not been
down to his last fourteen cents he would have telephoned a garage
for aid--as it was, he could only wait.

After a while a limousine with a Missouri licence drew to rest
beside him.  Behind the chauffeur sat a little white moustached man
and a large woman with a small dog.  They conversed for a moment--
then, in a rather shamefaced way, the woman leaned out and
addressed Pat.

'What stars' homes can you visit?' she asked.

It took a moment for this to sink in.

'I mean can we go to Robert Taylor's home and Clark Gable's and
Shirley Temple's--'

'I guess you can if you can get in,' said Pat.

'Because--' continued the woman, '--if we could go to the very best
homes, the most exclusive--we would be prepared to pay more than
your regular price.'

Light dawned upon Pat.  Here together were suckers and smackers.
Here was that dearest of Hollywood dreams--the angle.  If one got
the right angle it meant meals at the Brown Derby, long nights with
bottles and girls, a new tyre for his old car.  And here was an
angle fairly thrusting itself at him.

He rose and went to the side of the limousine.

'Sure.  Maybe I could fix it.'  As he spoke he felt a pang of
doubt.  'Would you be able to pay in advance?'

The couple exchanged a look.

'Suppose we gave you five dollars now,' the woman said, 'and five
dollars if we can visit Clark Gable's home or somebody like that.'

Once upon a time such a thing would have been so easy.  In his
salad days when Pat had twelve or fifteen writing credits a year,
he could have called up many people who would have said, 'Sure,
Pat, if it means anything to you.'  But now he could only think of
a handful who really recognized him and spoke to him around the
lots--Melvyn Douglas and Robert Young and Ronald Colman and Young
Doug.  Those he had known best had retired or passed away.

And he did not know except vaguely where the new stars lived, but
he had noticed that on the folder were typewritten several dozen
names and addresses with pencilled checks after each.

'Of course you can't be sure anybody's at home,' he said, 'they
might be working in the studios.'

'We understand that.'  The lady glanced at Pat's car, glanced away.
'We'd better go in our motor.'

'Sure.'

Pat got up in front with the chauffeur--trying to think fast.  The
actor who spoke to him most pleasantly was Ronald Colman--they had
never exchanged more than conventional salutations but he might
pretend that he was calling to interest Colman in a story.

Better still, Colman was probably not at home and Pat might wangle
his clients an inside glimpse of the house.  Then the process might
be repeated at Robert Young's house and Young Doug's and Melvyn
Douglas'.  By that time the lady would have forgotten Gable and the
afternoon would be over.

He looked at Ronald Colman's address on the folder and gave the
direction to the chauffeur.

'We know a woman who had her picture taken with George Brent,' said
the lady as they started off, 'Mrs Horace J. Ives, Jr.'

'She's our neighbour,' said her husband.  'She lives at 372 Rose
Drive in Kansas City.  And we live at 327.'

'She had her picture taken with George Brent.  We always wondered
if she had to pay for it.  Of course I don't know that I'd want to
go so far as THAT.  I don't know what they'd say back home.'

'I don't think we want to go as far as all that,' agreed her
husband.

'Where are we going first?' asked the lady, cosily.

'Well, I had a couple calls to pay anyhow,' said Pat.  'I got to
see Ronald Colman about something.'

'Oh, he's one of my favourites.  Do you know him well?'

'Oh yes,' said Pat, 'I'm not in this business regularly.  I'm just
doing it today for a friend.  I'm a writer.'

Sure in the knowledge that not so much as a trio of picture writers
were known to the public he named himself as the author of several
recent successes.

'That's very interesting,' said the man, 'I knew a writer once--
this Upton Sinclair or Sinclair Lewis.  Not a bad fellow even if he
was a socialist.'

'Why aren't you writing a picture now?' asked the lady.

'Well, you see we're on strike,' Pat invented.  'We got a thing
called the Screen Playwriters' Guild and we're on strike.'

'Oh.'  His clients stared with suspicion at this emissary of Stalin
in the front seat of their car.

'What are you striking for?' asked the man uneasily.

Pat's political development was rudimentary.  He hesitated.

'Oh, better living conditions,' he said finally, 'free pencils and
paper, I don't know--it's all in the Wagner Act.'  After a moment
he added vaguely, 'Recognize Finland.'

'I didn't know writers had unions,' said the man.  'Well, if you're
on strike who writes the movies?'

'The producers,' said Pat bitterly.  'That's why they're so lousy.'

'Well, that's what I would call an odd state of things.'

They came in sight of Ronald Colman's house and Pat swallowed
uneasily.  A shining new roadster sat out in front.

'I better go in first,' he said.  'I mean we wouldn't want to come
in on any--on any family scene or anything.'

'Does he have family scenes?' asked the lady eagerly.

'Oh, well, you know how people are,' said Pat with charity.  'I
think I ought to see how things are first.'

The car stopped.  Drawing a long breath Pat got out.  At the same
moment the door of the house opened and Ronald Colman hurried down
the walk.  Pat's heart missed a beat as the actor glanced in his
direction.

'Hello Pat,' he said.  Evidently he had no notion that Pat was a
caller for he jumped into his car and the sound of his motor
drowned out Pat's responses as he drove away.

'Well, he called you "Pat",' said the woman impressed.

'I guess he was in a hurry,' said Pat.  'But maybe we could see his
house.'

He rehearsed a speech going up the walk.  He had just spoken to his
friend Mr Colman, and received permission to look around.

But the house was shut and locked and there was no answer to the
bell.  He would have to try Melvyn Douglas whose salutations, on
second thought, were a little warmer than Ronald Colman's.  At any
rate his clients' faith in him was now firmly founded.  The 'Hello,
Pat,' rang confidently in their ears; by proxy they were already
inside the charmed circle.

'Now let's try Clark Gable's,' said the lady.  'I'd like to tell
Carole Lombard about her hair.'

The lese majesty made Pat's stomach wince.  Once in a crowd he had
met Clark Gable but he had no reason to believe that Mr Gable
remembered.

'Well, we could try Melvyn Douglas' first and then Bob Young or
else Young Doug.  They're all on the way.  You see Gable and
Lombard live away out in the St Joaquin valley.'

'Oh,' said the lady, disappointed, 'I did want to run up and see
their bedroom.  Well then, our next choice would be Shirley
Temple.'  She looked at her little dog.  'I know that would be
Boojie's choice too.'

'They're kind of afraid of kidnappers,' said Pat.

Ruffled, the man produced his business card and handed it to Pat.


                     DEERING R. ROBINSON

                 Vice President and Chairman
                        of the Board
                    Robdeer Food Products


'Does THAT sound as if I want to kidnap Shirley Temple?'

'They just have to be sure,' said Pat apologetically.  'After we go
to Melvyn--'

'No--let's see Shirley Temple's now,' insisted the woman.  'Really!
I told you in the first place what I wanted.'

Pat hesitated.

'First I'll have to stop in some drugstore and phone about it.'

In a drugstore he exchanged some of the five dollars for a half
pint of gin and took two long swallows behind a high counter, after
which he considered the situation.  He could, of course, duck Mr
and Mrs Robinson immediately--after all he had produced Ronald
Colman, with sound, for their five smackers.  On the other hand
they just MIGHT catch Miss Temple on her way in or out--and for a
pleasant day at Santa Anita tomorrow Pat needed five smackers more.
In the glow of the gin his courage mounted, and returning to the
limousine he gave the chauffeur the address.

But approaching the Temple house his spirit quailed as he saw that
there was a tall iron fence and an electric gate.  And didn't
guides have to have a licence?

'Not here,' he said quickly to the chauffeur.  'I made a mistake.
I think it's the next one, or two or three doors further on.'

He decided on a large mansion set in an open lawn and stopping the
chauffeur got out and walked up to the door.  He was temporarily
licked but at least he might bring back some story to soften them--
say, that Miss Temple had mumps.  He could point out her sick-room
from the walk.

There was no answer to his ring but he saw that the door was partly
ajar.  Cautiously he pushed it open.  He was staring into a
deserted living room on the baronial scale.  He listened.  There
was no one about, no footsteps on the upper floor, no murmur from
the kitchen.  Pat took another pull at the gin.  Then swiftly he
hurried back to the limousine.

'She's at the studio,' he said quickly.  'But if we're quiet we can
look at their living-room.'

Eagerly the Robinsons and Boojie disembarked and followed him.  The
living-room might have been Shirley Temple's, might have been one
of many in Hollywood.  Pat saw a doll in a corner and pointed at
it, whereupon Mrs Robinson picked it up, looked at it reverently
and showed it to Boojie who sniffed indifferently.

'Could I meet Mrs Temple?' she asked.

'Oh, she's out--nobody's home,' Pat said--unwisely.

'Nobody.  Oh--then Boojie would so like a wee little peep at her
bedroom.'

Before he could answer she had run up the stairs.  Mr Robinson
followed and Pat waited uneasily in the hall, ready to depart at
the sound either of an arrival outside or a commotion above.

He finished the bottle, disposed of it politely under a sofa
cushion and then deciding that the visit upstairs was tempting fate
too far, he went after his clients.  On the stairs he heard Mrs
Robinson.

'But there's only ONE child's bedroom.  I thought Shirley had
brothers.'

A window on the winding staircase looked upon the street, and
glancing out Pat saw a large car drive up to the curb.  From it
stepped a Hollywood celebrity who, though not one of those pursued
by Mrs Robinson, was second to none in prestige and power.  It was
old Mr Marcus, the producer, for whom Pat Hobby had been press
agent twenty years ago.

At this point Pat lost his head.  In a flash he pictured an
elaborate explanation as to what he was doing here.  He would not
be forgiven.  His occasional weeks in the studio at two-fifty would
now disappear altogether and another finis would be written to his
almost entirely finished career.  He left, impetuously and swiftly--
down the stairs, through the kitchen and out the back gate,
leaving the Robinsons to their destiny.

Vaguely he was sorry for them as he walked quickly along the next
boulevard.  He could see Mr Robinson producing his card as the head
of Robdeer Food Products.  He could see Mr Marcus' scepticism, the
arrival of the police, the frisking of Mr and Mrs Robinson.

Probably it would stop there--except that the Robinsons would be
furious at him for his imposition.  They would tell the police
where they had picked him up.

Suddenly he went ricketing down the street, beads of gin breaking
out profusely on his forehead.  He had left his car beside Gus
Venske's umbrella.  And now he remembered another recognizing clue
and hoped that Ronald Colman didn't know his last name.




PAT HOBBY DOES HIS BIT

Esquire (September 1940)


I


In order to borrow money gracefully one must choose the time and
place.  It is a difficult business, for example, when the borrower
is cockeyed, or has measles, or a conspicuous shiner.  One could
continue indefinitely but the inauspicious occasions can be
catalogued as one--it is exceedingly difficult to borrow money when
one needs it.

Pat Hobby found it difficult in the case of an actor on a set
during the shooting of a moving picture.  It was about the stiffest
chore he had ever undertaken but he was doing it to save his car.
To a sordidly commercial glance the jalopy would not have seemed
worth saving but, because of Hollywood's great distances, it was an
indispensable tool of the writer's trade.

'The finance company--' explained Pat, but Gyp McCarthy
interrupted.

'I got some business in this next take.  You want me to blow up on
it?'

'I only need twenty,' persisted Pat.  'I can't get jobs if I have
to hang around my bedroom.'

'You'd save money that way--you don't get jobs anymore.'

This was cruelly correct.  But working or not Pat liked to pass his
days in or near a studio.  He had reached a dolorous and precarious
forty-nine with nothing else to do.

'I got a rewrite job promised for next week,' he lied.

'Oh, nuts to you,' said Gyp.  'You better get off the set before
Hilliard sees you.'

Pat glanced nervously toward the group by the camera--then he
played his trump card.

'Once--' he said,'--once I paid for you to have a baby.'

'Sure you did!' said Gyp wrathfully.  'That was sixteen years ago.
And where is it now--it's in jail for running over an old lady
without a licence.'

'Well I paid for it,' said Pat.  'Two hundred smackers.'

'That's nothing to what it cost me.  Would I be stunting at my age
if I had dough to lend?  Would I be working at all?'

From somewhere in the darkness an assistant director issued an
order:

'Ready to go!'

Pat spoke quickly.

'All right,' he said.  'Five bucks.'

'No.'

'All right then,' Pat's red-rimmed eyes tightened.  'I'm going to
stand over there and put the hex on you while you say your line.'

'Oh, for God's sake!' said Gyp uneasily.  'Listen, I'll give you
five.  It's in my coat over there.  Here, I'll get it.'

He dashed from the set and Pat heaved a sigh of relief.  Maybe
Louie, the studio bookie, would let him have ten more.

Again the assistant director's voice:

'Quiet! . . .  We'll take it now! . . .  Lights!'

The glare stabbed into Pat's eyes, blinding him.  He took a step
the wrong way--then back.  Six other people were in the take--a
gangster's hide-out--and it seemed that each was in his way.

'All right . . .  Roll 'em . . .  We're turning!'

In his panic Pat had stepped behind a flat which would effectually
conceal him.  While the actors played their scene he stood there
trembling a little, his back hunched--quite unaware that it was a
'trolley shot', that the camera, moving forward on its track, was
almost upon him.

'You by the window--hey you, GYP! hands up.'

Like a man in a dream Pat raised his hands--only then did he
realize that he was looking directly into a great black lens--in an
instant it also included the English leading woman, who ran past
him and jumped out the window.  After an interminable second Pat
heard the order 'Cut.'

Then he rushed blindly through a property door, around a corner,
tripping over a cable, recovering himself and tearing for the
entrance.  He heard footsteps running behind him and increased his
gait, but in the doorway itself he was overtaken and turned
defensively.

It was the English actress.

'Hurry up!' she cried.  'That finishes my work.  I'm flying home to
England.'

As she scrambled into her waiting limousine she threw back a last
irrelevant remark.  'I'm catching a New York plane in an hour.'

Who cares!  Pat thought bitterly, as he scurried away.

He was unaware that her repatriation was to change the course of
his life.


II


And he did not have the five--he feared that this particular five
was forever out of range.  Other means must be found to keep the
wolf from the two doors of his coupe.  Pat left the lot with
despair in his heart, stopping only momentarily to get gas for the
car and gin for himself, possibly the last of many drinks they had
had together.

Next morning he awoke with an aggravated problem.  For once he did
not want to go to the studio.  It was not merely Gyp McCarthy he
feared--it was the whole corporate might of a moving picture
company, nay of an industry.  Actually to have interfered with the
shooting of a movie was somehow a major delinquency, compared to
which expensive fumblings on the part of producers or writers went
comparatively unpunished.

On the other hand zero hour for the car was the day after tomorrow
and Louie, the studio bookie, seemed positively the last resource
and a poor one at that.

Nerving himself with an unpalatable snack from the bottom of the
bottle, he went to the studio at ten with his coat collar turned up
and his hat pulled low over his ears.  He knew a sort of
underground railway through the make-up department and the
commissary kitchen which might get him to Louie's suite unobserved.

Two studio policemen seized him as he rounded the corner by the
barber shop.

'Hey, I got a pass!' he protested, 'Good for a week--signed by Jack
Berners.'

'Mr Berners specially wants to see you.'

Here it was then--he would be barred from the lot.

'We could sue you!' cried Jack Berners.  'But we couldn't recover.'

'What's one take?' demanded Pat.  'You can use another.'

'No we can't--the camera jammed.  And this morning Lily Keatts took
a plane to England.  She thought she was through.'

'Cut the scene,' suggested Pat--and then on inspiration, 'I bet I
could fix it for you.'

'You fixed it, all right!' Berners assured him.  'If there was any
way to fix it back I wouldn't have sent for you.'

He paused, looked speculatively at Pat.  His buzzer sounded and a
secretary's voice said 'Mr Hilliard'.

'Send him in.'

George Hilliard was a huge man and the glance he bent upon Pat was
not kindly.  But there was some other element besides anger in it
and Pat squirmed doubtfully as the two men regarded him with almost
impersonal curiosity--as if he were a candidate for a cannibal's
frying pan.

'Well, goodbye,' he suggested uneasily.

'What do you think, George?' demanded Berners.

'Well--' said Hilliard, hesitantly, 'we could black out a couple of
teeth.'

Pat rose hurriedly and took a step toward the door, but Hilliard
seized him and faced him around.

'Let's hear you talk,' he said.

'You can't beat me up,' Pat clamoured.  'You knock my teeth out and
I'll sue you.'

There was a pause.

'What do you think?' demanded Berners.

'He can't talk,' said Hilliard.

'You damn right I can talk!' said Pat.

'We can dub three or four lines,' continued Hilliard, 'and
nobody'll know the difference.  Half the guys you get to play rats
can't talk.  The point is this one's got the physique and the
camera will pull it out of his face too.'

Berners nodded.

'All right, Pat--you're an actor.  You've got to play the part this
McCarthy had.  Only a couple of scenes but they're important.
You'll have papers to sign with the Guild and Central Casting and
you can report for work this afternoon.'

'What is this!' Pat demanded.  'I'm no ham--'  Remembering that
Hilliard had once been a leading man he recoiled from this
attitude:  'I'm a writer.'

'The character you play is called "The Rat",' continued Berners.
He explained why it was necessary for Pat to continue his impromptu
appearance of yesterday.  The scenes which included Miss Keatts had
been shot first, so that she could fulfil an English engagement.
But in the filling out of the skeleton it was necessary to show how
the gangsters reached their hide-out, and what they did after Miss
Keatts dove from the window.  Having irrevocably appeared in the
shot with Miss Keatts, Pat must appear in half a dozen other shots,
to be taken in the next few days.

'What kind of jack is it?' Pat inquired.

'We were paying McCarthy fifty a day--wait a minute Pat--but I
thought I'd pay you your last writing price, two-fifty for the
week.'

'How about my reputation?' objected Pat.

'I won't answer that one,' said Berners.  'But if Benchley can act
and Don Stewart and Lewis and Wilder and Woollcott, I guess it
won't ruin you.'

Pat drew a long breath.

'Can you let me have fifty on account,' he asked, 'because really I
earned that yester--'

'If you got what you earned yesterday you'd be in a hospital.  And
you're not going on any bat.  Here's ten dollars and that's all you
see for a week.'

'How about my car--'

'To hell with your car.'


III


'The Rat' was the die-hard of the gang who were engaged in sabotage
for an unidentified government of N-zis.  His speeches were
simplicity itself--Pat had written their like many times.  'Don't
finish him till the Brain comes'; 'Let's get out of here'; 'Fella,
you're going out feet first.'  Pat found it pleasant--mostly
waiting around as in all picture work--and he hoped it might lead
to other openings in this line.  He was sorry that the job was so
short.

His last scene was on location.  He knew 'The Rat' was to touch off
an explosion in which he himself was killed but Pat had watched
such scenes and was certain he would be in no slightest danger.
Out on the back lot he was mildly curious when they measured him
around the waist and chest.

'Making a dummy?' he asked.

'Not exactly,' the prop man said.  'This thing is all made but it
was for Gyp McCarthy and I want to see if it'll fit you.'

'Does it?'

'Just exactly.'

'What is it?'

'Well--it's a sort of protector.'

A slight draught of uneasiness blew in Pat's mind.

'Protector for what?  Against the explosion?'

'Heck no!  The explosion is phony--just a process shot.  This is
something else.'

'What is it?' persisted Pat.  'If I got to be protected against
something I got a right to know what it is.'

Near the false front of a warehouse a battery of cameras were
getting into position.  George Hilliard came suddenly out of a
group and toward Pat and putting his arm on his shoulder steered
him toward the actors' dressing tent.  Once inside he handed Pat a
flask.

'Have a drink, old man.'

Pat took a long pull.

'There's a bit of business, Pat,' Hilliard said, 'needs some new
costuming.  I'll explain it while they dress you.'

Pat was divested of coat and vest, his trousers were loosened and
in an instant a hinged iron doublet was fastened about his middle,
extending from his armpits to his crotch very much like a plaster
cast.

'This is the very finest strongest iron, Pat,' Hilliard assured
him.  'The very best in tensile strength and resistance.  It was
built in Pittsburgh.'

Pat suddenly resisted the attempts of two dressers to pull his
trousers up over the thing and to slip on his coat and vest.

'What's it for?' he demanded, arms flailing.  'I want to know.
You're not going to shoot at me if that's what--'

'No shooting.'

'Then what IS it?  I'm no stunt man--'

'You signed a contract just like McCarthy's to do anything within
reason--and our lawyers have certified this.'

'What IS it?'  Pat's mouth was dry.

'It's an automobile.'

'You're going to hit me with an automobile.'

'Give me a chance to tell you,' begged Hilliard.  'Nobody's going
to hit you.  The auto's going to pass over you, that's all.  This
case is so strong--'

'Oh no!' said Pat.  'Oh no!'  He tore at the iron corselet.  'Not
on your--'

George Hilliard pinioned his arms firmly.

'Pat, you almost wrecked this picture once--you're not going to do
it again.  Be a man.'

'That's what I'm going to be.  You're not going to squash me out
flat like that extra last month.'

He broke off.  Behind Hilliard he saw a face he knew--a hateful and
dreaded face--that of the collector for the North Hollywood Finance
and Loan Company.  Over in the parking lot stood his coupe,
faithful pal and servant since 1934, companion of his misfortunes,
his only certain home.

'Either you fill your contract,' said George Hilliard, '--or you're
out of pictures for keeps.'

The man from the finance company had taken a step forward.  Pat
turned to Hilliard.

'Will you loan me--' he faltered, '--will you advance me twenty-
five dollars?'

'Sure,' said Hilliard.

Pat spoke fiercely to the credit man:

'You hear that?  You'll get your money, but if this thing breaks,
my death'll be on your head.'

The next few minutes passed in a dream.  He heard Hilliard's last
instructions as they walked from the tent.  Pat was to be lying in
a shallow ditch to touch off the dynamite--and then the hero would
drive the car slowly across his middle.  Pat listened dimly.  A
picture of himself, cracked like an egg by the factory wall, lay a-
thwart his mind.

He picked up the torch and lay down in the ditch.  Afar off he
heard the call 'Quiet', then Hilliard's voice and the noise of the
car warming up.

'Action!' called someone.  There was the sound of the car growing
nearer--louder.  And then Pat Hobby knew no more.


IV


When he awoke it was dark and quiet.  For some moments he failed to
recognize his whereabouts.  Then he saw that stars were out in the
California sky and that he was somewhere alone--no--he was held
tight in someone's arms.  But the arms were of iron and he realized
that he was still in the metallic casing.  And then it all came
back to him--up to the moment when he heard the approach of the
car.

As far as he could determine he was unhurt--but why out here and
alone?

He struggled to get up but found it was impossible and after a
horrified moment he let out a cry for help.  For five minutes he
called out at intervals until finally a voice came from far away;
and assistance arrived in the form of a studio policeman.

'What is it fella?  A drop too much?'

'Hell no,' cried Pat.  'I was in the shooting this afternoon.  It
was a lousy trick to go off and leave me in this ditch.'

'They must have forgot you in the excitement.'

'Forgot me!  _I_ was the excitement.  If you don't believe me then
feel what I got on!'

The cop helped him to his feet.

'They was upset,' he explained.  'A star don't break his leg every
day.'

'What's that?  Did something happen?'

'Well, as I heard, he was supposed to drive the car at a bump and
the car turned over and broke his leg.  They had to stop shooting
and they're all kind of gloomy.'

'And they leave me inside this--this stove.  How do I get it off
tonight?  How'm I going to drive my car?'

But for all his rage Pat felt a certain fierce pride.  He was
Something in this set-up--someone to be reckoned with after years
of neglect.  He had managed to hold up the picture once more.




PAT HOBBY'S PREVIEW

Esquire (October 1940)


I


'I haven't got a job for you,' said Berners.  'We've got more
writers now than we can use.'

'I didn't ask for a job,' said Pat with dignity.  'But I rate some
tickets for the preview tonight--since I got a half credit.'

'Oh yes, I want to talk to you about that,' Berners frowned.  'We
may have to take your name off the screen credits.'

'WHAT?' exclaimed Pat.  'Why, it's already on!  I saw it in the
Reporter.  "By Ward Wainwright and Pat Hobby."'

'But we may have to take it off when we release the picture.
Wainwright's back from the East and raising hell.  He says that you
claimed lines where all you did was change "No" to "No sir" and
"crimson" to "red", and stuff like that.'

'I been in this business twenty years,' said Pat.  'I know my
rights.  That guy laid an egg.  I was called in to revise a
turkey!'

'You were not,' Berners assured him.  'After Wainwright went to New
York I called you in to fix one small character.  If I hadn't gone
fishing you wouldn't have got away with sticking your name on the
script.'  Jack Berners broke off, touched by Pat's dismal, red-
streaked eyes.  'Still, I was glad to see you get a credit after so
long.'

'I'll join the Screen Writers Guild and fight it.'

'You don't stand a chance.  Anyhow, Pat, your name's on it tonight
at least, and it'll remind everybody you're alive.  And I'll dig
you up some tickets--but keep an eye out for Wainwright.  It isn't
good for you to get socked if you're over fifty.'

'I'm in my forties,' said Pat, who was forty-nine.

The Dictograph buzzed.  Berners switched it on.

'It's Mr Wainwright.'

'Tell him to wait.'  He turned to Pat:  'That's Wainwright.  Better
go out the side door.'

'How about the tickets?'

'Drop by this afternoon.'

To a rising young screen poet this might have been a crushing blow
but Pat was made of sterner stuff.  Sterner not upon himself, but
on the harsh fate that had dogged him for nearly a decade.  With
all his experience, and with the help of every poisonous herb that
blossoms between Washington Boulevard and Ventura, between Santa
Monica and Vine--he continued to slip.  Sometimes he grabbed
momentarily at a bush, found a few weeks' surcease upon the island
of a 'patch job', but in general the slide continued at a pace that
would have dizzied a lesser man.

Once safely out of Berners' office, for instance, Pat looked ahead
and not behind.  He visioned a drink with Louie, the studio bookie,
and then a call on some old friends on the lot.  Occasionally, but
less often every year, some of these calls developed into jobs
before you could say 'Santa Anita'.  But after he had had his drink
his eyes fell upon a lost girl.

She was obviously lost.  She stood staring very prettily at the
trucks full of extras that rolled toward the commissary.  And then
gazed about helpless--so helpless that a truck was almost upon her
when Pat reached out and plucked her aside.

'Oh, thanks,' she said, 'thanks, I came with a party for a tour of
the studio and a policeman made me leave my camera in some office.
Then I went to stage five where the guide said, but it was closed.'

She was a 'Cute Little Blonde'.  To Pat's liverish eye, cute little
blondes seemed as much alike as a string of paper dolls.  Of course
they had different names.

'We'll see about it,' said Pat.

'You're very nice.  I'm Eleanor Carter from Boise, Idaho.'

He told her his name and that he was a writer.  She seemed first
disappointed--then delighted.

'A writer? . . .  Oh, of course.  I knew they had to have writers
but I guess I never heard about one before.'

'Writers get as much as three grand a week,' he assured her firmly.
'Writers are some of the biggest shots in Hollywood.'

'You see, I never thought of it that way.'

'Bernud Shaw was out here,' he said, '--and Einstein, but they
couldn't make the grade.'

They walked to the Bulletin Board and Pat found that there was work
scheduled on three stages--and one of the directors was a friend
out of the past.

'What did you write?' Eleanor asked.

A great male Star loomed on the horizon and Eleanor was all eyes
till he had passed.  Anyhow the names of Pat's pictures would have
been unfamiliar to her.

'Those were all silents,' he said.

'Oh.  Well, what did you write last?'

'Well, I worked on a thing at Universal--I don't know what they
called it finally--'  He saw that he was not impressing her at all.
He thought quickly.  What did they know in Boise, Idaho?'  I wrote
Captains Courageous,' he said boldly.  'And Test Pilot and
Wuthering Heights and--and The Awful Truth and Mr Smith Goes to
Washington.'

'Oh!' she exclaimed.  'Those are all my favourite pictures.  And
Test Pilot is my boy friend's favourite picture and Dark Victory is
mine.'

'I thought Dark Victory stank,' he said modestly.  'Highbrow
stuff,' and he added to balance the scales of truth, 'I been here
twenty years.'

They came to a stage and went in.  Pat sent his name to the
director and they were passed.  They watched while Ronald Colman
rehearsed a scene.

'Did you write this?' Eleanor whispered.

'They asked me to,' Pat said, 'but I was busy.'

He felt young again, authoritative and active, with a hand in many
schemes.  Then he remembered something.

'I've got a picture opening tonight.'

'You HAVE?'

He nodded.

'I was going to take Claudette Colbert but she's got a cold.  Would
you like to go?'


II


He was alarmed when she mentioned a family, relieved when she said
it was only a resident aunt.  It would be like old times walking
with a cute little blonde past the staring crowds on the sidewalk.
His car was Class of 1933 but he could say it was borrowed--one of
his Jap servants had smashed his limousine.  Then what? he didn't
quite know, but he could put on a good act for one night.

He bought her lunch in the commissary and was so stirred that he
thought of borrowing somebody's apartment for the day.  There was
the old line about 'getting her a test'.  But Eleanor was thinking
only of getting to a hair-dresser to prepare for tonight, and he
escorted her reluctantly to the gate.  He had another drink with
Louie and went to Jack Berners' office for the tickets.

Berners' secretary had them ready in an envelope.

'We had trouble about these, Mr Hobby.'

'Trouble?  Why?  Can't a man go to his own preview?  Is this
something new?'

'It's not that, Mr Hobby,' she said.  'The picture's been talked
about so much, every seat is gone.'

Unreconciled, he complained, 'And they just didn't think of me.'

'I'm sorry.'  She hesitated.  'These are really Mr Wainwright's
tickets.  He was so angry about something that he said he wouldn't
go--and threw them on my desk.  I shouldn't be telling you this.'

'These are HIS seats?'

'Yes, Mr Hobby.'

Pat sucked his tongue.  This was in the nature of a triumph.
Wainwright had lost his temper, which was the last thing you should
ever do in pictures--you could only pretend to lose it--so perhaps
his applecart wasn't so steady.  Perhaps Pat ought to join the
Screen Writers Guild and present his case--if the Screen Writers
Guild would take him in.

This problem was academic.  He was calling for Eleanor at five
o'clock and taking her 'somewhere for a cocktail'.  He bought a two-
dollar shirt, changing into it in the shop, and a four-dollar
Alpine hat--thus halving his bank account which, since the Bank
Holiday of 1933, he carried cautiously in his pocket.

The modest bungalow in West Hollywood yielded up Eleanor without a
struggle.  On his advice she was not in evening dress but she was
as trim and shining as any cute little blonde out of his past.
Eager too--running over with enthusiasm and gratitude.  He must
think of someone whose apartment he could borrow for tomorrow.

'You'd like a test?' he asked as they entered the Brown Derby bar.

'What girl wouldn't?'

'Some wouldn't--for a million dollars.'  Pat had had setbacks in
his love life.  'Some of them would rather go on pounding the keys
or just hanging around.  You'd be surprised.'

'I'd do almost anything for a test,' Eleanor said.

Looking at her two hours later he wondered honestly to himself if
it couldn't be arranged.  There was Harry Gooddorf--there was Jack
Berners--but his credit was low on all sides.  He could do
SOMETHING for her, he decided.  He would try at least to get an
agent interested--if all went well tomorrow.

'What are you doing tomorrow?' he asked.

'Nothing,' she answered promptly.  'Hadn't we better eat and get to
the preview?'

'Sure, sure.'

He made a further inroad on his bank account to pay for his six
whiskeys--you certainly had the right to celebrate before your own
preview--and took her into the restaurant for dinner.  They ate
little.  Eleanor was too excited--Pat had taken his calories in
another form.

It was a long time since he had seen a picture with his name on it.
Pat Hobby.  As a man of the people he always appeared in the credit
titles as Pat Hobby.  It would be nice to see it again and though
he did not expect his old friends to stand up and sing Happy
Birthday to You, he was sure there would be back-slapping and even
a little turn of attention toward him as the crowd swayed out of
the theatre.  That would be nice.

'I'm frightened,' said Eleanor as they walked through the alley of
packed fans.

'They're looking at you,' he said confidently.  'They look at that
pretty pan and try to think if you're an actress.'

A fan shoved an autograph album and pencil toward Eleanor but Pat
moved her firmly along.  It was late--the equivalent of' 'all
aboard' was being shouted around the entrance.

'Show your tickets, please sir.'

Pat opened the envelope and handed them to the doorman.  Then he
said to Eleanor:

'The seats are reserved--it doesn't matter that we're late.'

She pressed close to him, clinging--it was, as it turned out, the
high point of her debut.  Less than three steps inside the theatre
a hand fell on Pat's shoulder.

'Hey Buddy, these aren't tickets for here.'

Before they knew it they were back outside the door, glared at with
suspicious eyes.

'I'm Pat Hobby.  I wrote this picture.'

For an instant credulity wandered to his side.  Then the hard-
boiled doorman sniffed at Pat and stepped in close.

'Buddy you're drunk.  These are tickets to another show.'

Eleanor looked and felt uneasy but Pat was cool.

'Go inside and ask Jack Berners,' Pat said.  'He'll tell you.'

'Now listen,' said the husky guard, 'these are tickets for a
burlesque down in L.A.'  He was steadily edging Pat to the side.
'You go to your show, you and your girl friend.  And be happy.'

'You don't understand.  I wrote this picture.'

'Sure.  In a pipe dream.'

'Look at the programme.  My name's on it.  I'm Pat Hobby.'

'Can you prove it?  Let's see your auto licence.'

As Pat handed it over he whispered to Eleanor, 'Don't worry!'

'This doesn't say Pat Hobby,' announced the doorman.  'This says
the car's owned by the North Hollywood Finance and Loan Company.
Is that you?'

For once in his life Pat could think of nothing to say--he cast one
quick glance at Eleanor.  Nothing in her face indicated that he was
anything but what he thought he was--all alone.


III


Though the preview crowd had begun to drift away, with that vague
American wonder as to why they had come at all, one little cluster
found something arresting and poignant in the faces of Pat and
Eleanor.  They were obviously gate-crashers, outsiders like
themselves, but the crowd resented the temerity of their effort to
get in--a temerity which the crowd did not share.  Little jeering
jests were audible.  Then, with Eleanor already edging away from
the distasteful scene, there was a flurry by the door.  A well-
dressed six-footer strode out of the theatre and stood gazing till
he saw Pat.

'There you are!' he shouted.

Pat recognized Ward Wainwright.

'Go in and look at it!' Wainwright roared.  'Look at it.  Here's
some ticket stubs!  I think the prop boy directed it!  Go and
look!'  To the doorman he said:  'It's all right!  He wrote it.  I
wouldn't have my name on an inch of it.'

Trembling with frustration, Wainwright threw up his hands and
strode off into the curious crowd.

Eleanor was terrified.  But the same spirit that had inspired 'I'd
do anything to get in the movies', kept her standing there--though
she felt invisible fingers reaching forth to drag her back to
Boise.  She had been intending to run--hard and fast.  The hard-
boiled doorman and the tall stranger had crystallized her feelings
that Pat was 'rather simple'.  She would never let those red-rimmed
eyes come close to her--at least for any more than a doorstep kiss.
She was saving herself for somebody--and it wasn't Pat.  Yet she
felt that the lingering crowd was a tribute to her--such as she had
never exacted before.  Several times she threw a glance at the
crowd--a glance that now changed from wavering fear into a sort of
queenliness.

She felt exactly like a star.

Pat, too, was all confidence.  This was HIS preview; all had been
delivered into his hands: his name would stand alone on the screen
when the picture was released.  There had to be somebody's name,
didn't there?--and Wainwright had withdrawn.

SCREENPLAY BY PAT HOBBY.

He seized Eleanor's elbow in a firm grasp and steered her
triumphantly towards the door:

'Cheer up, baby.  That's the way it is.  You see?'




NO HARM TRYING

Esquire (November 1940)


Pat hobby's apartment lay athwart a delicatessen shop on Wilshire
Boulevard.  And there lay Pat himself, surrounded by his books--the
Motion Picture Almanac of 1928 and Barton's Track Guide, 1939--by
his pictures, authentically signed photographs of Mabel Normand and
Barbara LaMarr (who, being deceased, had no value in the pawn-
shops)--and by his dogs in their cracked leather oxfords, perched
on the arm of a slanting settee.

Pat was at "the end of his resources"--though this term is too
ominous to describe a fairly usual condition in his life.  He was
an old-timer in pictures; he had once known sumptuous living, but
for the past ten years jobs had been hard to hold--harder to hold
than glasses.

"Think of it," he often mourned.  "Only a writer--at forty-nine."

All this afternoon he had turned the pages of The Times and The
Examiner for an idea.  Though he did not intend to compose a motion
picture from this idea, he needed it to get him inside a studio.
If you had nothing to submit it was increasingly difficult to pass
the gate.  But though these two newspapers, together with Life,
were the sources most commonly combed for "originals," they yielded
him nothing this afternoon.  There were wars, a fire in Topanga
Canyon, press releases from the studios, municipal corruptions, and
always the redeeming deeds of "The Trojuns," but Pat found nothing
that competed in human interest with the betting page.

--If I could get out to Santa Anita, he thought--I could maybe get
an idea about the nags.

This cheering idea was interrupted by his landlord, from the
delicatessen store below.

"I told you I wouldn't deliver any more messages," said Nick, "and
STILL I won't.  But Mr. Carl Le Vigne is telephoning in person from
the studio and wants you should go over right away."

The prospect of a job did something to Pat.  It anesthetized the
crumbled, struggling remnants of his manhood, and inoculated him
instead with a bland, easygoing confidence.  The set speeches and
attitudes of success returned to him.  His manner as he winked at a
studio policeman, stopped to chat with Louie, the bookie, and
presented himself to Mr. Le Vigne's secretary, indicated that he
had been engaged with momentous tasks in other parts of the globe.
By saluting Le Vigne with a facetious "Hel-LO Captain!" he behaved
almost as an equal, a trusted lieutenant who had never really been
away.

"Pat, your wife's in the hospital," Le Vigne said.  "It'll probably
be in the papers this afternoon."

Pat started.

"My wife?" he said.  "What wife?"

"Estelle.  She tried to cut her wrists."

"Estelle!" Pat exclaimed.  "You mean ESTELLE?  Say, I was only
married to her three weeks!"

"She was the best girl you ever had," said Le Vigne grimly.

"I haven't even heard of her for ten years."

"You're hearing about her now.  They called all the studios trying
to locate you."

"I had nothing to do with it."

"I know--she's only been here a week.  She had a run of hard luck
wherever it was she lived--New Orleans?  Husband died, child died,
no money . . ."

Pat breathed easier.  They weren't trying to hang anything on him.

"Anyhow she'll live," Le Vigne reassured him superfluously, "--and
she was the best script girl on the lot once.  We'd like to take
care of her.  We thought the way was give you a job.  Not exactly a
job, because I know you're not up to it."  He glanced into Pat's
red-rimmed eyes.  "More of a sinecure."

Pat became uneasy.  He didn't recognize the word, but "sin"
disturbed him and "cure" brought a whole flood of unpleasant
memories.

"You're on the payroll at two-fifty a week for three weeks," said
Le Vigne, "--but one-fifty of that goes to the hospital for your
wife's bill."

"But we're divorced!" Pat protested.  "No Mexican stuff either.
I've been married since, and so has--"

"Take it or leave it.  You can have an office here, and if anything
you can do comes up we'll let you know."

"I never worked for a hundred a week."

"We're not asking you to work.  If you want you can stay home."

Pat reversed his field.

"Oh, I'll work," he said quickly.  "You dig me up a good story and
I'll show you whether I can work or not."

Le Vigne wrote something on a slip of paper.

"All right.  They'll find you an office."

Outside Pat looked at the memorandum.

"Mrs. John Devlin," it read, "Good Samaritan Hospital."

The very words irritated him.

"Good Samaritan!" he exclaimed.  "Good gyp joint!  One hundred and
fifty bucks a week!"



Pat had been given many a charity job but this was the first one
that made him feel ashamed.  He did not mind not EARN-ing his
salary, but not getting it was another matter.  And he wondered if
other people on the lot who were obviously doing nothing, were
being fairly paid for it.  There were, for example, a number of
beautiful young ladies who walked aloof as stars, and whom Pat took
for stock girls, until Eric, the callboy, told him they were
imports from Vienna and Budapest, not yet cast for pictures.  Did
half their pay checks go to keep husbands they had only had for
three weeks!

The loveliest of these was Lizzette Starheim, a violet-eyed little
blonde with an ill-concealed air of disillusion.  Pat saw her alone
at tea almost every afternoon in the commissary--and made her
acquaintance one day by simply sliding into a chair opposite.

"Hello, Lizzette," he said.  "I'm Pat Hobby, the writer."

"Oh, hel-LO!"

She flashed such a dazzling smile that for a moment he thought she
must have heard of him.

"When they going to cast you?" he demanded.

"I don't know."  Her accent was faint and poignant.

"Don't let them give you the run-around.  Not with a face like
yours."  Her beauty roused a rusty eloquence.  "Sometimes they just
keep you under contract till your teeth fall out, because you look
too much like their big star."

"Oh no," she said distressfully.

"Oh yes!" he assured her.  "I'm telling YOU.  Why don't you go to
another company and get borrowed?  Have you thought of that idea?"

"I think it's wonderful."

He intended to go further into the subject but Miss Starheim looked
at her watch and got up.

"I must go now, Mr.--"

"Hobby.  Pat Hobby."

Pat joined Dutch Waggoner, the director, who was shooting dice with
a waitress at another table.

"Between pictures, Dutch?"

"Between pictures hell!" said Dutch.  "I haven't done a picture for
six months and my contract's got six months to run.  I'm trying to
break it.  Who was the little blonde?"

Afterwards, back in his office, Pat discussed these encounters with
Eric the callboy.

"All signed up and no place to go," said Eric.  "Look at this Jeff
Manfred, now--an associate producer!  Sits in his office and sends
notes to the big shots--and I carry back word they're in Palm
Springs.  It breaks my heart.  Yesterday he put his head on his
desk and boo-hoo'd."

"What's the answer?" asked Pat.

"Changa management," suggested Eric, darkly.  "Shake-up coming."

"Who's going to the top?" Pat asked, with scarcely concealed
excitement.

"Nobody knows," said Eric.  "But wouldn't I like to land uphill!
Boy!  I want a writer's job.  I got three ideas so new they're wet
behind the ears."

"It's no life at all," Pat assured him with conviction.  "I'd trade
with you right now."

In the hall next day he intercepted Jeff Manfred who walked with
the unconvincing hurry of one without a destination.

"What's the rush, Jeff?" Pat demanded, falling into step.

"Reading some scripts," Jeff panted without conviction.

Pat drew him unwillingly into his office.

"Jeff, have you heard about the shake-up?"

"Listen now, Pat--"  Jeff looked nervously at the walls.  "What
shake-up?" he demanded.

"I heard that this Harmon Shaver is going to be the new boss,"
ventured Pat, "Wall Street control."

"Harmon Shaver!" Jeff scoffed.  "He doesn't know anything about
pictures--he's just a money man.  He wanders around like a lost
soul."  Jeff sat back and considered.  "Still--if you're RIGHT,
he'd be a man you could get to."  He turned mournful eyes on Pat.
"I haven't been able to see Le Vigne or Barnes or Bill Behrer for a
month.  Can't get an assignment, can't get an actor, can't get a
story."  He broke off.  "I've thought of drumming up something on
my own.  Got any ideas?"

"Have I?" said Pat.  "I got three ideas so new they're wet behind
the ears."

"Who for?"

"Lizzette Starheim," said Pat, "with Dutch Waggoner directing--
see?"



"I'm with you all a hundred per cent," said Harmon Shaver.  "This
is the most encouraging experience I've had in pictures."  He had a
bright bond-salesman's chuckle.  "By God, it reminds me of a circus
we got up when I was a boy."

They had come to his office inconspicuously like conspirators--Jeff
Manfred, Waggoner, Miss Starheim and Pat Hobby.

"You like the idea, Miss Starheim?" Shaver continued.

"I think it's wonderful."

"And you, Mr. Waggoner?"

"I've heard only the general line," said Waggoner with director's
caution, "but it seems to have the old emotional socko."  He winked
at Pat.  "I didn't know this old tramp had it in him."

Pat glowed with pride.  Jeff Manfred, though he was elated, was
less sanguine.

"It's important nobody talks," he said nervously.  "The Big Boys
would find some way of killing it.  In a week, when we've got the
script done we'll go to them."

"I agree," said Shaver.  "They have run the studio so long that--
well, I don't trust my own secretaries--I sent them to the races
this afternoon."

Back in Pat's office Eric, the callboy, was waiting.  He did not
know that he was the hinge upon which swung a great affair.

"You like the stuff, eh?" he asked eagerly.

"Pretty good," said Pat with calculated indifference.

"You said you'd pay more for the next batch."

"Have a heart!"  Pat was aggrieved.  "How many callboys get seventy-
five a week?"

"How many callboys can write?"

Pat considered.  Out of the two hundred a week Jeff Manfred was
advancing from his own pocket, he had naturally awarded himself a
commission of sixty per cent.

"I'll make it a hundred," he said.  "Now check yourself off the lot
and meet me in front of Benny's bar."

At the hospital, Estelle Hobby Devlin sat up in bed, overwhelmed by
the unexpected visit.

"I'm glad you came, Pat," she said, "you've been very kind.  Did
you get my note?"

"Forget it," Pat said gruffly.  He had never liked this wife.  She
had loved him too much--until she found suddenly that he was a poor
lover.  In her presence he felt inferior.

"I got a guy outside," he said.

"What for?"

"I thought maybe you had nothing to do and you might want to pay me
back for all this jack--"

He waved his hand around the bare hospital room.

"You were a swell script girl once.  Do you think if I got a
typewriter you could put some good stuff into continuity?"

"Why--yes.  I suppose I could."

"It's a secret.  We can't trust anybody at the studio."

"All right," she said.

"I'll send this kid in with the stuff.  I got a conference."

"All right--and--oh Pat--come and see me again."

"Sure, I'll come."

But he knew he wouldn't.  He didn't like sickrooms--he lived in one
himself.  From now on he was done with poverty and failure.  He
admired strength--he was taking Lizzette Starheim to a wrestling
match that night.



In his private musings Harmon Shaver referred to the showdown as
"the surprise party."  He was going to confront Le Vigne with a
fait accompli and he gathered his coterie before phoning Le Vigne
to come over to his office.

"What for?" demanded Le Vigne.  "Couldn't you tell me now--I'm busy
as hell."

This arrogance irritated Shaver--who was here to watch over the
interests of Eastern stockholders.

"I don't ask much," he said sharply, "I let you fellows laugh at me
behind my back and freeze me out of things.  But now I've got
something and I'd like you to come over."

"All right--all right."

Le Vigne's eyebrows lifted as he saw the members of the new
production unit but he said nothing--sprawled into an arm chair
with his eyes on the floor and his fingers over his mouth.

Mr. Shaver came around the desk and poured forth words that had
been fermenting in him for months.  Simmered to its essentials, his
protest was:  "You would not let me play, but I'm going to play
anyhow."  Then he nodded to Jeff Manfred--who opened the script and
read aloud.  This took an hour, and still Le Vigne sat motionless
and silent.

"There you are," said Shaver triumphantly.  "Unless you've got any
objection I think we ought to assign a budget to this proposition
and get going.  I'll answer to my people."

Le Vigne spoke at last.

"You like it, Miss Starheim?"

"I think it's wonderful."

"What language you going to play it in?"

To everyone's surprise Miss Starheim got to her feet.

"I must go now," she said with her faint poignant accent.

"Sit down and answer me," said Le Vigne.  "What language are you
playing it in?"

Miss Starheim looked tearful.

"Wenn I gute teachers hätte konnte ich dann thees rôle gut
spielen," she faltered.

"But you like the script."

She hesitated.

"I think it's wonderful."

Le Vigne turned to the others.

"Miss Starheim has been here eight months," he said.  "She's had
three teachers.  Unless things have changed in the past two weeks
she can say just three sentences.  She can say, 'How do you do';
she can say, 'I think it's wonderful'; and she can say, 'I must go
now.'  Miss Starheim has turned out to be a pinhead--I'm not
insulting her because she doesn't know what it means.  Anyhow--
there's your Star."

He turned to Dutch Waggoner, but Dutch was already on his feet.

"Now Carl--" he said defensively.

"You force me to it," said Le Vigne.  "I've trusted drunks up to a
point, but I'll be goddam if I'll trust a hophead."

He turned to Harmon Shaver.

"Dutch has been good for exactly one week apiece on his last four
pictures.  He's all right now but as soon as the heat goes on he
reaches for the little white powders.  Now Dutch!  Don't say
anything you'll regret.  We're carrying you in HOPES--but you won't
get on a stage till we've had a doctor's certificate for a year."

Again he turned to Harmon.

"There's your director.  Your supervisor, Jeff Manfred, is here for
one reason only--because he's Behrer's wife's cousin.  There's
nothing against him but he belongs to silent days as much as--as
much as--"  His eyes fell upon a quavering broken man, "--as much
as Pat Hobby."

"What do you mean?" demanded Jeff.

"You trusted Hobby, didn't you?  That tells the whole story."  He
turned back to Shaver.  "Jeff's a weeper and a wisher and a
dreamer.  Mr. Shaver, you have bought a lot of condemned building
material."

"Well, I've bought a good story," said Shaver defiantly.

"Yes.  That's right.  We'll make that story."

"Isn't that something?" demanded Shaver.  "With all this secrecy
how was I to know about Mr. Waggoner and Miss Starheim?  But I do
know a good story."

"Yes," said Le Vigne absently.  He got up.  "Yes--it's a good
story. . . .  Come along to my office, Pat."

He was already at the door.  Pat cast an agonized look at Mr.
Shaver as if for support.  Then, weakly, he followed.

"Sit down, Pat."

"That Eric's got talent, hasn't he?" said Le Vigne.  "He'll go
places.  How'd you come to dig him up?"

Pat felt the straps of the electric chair being adjusted.

"Oh--I just dug him up.  He--came in my office."

"We're putting him on salary," said Le Vigne.  "We ought to have
some system to give these kids a chance."

He took a call on his Dictograph, then swung back to Pat.

"But how did you ever get mixed up with this goddam Shaver.  YOU,
Pat--an old-timer like you."

"Well, I thought--"

"Why doesn't he go back East?" continued Le Vigne disgustedly.
"Getting all you poops stirred up!"

Blood flowed back into Pat's veins.  He recognized his signal, his
dog-call.

"Well, I got you a story, didn't I?" he said, with almost a
swagger.  And he added, "How'd you know about it?"

"I went down to see Estelle in the hospital.  She and this kid were
working on it.  I walked right in on them."

"Oh," said Pat.

"I knew the kid by sight.  Now, Pat, tell me this--did Jeff Manfred
think you wrote it--or was he in on the racket?"

"Oh God," Pat mourned.  "What do I have to answer that for?"

Le Vigne leaned forward intensely.

"Pat, you're sitting over a trap door!" he said with savage eyes.
"Do you see how the carpet's cut?  I just have to press this button
and drop you down to hell!  Will you TALK?"

Pat was on his feet, staring wildly at the floor.

"Sure I will!" he cried.  He believed it--he believed such things.

"All right," said Le Vigne relaxing.  "There's whiskey in the
sideboard there.  Talk quick and I'll give you another month at two-
fifty.  I kinda like having you around."




A PATRIOTIC SHORT

Esquire (December 1940)


Pat Hobby, the writer and the man, had his great success in
Hollywood during what Irving Cobb refers to as 'the mosaic swimming-
pool age--just before the era when they had to have a shinbone of
St Sebastian for a clutch lever.'

Mr Cobb no doubt exaggerates, for when Pat had his pool in those
fat days of silent pictures, it was entirely cement, unless you
should count the cracks where the water stubbornly sought its own
level through the mud.

'But it WAS a pool,' he assured himself one afternoon more than a
decade later.  Though he was now more than grateful for this small
chore he had assigned him by producer Berners--one week at two-
fifty--all the insolence of office could not take that memory away.

He had been called in to the studio to work upon an humble short.
It was based on the career of General Fitzhugh Lee who fought for
the Confederacy and later for the U.S.A. against Spain--so it would
offend neither North nor South.  And in the recent conference Pat
had tried to co-operate.

'I was thinking--' he suggested to Jack Berners '--that it might be
a good thing if we could give it a Jewish touch.'

'What do you mean?' demanded Jack Berners quickly.

'Well I thought--the way things are and all, it would be a sort of
good thing to show that there were a number of Jews in it too.'

'In what?'

'In the Civil War.'  Quickly he reviewed his meagre history.  'They
were, weren't they?'

'Naturally,' said Berners, with some impatience, 'I suppose
everybody was except the Quakers.'

'Well, my idea was that we could have this Fitzhugh Lee in love
with a Jewish girl.  He's going to be shot at curfew so she grabs a
church bell--'

Jack Berners leaned forward earnestly.

'Say, Pat, you want this job, don't you?  Well, I told you the
story.  You got the first script.  If you thought up this tripe to
please me you're losing your grip.'

Was that a way to treat a man who had once owned a pool which had
been talked about by--

That was how he happened to be thinking about his long lost
swimming pool as he entered the shorts department.  He was
remembering a certain day over a decade ago in all its details, how
he had arrived at the studio in his car driven by a Filipino in
uniform; the deferential bow of the guard at the gate which had
admitted car and all to the lot, his ascent to that long lost
office which had a room for the secretary and was really a
director's office . . .

His reverie was broken off by the voice of Ben Brown, head of the
shorts department, who walked him into his own chambers.

'Jack Berners just phoned me,' he said.  'We don't want any new
angles, Pat.  We've got a good story.  Fitzhugh Lee was a dashing
cavalry commander.  He was a nephew of Robert E. Lee and we want to
show him at Appomattox, pretty bitter and all that.  And then show
how he became reconciled--we'll have to be careful because Virginia
is swarming with Lees--and how he finally accepts a U.S. commission
from President McKinley--'

Pat's mind darted back again into the past.  The President--that
was the magic word that had gone around that morning many years
ago.  The President of the United States was going to make a visit
to the lot.  Everyone had been agog about it--it seemed to mark a
new era in pictures because a President of the United States had
never visited a studio before.  The executives of the company were
all dressed up--from a window of his long lost Beverly Hills house
Pat had seen Mr Maranda, whose mansion was next door to him, bustle
down his walk in a cutaway coat at nine o'clock, and had known that
something was up.  He thought maybe it was clergy but when he
reached the lot he had found it was the President of the United
States himself who was coming . . .

'Clean up the stuff about Spain,' Ben Brown was saying.  'The guy
that wrote it was a Red and he's got all the Spanish officers with
ants in their pants.  Fix up that.'

In the office assigned him Pat looked at the script of True to Two
Flags.  The first scene showed General Fitzhugh Lee at the head of
his cavalry receiving word that Petersburg had been evacuated.  In
the script Lee took the blow in pantomime, but Pat was getting two-
fifty a week--so, casually and without effort, he wrote in one of
his favourite lines:


Lee (to his officers)

Well, what are you standing here gawking for?  DO something!  6.
Medium Shot Officers pepping up, slapping each other on back, etc.

Dissolve to:


To what?  Pat's mind dissolved once more into the glamorous past.
On that happy day in the twenties his phone had rung at about noon.
It had been Mr Maranda.

'Pat, the President is lunching in the private dining room.  Doug
Fairbanks can't come so there's a place empty and anyhow we think
there ought to be one writer there.'

His memory of the luncheon was palpitant with glamour.  The Great
Man had asked some questions about pictures and had told a joke and
Pat had laughed and laughed with the others--all of them solid men
together--rich, happy and successful.

Afterwards the President was to go on some sets and see some scenes
taken and still later he was going to Mr Maranda's house to meet
some of the women stars at tea.  Pat was not invited to that party
but he went home early anyhow and from his veranda saw the cortège
drive up, with Mr Maranda beside the President in the back seat.
Ah he was proud of pictures then--of his position in them--of the
President of the happy country where he was born . . .

Returning to reality Pat looked down at the script of True to Two
Flags and wrote slowly and thoughtfully:


Insert: A calendar--with the years plainly marked and the sheets
blowing off in a cold wind, to show Fitzhugh Lee growing older and
older.


His labours had made him thirsty--not for water, but he knew better
than to take anything else his first day on the job.  He got up and
went out into the hall and along the corridor to the water-cooler.

As he walked he slipped back into his reverie.

That had been a lovely California afternoon so Mr Maranda had taken
his exalted guest and the coterie of stars into his garden, which
adjoined Pat's garden.  Pat had gone out his back door and followed
a low privet hedge keeping out of sight--and then accidentally come
face to face with the Presidential party.

The President had smiled and nodded.  Mr Maranda smiled and nodded.

'You met Mr Hobby at lunch,' Mr Maranda said to the President.
'He's one of our writers.'

'Oh yes,' said the President, 'you write the pictures.'

'Yes I do,' said Pat.

The President glanced over into Pat's property.

'I suppose--' he said, '--that you get lots of inspiration sitting
by the side of that fine pool.'

'Yes,' said Pat, 'yes, I do,'

. . . Pat filled his cup at the cooler.  Down the hall there was a
group approaching--Jack Berners, Ben Brown and several other
executives and with them a girl to whom they were very attentive
and deferential.  He recognized her face--she was the girl of the
year, the It girl, the Oomph girl, the Glamour Girl, the girl for
whose services every studio was in violent competition.

Pat lingered over his drink.  He had seen many phonies break in and
break out again, but this girl was the real thing, someone to stir
every pulse in the nation.  He felt his own heart beat faster.
Finally, as the procession drew near, he put down the cup, dabbed
at his hair with his hand and took a step out into the corridor.

The girl looked at him--he looked at the girl.  Then she took one
arm of Jack Berners' and one of Ben Brown's and suddenly the party
seemed to walk right through him--so that he had to take a step
back against the wall.

An instant later Jack Berners turned around and said back to him,
'Hello, Pat.'  And then some of the others threw half glances
around but no one else spoke, so interested were they in the girl.

In his office, Pat looked at the scene where President McKinley
offers a United States commission to Fitzhugh Lee.  Suddenly he
gritted his teeth and bore down on his pencil as he wrote:


Lee

Mr President, you can take your commission and go straight to hell.


Then he bent down over his desk, his shoulders shaking as he
thought of that happy day when he had had a swimming pool.




ON THE TRAIL OF PAT HOBBY

Esquire (January 1941)


I


The day was dark from the outset, and a California fog crept
everywhere.  It had followed Pat in his headlong, hatless flight
across the city.  His destination, his refuge, was the studio,
where he was not employed but which had been home to him for twenty
years.

Was it his imagination or did the policeman at the gate give him
and his pass an especially long look?  It might be the lack of a
hat--Hollywood was full of hatless men but Pat felt marked,
especially as there had been no opportunity to part his thin grey
hair.

In the Writers' Building he went into the lavatory.  Then he
remembered: by some inspired ukase from above, all mirrors had been
removed from the Writers' Building a year ago.

Across the hall he saw Bee McIlvaine's door ajar, and discerned her
plump person.

'Bee, can you loan me your compact box?' he asked.

Bee looked at him suspiciously, then frowned and dug it from her
purse.

'You on the lot?' she inquired.

'Will be next week,' he prophesied.  He put the compact on her desk
and bent over it with his comb.  'Why won't they put mirrors back
in the johnnies?  Do they think writers would look at themselves
all day?'

'Remember when they took out the couches?' said Bee.  'In nineteen
thirty-two.  And they put them back in thirty-four.'

'I worked at home,' said Pat feelingly.

Finished with her mirror he wondered if she were good for a loan--
enough to buy a hat and something to eat.  Bee must have seen the
look in his eyes for she forestalled him.

'The Finns got all my money,' she said, 'and I'm worried about my
job.  Either my picture starts tomorrow or it's going to be
shelved.  We haven't even got a title.'

She handed him a mimeographed bulletin from the scenario department
and Pat glanced at the headline.


TO ALL DEPARTMENTS

TITLE WANTED--FIFTY DOLLARS REWARD
SUMMARY FOLLOWS


'I could use fifty,' Pat said.  'What's it about?'

'It's written there.  It's about a lot of stuff that goes on in
tourist cabins.'

Pat started and looked at her wild-eyed.  He had thought to be safe
here behind the guarded gates but news travelled fast.  This was a
friendly or perhaps not so friendly warning.  He must move on.  He
was a hunted man now, with nowhere to lay his hatless head.

'I don't know anything about that,' he mumbled and walked hastily
from the room.


II


Just inside the door of the commissary Pat looked around.  There
was no guardian except the girl at the cigarette stand but
obtaining another person's hat was subject to one complication: it
was hard to judge the size by a cursory glance, while the sight of
a man trying on several hats in a check room was unavoidably
suspicious.

Personal taste also obtruded itself.  Pat was beguiled by a green
fedora with a sprightly feather but it was too readily identifiable.
This was also true of a fine white Stetson for the open spaces.
Finally he decided on a sturdy grey Homburg which looked as if it
would give him good service.  With trembling hands he put it on.
It fitted.  He walked out--in painful, interminable slow motion.

His confidence was partly restored in the next hour by the fact
that no one he encountered made references to tourists' cabins.  It
had been a lean three months for Pat.  He had regarded his job as
night clerk for the Selecto Tourists Cabins as a mere fill-in,
never to be mentioned to his friends.  But when the police squad
came this morning they held up the raid long enough to assure Pat,
or Don Smith as he called himself, that he would be wanted as a
witness.  The story of his escape lies in the realm of melodrama,
how he went out a side door, bought a half pint of what he so
desperately needed at the corner drug-store, hitchhiked his way
across the great city, going limp at the sight of traffic cops and
only breathing free when he saw the studio's high-flown sign.

After a call on Louie, the studio bookie, whose great patron he
once had been, he dropped in on Jack Berners.  He had no idea to
submit, but he caught Jack in a hurried moment flying off to a
producers' conference and was unexpectedly invited to step in and
wait for his return.

The office was rich and comfortable.  There were no letters worth
reading on the desk, but there were a decanter and glasses in a
cupboard and presently he lay down on a big soft couch and fell
asleep.

He was awakened by Berners' return, in high indignation.

'Of all the damn nonsense!  We get a hurry call--heads of all
departments.  One man is late and we wait for him.  He comes in and
gets a bawling out for wasting thousands of dollars worth of time.
Then what do you suppose: Mr Marcus has lost his favourite hat!'

Pat failed to associate the fact with himself.

'All the department heads stop production!' continued Berners.
'Two thousand people look for a grey Homburg hat!'  He sank
despairingly into a chair, 'I can't talk to you today, Pat.  By
four o'clock, I've got to get a title to a picture about a tourist
camp.  Got an idea?'

'No,' said Pat.  'No.'

'Well, go up to Bee McIlvaine's office and help her figure
something out.  There's fifty dollars in it.'

In a daze Pat wandered to the door.

'Hey,' said Berners, 'don't forget your hat.'


III


Feeling the effects of his day outside the law, and of a tumbler
full of Berners' brandy, Pat sat in Bee McIlvaine's office.

'We've got to get a title,' said Bee gloomily.

She handed Pat the mimeograph offering fifty dollars reward and put
a pencil in his hand.  Pat stared at the paper unseeingly.

'How about it?' she asked.  'Who's got a title?'

There was a long silence.

'Test Pilot's been used, hasn't it?' he said with a vague tone.

'Wake up!  This isn't about aviation.'

'Well, I was just thinking it was a good title.'

'So's The Birth of a Nation.'

'But not for this picture,' Pat muttered.  'Birth of a Nation
wouldn't suit this picture.'

'But not for this picture,' Pat muttered.  'Birth of a Nation
wouldn't suit this picture.'

'Are you ribbing me?' demanded Bee.  'Or are you losing your mind?
This is serious.'

'Sure--I know.'  Feebly he scrawled words at the bottom of the
page.  'I've had a couple of drinks that's all.  My head'll clear
up in a minute.  I'm trying to think what have been the most
successful titles.  The trouble is they've all been used, like It
Happened One Night.'

Bee looked at him uneasily.  He was having trouble keeping his eyes
open and she did not want him to pass out in her office.  After a
minute she called Jack Berners.

'Could you possibly come up?  I've got some title ideas.'

Jack arrived with a sheaf of suggestions sent in from here and
there in the studio, but digging through them yielded no ore.

'How about it, Pat?  Got anything?'

Pat braced himself to an effort.

'I like It Happened One Morning,' he said--then looked desperately
at his scrawl on the mimeograph paper, 'or else--Grand Motel.'

Berners smiled.

'Grand Motel,' he repeated.  'By God!  I think you've got
something.  Grand Motel.'

'I said Grand Hotel,' said Pat.

'No, you didn't.  You said Grand Motel--and for my money it wins
the fifty.'

'I've got to go lie down,' announced Pat.  'I feel sick.'

'There's an empty office across the way.  That's a funny idea Pat,
Grand Motel--or else Motel Clerk.  How do you like that?'

As the fugitive quickened his step out the door Bee pressed the hat
into his hands.

'Good work, old timer,' she said.

Pat seized Mr Marcus' hat, and stood holding it there like a bowl
of soup.

'Feel--better--now,' he mumbled after a moment.  'Be back for the
money.'

And carrying his burden he shambled toward the lavatory.





FUN IN AN ARTIST'S STUDIO

Esquire (February 1941)


I


This was back in 1938 when few people except the Germans knew that
they had already won their war in Europe.  People still cared about
art and tried to make it out of everything from old clothes to
orange peel and that was how the Princess Dignanni found Pat.  She
wanted to make art out of him.

'No, not you, Mr DeTinc.' she said, 'I can't paint you.  You are a
very standardized product, Mr DeTinc.'

Mr DeTinc, who was a power in pictures and had even been
photographed with Mr Duchman, the Secret Sin specialist, stepped
smoothly out of the way.  He was not offended--in his whole life Mr
DeTinc had never been offended--but especially not now, for the
Princess did not want to paint Clark Gable or Spencer Rooney or
Vivien Leigh either.

She saw Pat in the commissary and found he was a writer, and asked
that he be invited to Mr DeTinc's party.  The Princess was a pretty
woman born in Boston, Massachusetts and Pat was forty-nine with red-
rimmed eyes and a soft purr of whiskey on his breath.

'You write scenarios, Mr Hobby?'

'I help,' said Pat.  'Takes more than one person to prepare a
script.'

He was flattered by this attention and not a little suspicious.  It
was only because his supervisor was a nervous wreck that he
happened to have a job at all.  His supervisor had forgotten a week
ago that he had hired Pat, and when Pat was spotted in the
commissary and told he was wanted at Mr DeTinc's house, the writer
had passed a mauvais quart d'heure.  It did not even look like the
kind of party that Pat had known in his prosperous days.  There was
not so much as a drunk passed out in the downstairs toilet.

'I imagine scenario writing is very well-paid,' said the Princess.

Pat glanced around to see who was within hearing.  Mr DeTinc had
withdrawn his huge bulk somewhat, but one of his apparently
independent eyes seemed fixed glittering on Pat.

'Very well paid,' said Pat--and he added in a lower voice, '--if
you can get it.'

The Princess seemed to understand and lowered her voice too.

'You mean writers have trouble getting work?'

He nodded.

'Too many of 'em get in these unions.'  He raised his voice a
little for Mr DeTinc's benefit.  'They're all Reds, most of these
writers.'

The Princess nodded.

'Will you turn your face a little to the light?' she said politely.
'There, that's fine.  You won't mind coming to my studio tomorrow,
will you?  Just to pose for me an hour?'

He scrutinized her again.

'Naked?' he asked cautiously.

'Oh, no,' she averred.  'Just the head.'

Mr DeTinc moved nearer and nodded.

'You ought to go.  Princess Dignanni is going to paint some of the
biggest stars here.  Going to paint Jack Benny and Baby Sandy and
Hedy Lamarr--isn't that a fact, Princess?'

The artist didn't answer.  She was a pretty good portrait painter
and she knew just how good she was and just how much of it was her
title.  She was hesitating between her several manners--Picasso's
rose period with a flash of Boldini, or straight Reginald Marsh.
But she knew what she was going to call it.  She was going to call
it Hollywood and Vine.


II


In spite of the reassurance that he would be clothed Pat approached
the rendezvous with uneasiness.  In his young and impressionable
years he had looked through a peep-hole into a machine where two
dozen postcards slapped before his eyes in sequence.  The story
unfolded was Fun in an Artist's Studio.  Even now with the strip
tease a legalized municipal project, he was a little shocked at the
remembrance, and when he presented himself next day at the
Princess's bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel it would not have
surprised him if she had met him in a turkish towel.  He was
disappointed.  She wore a smock and her black hair was brushed
straight back like a boy's.

Pat had stopped off for a couple of drinks on the way, but his
first words:  'How'ya Duchess?' failed to set a jovial note for the
occasion.

'Well, Mr Hobby,' she said coolly, 'it's nice of you to spare me an
afternoon.'

'We don't work too hard in Hollywood,' he assured her.  'Everything
is "Mañana"--in Spanish that means tomorrow.'

She led him forthwith into a rear apartment where an easel stood on
a square of canvas by the window.  There was a couch and they sat
down.

'I want to get used to you for a minute,' she said.  'Did you ever
pose before?'

'Do I look that way?'  He winked, and when she smiled he felt
better and asked:  'You haven't got a drink around, have you?'

The Princess hesitated.  She had wanted him to look as if he NEEDED
one.  Compromising, she went to the ice box and fixed him a small
highball.  She returned to find that he had taken off his coat and
tie and lay informally upon the couch.

'That IS better,' the Princess said.  'That shirt you're wearing.
I think they make them for Hollywood--like the special prints they
make for Ceylon and Guatemala.  Now drink this and we'll get to
work.'

'Why don't you have a drink too and make it friendly?' Pat
suggested.

'I had one in the pantry,' she lied.

'Married woman?' he asked.

'I have been married.  Now would you mind sitting on this stool?'

Reluctantly Pat got up, took down the highball, somewhat thwarted
by the thin taste, and moved to the stool.  'Now sit very still,'
she said.

He sat silent as she worked.  It was three o'clock.  They were
running the third race at Santa Anita and he had ten bucks on the
nose.  That made sixty he owed Louie, the studio bookie, and Louie
stood determinedly beside him at the pay window every Thursday.
This dame had good legs under the easel--her red lips pleased him
and the way her bare arms moved as she worked.  Once upon a time he
wouldn't have looked at a woman over twenty-five, unless it was a
secretary right in the office with him.  But the kids you saw
around now were snooty--always talking about calling the police.

'Please sit still, Mr Hobby.'

'What say we knock off,' he suggested.  'This work makes you
thirsty.'

The Princess had been painting half an hour.  Now she stopped and
stared at him a moment.

'Mr Hobby, you were loaned me by Mr DeTinc.  Why don't you act just
as if you were working over at the studio?  I'll be through in
another half-hour.'

'What do I get out of it?' he demanded, 'I'm no poser--I'm a
writer.'

'Your studio salary has not stopped,' she said, resuming her work.
'What does it matter if Mr DeTinc wants you to do this?'

'It's different.  You're a dame.  I've got my self-respect to think
of.'

'What do you expect me to do--flirt with you?'

'No--that's old stuff.  But I thought we could sit around and have
a drink.'

'Perhaps later,' she said, and then, 'Is this harder work than the
studio?  Am I so difficult to look at?'

'I don't mind looking at you but why couldn't we sit on the sofa?'

'You don't sit on the sofa at the studio.'

'Sure you do.  Listen, if you tried all the doors in the Writers'
Building you'd find a lot of them locked and don't you forget it.'

She stepped back and squinted at him.

'Locked?  To be undisturbed?'  She put down her brush.  'I'll get
you a drink.'

When she returned she stopped for a moment in the doorway--Pat had
removed his shirt and stood rather sheepishly in the middle of the
floor holding it toward her.

'Here's that shirt,' he said.  'You can have it.  I know where I
can get a lot more.'

For a moment longer she regarded him; then she took the shirt and
put it on the sofa.

'Sit down and let me finish,' she said.  As he hesitated she added,
'Then we'll have a drink together.'

'When'll that be?'

'Fifteen minutes.'

She worked quickly--several times she was content with the lower
face--several times she deliberated and started over.  Something
that she had seen in the commissary was missing.

'Been an artist a long time?' Pat asked.

'Many years.'

'Been around artists' studios a lot?'

'Quite a lot--I've had my own studios.'

'I guess a lot goes on around those studios.  Did you ever--'

He hesitated.

'Ever what?' she queried.

'Did you ever paint a naked man?'

'Don't talk for one minute, please.'  She paused with brush
uplifted, seemed to listen, then made a swift stroke and looked
doubtfully at the result.

'Do you know you're difficult to paint?' she said, laying down the
brush.

'I don't like this posing around,' he admitted.  'Let's call it a
day.'  He stood up.  'Why don't you--why don't you slip into
something so you'll be comfortable?'

The Princess smiled.  She would tell her friends this story--it
would sort of go with the picture, if the picture was any good,
which she now doubted.

'You ought to revise your methods,' she said.  'Do you have much
success with this approach?'

Pat lit a cigarette and sat down.

'If you were eighteen, see, I'd give you that line about being nuts
about you.'

'But why any line at all?'

'Oh, come off it!' he advised her.  'You wanted to paint me, didn't
you?'

'Yes.'

'Well, when a dame wants to paint a guy--'  Pat reached down and
undid his shoe strings, kicked his shoes onto the floor, put his
stockinged feet on the couch.  '--when a dame wants to see a guy
about something or a guy wants to see a dame, there's a payoff,
see.'

The Princess sighed.  'Well I seem to be trapped,' she said.  'But
it makes it rather difficult when a dame just wants to paint a
guy.'

'When a dame wants to paint a guy--'  Pat half closed his eyes,
nodded and flapped his hands expressively.  As his thumbs went
suddenly toward his suspenders, she spoke in a louder voice.

'Officer!'

There was a sound behind Pat.  He turned to see a young man in
khaki with shining black gloves, standing in the door.

'Officer, this man is an employee of Mr DeTinc's.  Mr DeTinc lent
him to me for the afternoon.'

The policeman looked at the staring image of guilt upon the couch.

'Get fresh?' he inquired.

'I don't want to prefer charges--I called the desk to be on the
safe side.  He was to pose for me in the nude and now he refuses.'
She walked casually to her easel.'  Mr Hobby, why don't you stop
this mock-modesty--you'll find a turkish towel in the bathroom.'

Pat reached stupidly for his shoes.  Somehow it flashed into his
mind that they were running the eighth race at Santa Anita--

'Shake it up, you,' said the cop.  'You heard what the lady said.'

Pat stood up vaguely and fixed a long poignant look on the
Princess.

'You told me--' he said hoarsely, 'you wanted to paint--'

'You told me I meant something else.  Hurry please.  And officer,
there's a drink in the pantry.'

. . . A few minutes later as Pat sat shivering in the centre of the
room his memory went back to those peep-shows of his youth--though
at the moment he could see little resemblance.  He was grateful at
least for the turkish towel, even now failing to realize that the
Princess was not interested in his shattered frame but in his face.

It wore the exact expression that had wooed her in the commissary,
the expression of Hollywood and Vine, the other self of Mr DeTinc--
and she worked fast while there was still light enough to paint by.





TWO OLD-TIMERS

Esquire (March 1941)


Phil Macedon, once the Star of Stars, and Pat Hobby, script writer,
had collided out on Sunset near the Beverly Hills Hotel.  It was
five in the morning and there was liquor in the air as they argued
and Sergeant Gaspar took them around to the station house.  Pat
Hobby, a man of forty-nine, showed fight, apparently because Phil
Macedon failed to acknowledge that they were old acquaintances.

He accidentally bumped Sergeant Gaspar who was so provoked that he
put him in a little barred room while they waited for the Captain
to arrive.

Chronologically Phil Macedon belonged between Eugene O'Brien and
Robert Taylor.  He was still a handsome man in his early fifties
and he had saved enough from his great days for a hacienda in the
San Fernando Valley; there he rested as full of honours, as
rolicksome and with the same purposes in life as Man o' War.

With Pat Hobby life had dealt otherwise.  After twenty-one years in
the industry, script and publicity, the accident found him driving
a 1933 car which had lately become the property of the North
Hollywood Finance and Loan Co.  And once, back in 1928, he had
reached a point of getting bids for a private swimming pool.

He glowered from his confinement, still resenting Macedon's failure
to acknowledge that they had ever met before.

'I suppose you don't remember Coleman,' he said sarcastically.  'Or
Connie Talmadge or Bill Corker or Allan Dwan.'

Macedon lit a cigarette with the sort of timing in which the silent
screen has never been surpassed, and offered one to Sergeant
Gaspar.

'Couldn't I come in tomorrow?' he asked.  'I have a horse to
exercise--'

'I'm sorry, Mr Macedon,' said the cop--sincerely for the actor was
an old favourite of his.  'The Captain is due here any minute.
After that we won't be holding YOU.'

'It's just a formality,' said Pat, from his cell.

'Yeah, it's just a--'  Sergeant Gaspar glared at Pat.  'It may not
be any formality for YOU.  Did you ever hear of the sobriety test?'

Macedon flicked his cigarette out the door and lit another.

'Suppose I come back in a couple of hours,' he suggested.

'No,' regretted Sergeant Gaspar.  'And since I have to detain you,
Mr Macedon, I want to take the opportunity to tell you what you
meant to me once.  It was that picture you made, The Final Push, it
meant a lot to every man who was in the war.'

'Oh, yes,' said Macedon, smiling.

'I used to try to tell my wife about the war--how it was, with the
shells and the machine guns--I was in there seven months with the
26th New England--but she never understood.  She'd point her finger
at me and say "Boom!  you're dead," and so I'd laugh and stop
trying to make her understand.'

'Hey, can I get out of here?' demanded Pat.

'You shut up!' said Gaspar fiercely.  'You probably wasn't in the
war.'

'I was in the Motion Picture Home Guard,' said Pat.  'I had bad
eyes.'

'Listen to him,' said Gaspar disgustedly.  'That's what all them
slackers say.  Well, the war was something.  And after my wife saw
that picture of yours I never had to explain to her.  She knew.
She always spoke different about it after that--never just pointed
her finger at me and said "Boom!"  I'll never forget the part where
you was in that shell hole.  That was so real it made my hands
sweat.'

'Thanks,' said Macedon graciously.  He lit another cigarette, 'You
see, I was in the war myself and I knew how it was.  I knew how it
felt.'

'Yes sir,' said Gaspar appreciatively.  'Well; I'm glad of the
opportunity to tell you what you did for me.  You--you explained
the war to my wife.'

'What are you talking about?' demanded Pat Hobby suddenly.  'That
war picture Bill Corker did in 1925?'

'There he goes again,' said Gaspar.  'Sure--The Birth of a Nation.
Now you pipe down till the Captain comes.'

'Phil Macedon knew me then all right,' said Pat resentfully, 'I
even watched him work on it one day.'

'I just don't happen to remember you, old man,' said Macedon
politely, 'I can't help that.'

'You remember the day Bill Corker shot that shell hole sequence
don't you?  Your first day on the picture?'

There was a moment's silence.

'When will the Captain be here?' Macedon asked.

'Any minute now,' Mr Macedon.'

'Well, I remember,' said Pat, '--because I was there when he had
that shell hole dug.  He was out there on the back lot at nine
o'clock in the morning with a gang of hunkies to dig the hole and
four cameras.  He called you up from a field telephone and told you
to go to the costumer and get into a soldier suit.  Now you
remember?'

'I don't load my mind with details, old man.'

'You called up that they didn't have one to fit you and Corker told
you to shut up and get into one anyhow.  When you got out to the
back lot you were sore as hell because your suit didn't fit.'

Macedon smiled charmingly.

'You have a most remarkable memory.  Are you sure you have the
right picture--and the right actor?' he asked.

'Am I!' said Pat grimly.  'I can see you right now.  Only you
didn't have much time to complain about the uniform because that
wasn't Corker's plan.  He always thought you were the toughest ham
in Hollywood to get anything natural out of--and he had a scheme.
He was going to get the heart of the picture shot by noon--before
you even knew you were acting.  He turned you around and shoved you
down into that shell hole on your fanny, and yelled "Camera".'

'That's a lie,' said Phil Macedon.  'I GOT down.'

'Then why did you start yelling?' demanded Pat.  'I can still hear
you:  "Hey, what's the idea!  Is this some -- -- gag?  You get me
out of here or I'll walk out on you!"

'--and all the time you were trying to claw your way up the side of
that pit, so damn mad you couldn't see.  You'd almost get up and
then you'd slide back and lie there with your face working--till
finally you began to bawl and all this time Bill had four cameras
on you.  After about twenty minutes you gave up and just lay there,
heaving.  Bill took a hundred feet of that and then he had a couple
of prop men pull you out.'

The police Captain had arrived in the squad car.  He stood in the
doorway against the first grey of dawn.

'What you got here, Sergeant?  A drunk?'

Sergeant Gaspar walked over to the cell, unlocked it and beckoned
Pat to come out.  Pat blinked a moment--then his eyes fell on Phil
Macedon and he shook his finger at him.

'So you see I DO know you,' he said.  'Bill Corker cut that piece
of film and titled it so you were supposed to be a doughboy whose
pal had just been killed.  You wanted to climb out and get at the
Germans in revenge, but the shells bursting all around and the
concussions kept knocking you back in.'

'What's it about?' demanded the Captain.

'I want to prove I know this guy,' said Pat.  'Bill said the best
moment in the picture was when Phil was yelling "I've al-READY
broken my first finger nail!"  Bill titled it "Ten Huns will go to
hell to shine your shoes!"'

'You've got here "collision with alcohol",' said the Captain
looking at the blotter.  'Let's take these guys down to the
hospital and give them the test.'

'Look here now,' said the actor, with his flashing smile, 'my
name's Phil Macedon.'

The Captain was a political appointee and very young.  He
remembered the name and the face but he was not especially
impressed because Hollywood was full of has-beens.

They all got into the squad car at the door.

After the test Macedon was held at the station house until friends
could arrange bail.  Pat Hobby was discharged but his car would not
run, so Sergeant Gaspar offered to drive him home.

'Where do you live?' he asked as they started off.

'I don't live anywhere tonight,' said Pat.  'That's why I was
driving around.  When a friend of mine wakes up I'll touch him for
a couple of bucks and go to a hotel.'

'Well now,' said Sergeant Gaspar, 'I got a couple of bucks that
ain't working.'

The great mansions of Beverly Hills slid by and Pat waved his hand
at them in salute.

'In the good old days,' he said, 'I used to be able to drop into
some of those houses day or night.  And Sunday mornings--'

'Is that all true you said in the station,' Gaspar asked, '--about
how they put him in the hole?'

'Sure, it is,' said Pat.  'That guy needn't have been so upstage.
He's just an old-timer like me.'





MIGHTIER THAN THE SWORD

Esquire (April 1941)


I


The swarthy man, with eyes that snapped back and forward on a
rubber band from the rear of his head, answered to the alias of
Dick Dale.  The tall, spectacled man who was put together like a
camel without a hump--and you missed the hump--answered to the name
of E. Brunswick Hudson.  The scene was a shoeshine stand,
insignificant unit of the great studio.  We perceive it through the
red-rimmed eyes of Pat Hobby who sat in the chair beside Director
Dale.

The stand was out of doors, opposite the commissary.  The voice of
E. Brunswick Hudson quivered with passion but it was pitched low so
as not to reach passers-by.

'I don't know what a writer like me is doing out here anyhow,' he
said, with vibrations.

Pat Hobby, who was an old-timer, could have supplied the answer,
but he had not the acquaintance of the other two.

'It's a funny business,' said Dick Dale, and to the shoe-shine boy,
'Use that saddle soap.'

'Funny!' thundered E., 'It's SUS-pect!  Here against my better
judgement I write just what you tell me--and the office tells me to
get out because we can't seem to agree.'

'That's polite,' explained Dick Dale.  'What do you want me to do--
knock you down?'

E. Brunswick Hudson removed his glasses.

'Try it!' he suggested.  'I weigh a hundred and sixty-two and I
haven't got an ounce of flesh on me.'  He hesitated and redeemed
himself from this extremity.  'I mean FAT on me.'

'Oh, to hell with that!' said Dick Dale contemptuously, 'I can't
mix it up with you.  I got to figure this picture.  You go back
East and write one of your books and forget it.'  Momentarily he
looked at Pat Hobby, smiling as if HE would understand, as if
anyone would understand except E. Brunswick Hudson.  'I can't tell
you all about pictures in three weeks.'

Hudson replaced his spectacles.

'When I DO write a book,' he said, 'I'll make you the laughing
stock of the nation.'

He withdrew, ineffectual, baffled, defeated.  After a minute Pat
spoke.

'Those guys can never get the idea,' he commented.  'I've never
seen one get the idea and I been in this business, publicity and
script, for twenty years.'

'You on the lot?' Dale asked.

Pat hesitated.

'Just finished a job,' he said.

That was five months before.

'What screen credits you got?' Dale asked.

'I got credits going all the way back to 1920.'

'Come up to my office,' Dick Dale said, 'I got something I'd like
to talk over--now that bastard is gone back to his New England
farm.  Why do they have to get a New England farm--with the whole
West not settled?'

Pat gave his second-to-last dime to the bootblack and climbed down
from the stand.


II


We are in the midst of technicalities.

'The trouble is this composer Reginald de Koven didn't have any
colour,' said Dick Dale.  'He wasn't deaf like Beethoven or a
singing waiter or get put in jail or anything.  All he did was
write music and all we got for an angle is that song O Promise Me.
We got to weave something around that--a dame promises him
something and in the end he collects.'

'I want time to think it over in my mind,' said Pat.  'If Jack
Berners will put me on the picture--'

'He'll put you on,' said Dick Dale.  'From now on I'm picking my
own writers.  What do you get--fifteen hundred?'  He looked at
Pat's shoes, 'Seven-fifty?'

Pat stared at him blankly for a moment; then out of thin air,
produced his best piece of imaginative fiction in a decade.

'I was mixed up with a producer's wife,' he said, 'and they ganged
up on me.  I only get three-fifty now.'

In some ways it was the easiest job he had ever had.  Director Dick
Dale was a type that, fifty years ago, could be found in any
American town.  Generally he was the local photographer, usually he
was the originator of small mechanical contrivances and a leader in
bizarre local movements, almost always he contributed verse to the
local press.  All the most energetic embodiments of this 'Sensation
Type' had migrated to Hollywood between 1910 and 1930, and there
they had achieved a psychological fulfilment inconceivable in any
other time or place.  At last, and on a large scale, they were able
to have their way.  In the weeks that Pat Hobby and Mabel Hatman,
Mr Dale's script girl, sat beside him and worked on the script, not
a movement, not a word went into it that was not Dick Dale's
coinage.  Pat would venture a suggestion, something that was
'Always good'.

'Wait a minute!  Wait a minute!'  Dick Dale was on his feet, his
hands outspread.  'I seem to see a dog.'  They would wait, tense
and breathless, while he saw a dog.

'Two dogs.'

A second dog took its place beside the first in their obedient
visions.

'We open on a dog on a leash--pull the camera back to show another
dog--now they're snapping at each other.  We pull back further--the
leashes are attached to tables--the tables tip over.  See it?'

Or else, out of a clear sky.

'I seem to see De Koven as a plasterer's apprentice.'

'Yes.'  This hopefully.

'He goes to Santa Anita and plasters the walls, singing at his
work.  Take that down, Mabel.'  He continued on . . .

In a month they had the requisite hundred and twenty pages.
Reginald de Koven, it seemed, though not an alcoholic, was too fond
of 'The Little Brown Jug'.  The father of the girl he loved had
died of drink, and after the wedding when she found him drinking
from the Little Brown Jug, nothing would do but that she should go
away, for twenty years.  He became famous and she sang his songs as
Maid Marian but he never knew it was the same girl.

The script, marked 'Temporary Complete.  From Pat Hobby' went up to
the head office.  The schedule called for Dale to begin shooting in
a week.

Twenty-four hours later he sat with his staff in his office, in an
atmosphere of blue gloom.  Pat Hobby was the least depressed.  Four
weeks at three-fifty, even allowing for the two hundred that had
slipped away at Santa Anita, was a far cry from the twenty cents he
had owned on the shoeshine stand.

'That's pictures, Dick,' he said consolingly.  'You're up--you're
down--you're in, you're out.  Any old-timer knows.'

'Yes,' said Dick Dale absently.  'Mabel, phone that E. Brunswick
Hudson.  He's on his New England farm--maybe milking bees.'

In a few minutes she reported.

'He flew into Hollywood this morning, Mr Dale.  I've located him at
the Beverly Wilshire Hotel.'

Dick Dale pressed his ear to the phone.  His voice was bland and
friendly as he said:

'Mr Hudson, there was one day here you had an idea I liked.  You
said you were going to write it up.  It was about this De Koven
stealing his music from a sheepherder up in Vermont.  Remember?'

'Yes.'

'Well, Berners wants to go into production right away, or else we
can't have the cast, so we're on the spot, if you know what I mean.
Do you happen to have that stuff?'

'You remember when I brought it to you?' Hudson asked.  'You kept
me waiting two hours--then you looked at it for two minutes.  Your
neck hurt you--I think it needed wringing.  God, how it hurt you.
That was the only nice thing about that morning.'

'In picture business--'

'I'm so glad you're stuck.  I wouldn't tell you the story of The
Three Bears for fifty grand.'

As the phones clicked Dick Dale turned to Pat.

'Goddam writers!' he said savagely.  'What do we pay you for?
Millions--and you write a lot of tripe I can't photograph and get
sore if we don't read your lousy stuff!  How can a man make
pictures when they give me two bastards like you and Hudson.  How?
How do you think--you old whiskey bum!'

Pat rose--took a step toward the door.  He didn't know, he said.

'Get out of here!' cried Dick Dale.  'You're off the payroll.  Get
off the lot.'

Fate had not dealt Pat a farm in New England, but there was a café
just across from the studio where bucolic dreams blossomed in
bottles if you had the money.  He did not like to leave the lot,
which for many years had been home for him, so he came back at six
and went up to his office.  It was locked.  He saw that they had
already allotted it to another writer--the name on the door was E.
Brunswick Hudson.

He spent an hour in the commissary, made another visit to the bar,
and then some instinct led him to a stage where there was a bedroom
set.  He passed the night upon a couch occupied by Claudette
Colbert in the fluffiest ruffles only that afternoon.

Morning was bleaker, but he had a little in his bottle and almost a
hundred dollars in his pocket.  The horses were running at Santa
Anita and he might double it by night.

On his way out of the lot he hesitated beside the barber shop but
he felt too nervous for a shave.  Then he paused, for from the
direction of the shoeshine stand he heard Dick Dale's voice.

'Miss Hatman found your other script, and it happens to be the
property of the company.'

E. Brunswick Hudson stood at the foot of the stand.

'I won't have my name used,' he said.

'That's good.  I'll put her name on it.  Berners thinks it's great,
if the De Koven family will stand for it.  Hell--the sheepbreeder
never would have been able to market those tunes anyhow.  Ever hear
of any sheepherder drawing down jack from ASCAP?'

Hudson took off his spectacles.

'I weigh a hundred and sixty-three--'

Pat moved in closer.

'Join the army,' said Dale contemptuously, 'I got no time for
mixing it up.  I got to make a picture.'  His eyes fell on Pat.
'Hello old-timer.'

'Hello Dick,' said Pat smiling.  Then knowing the advantage of the
psychological moment he took his chance.

'When do we work?' he said.

'How much?' Dick Dale asked the shoeshine boy--and to Pat, 'It's
all done.  I promised Mabel a screen credit for a long time.  Look
me up some day when you got an idea.'

He hailed someone by the barber shop and hurried off.  Hudson and
Hobby, men of letters who had never met, regarded each other.
There were tears of anger in Hudson's eyes.

'Authors get a tough break out here,' Pat said sympathetically.
'They never ought to come.'

'Who'd make up the stories--these feebs?'

'Well anyhow, not authors,' said Pat.  'They don't want authors.
They want writers--like me.'




PAT HOBBY'S COLLEGE DAYS

Esquire (May 1941)


I


The afternoon was dark.  The walls of Topanga Canyon rose sheer on
either side.  Get rid of it she must.  The clank clank in the back
seat frightened her.  Evylyn did not like the business at all.  It
was not what she came out here to do.  Then she thought of Mr
Hobby.  He believed in her, trusted her--and she was doing this for
him.

But the mission was arduous.  Evylyn Lascalles left the canyon and
cruised along the inhospitable shores of Beverly Hills.  Several
times she turned up alleys, several times she parked beside vacant
lots--but always some pedestrian or loiterer threw her into a mood
of nervous anxiety.  Once her heart almost stopped as she was eyed
with appreciation--or was it suspicion--by a man who looked like a
detective.

--He had no right to ask me this, she said to herself.  Never
again.  I'll tell him so.  Never again.

Night was fast descending.  Evylyn Lascalles had never seen it come
down so fast.  Back to the canyon then, to the wild, free life.
She drove up a paint-box corridor which gave its last pastel shades
to the day.  And reached a certain security at a bend overlooking
plateau land far below.

Here there could be no complication.  As she threw each article
over the cliff it would be as far removed from her as if she were
in a different state of the Union.

Miss Lascalles was from Brooklyn.  She had wanted very much to come
to Hollywood and be a secretary in pictures--now she wished that
she had never left her home.

On with the job though--she must part with her cargo--as soon as
this next car passed the bend . . .


II


. . . Meanwhile her employer, Pat Hobby, stood in front of the
barber shop talking to Louie, the studio bookie.  Pat's four weeks
at two-fifty would be up tomorrow and he had begun to have that
harassed and aghast feeling of those who live always on the edge of
solvency.

'Four lousy weeks on a bad script,' he said.  'That's all I've had
in six months.'

'How do you live?' asked Louie--without too much show of interest.

'I don't live.  The days go by, the weeks go by.  But who cares?
Who cares--after twenty years.'

'You had a good time in your day,' Louie reminded him.

Pat looked after a dress extra in a shimmering lamé gown.

'Sure,' he admitted, 'I had three wives.  All anybody could want.'

'You mean THAT was one of your wives?' asked Louie.

Pat peered after the disappearing figure.

'No-o.  I didn't say THAT was one.  But I've had plenty of them
feeding out of my pocket.  Not now though--a man of forty-nine is
not considered human.'

'You've got a cute little secretary,' said Louie.  'Look Pat, I'll
give you a tip--'

'Can't use it,' said Pat, 'I got fifty cents.'

'I don't mean that kind of tip.  Listen--Jack Berners wants to make
a picture about U.W.C. because he's got a kid there that plays
basketball.  He can't get a story.  Why don't you go over and see
the Athaletic Superintendent named Doolan at U.W.C.?  That
superintendent owes me three grand on the nags, and he could maybe
give you an idea for a college picture.  And then you bring it back
and sell it to Berners.  You're on salary, ain't you?'

'Till tomorrow,' said Pat gloomily.

'Go and see Jim Kresge that hangs out in the Campus Sport Shop.
He'll introduce you to the Athaletic Superintendent.  Look, Pat, I
got to make a collection now.  Just remember, Pat, that Doolan owes
me three grand.'


III


It didn't seem hopeful to Pat but it was better than nothing.
Returning for his coat to his room in the Writers' Building he was
in time to pick up a plainting telephone.

'This is Evylyn,' said a fluttering voice.  'I can't get rid of it
this afternoon.  There's cars on every road--'

'I can't talk about it here,' said Pat quickly, 'I got to go over
to U.W.C. on a notion.'

'I've tried,' she wailed, '--and TRIED!  And every time, some car
comes along--'

'Aw, please!'  He hung up--he had enough on his mind.

For years Pat had followed the deeds of 'the Trojums' of U.S.C. and
the almost as fabulous doings of 'the Roller Coasters', who
represented the Univ. of the Western Coast.  His interest was not
so much physiological, tactical or intellectual as it was
mathematical--but the Rollers had cost him plenty in their day--and
thus it was with a sense of vague proprietorship that he stepped
upon the half De Mille, half Aztec campus.

He located Kresge who conducted him to Superintendent Kit Doolan.
Mr Doolan, a famous ex-tackle, was in excellent humour.  With five
coloured giants in this year's line, none of them quite old enough
for pensions, but all men of experience, his team was in a fair way
to conquer his section.

'Glad to be of help to your studio,' he said.  'Glad to help Mr
Berners--or Louie.  What can I do for you?  You want to make a
picture? . . .  Well, we can always use publicity.  Mr Hobby, I got
a meeting of the Faculty Committee in just five minutes and perhaps
you'd like to tell them your notion.'

'I don't know,' said Pat doubtfully.  'What I thought was maybe I
could have a spiel with you.  We could go somewhere and hoist one.'

'Afraid not,' said Doolan jovially.  'If those smarties smelt
liquor on me--Boy!  Come on over to the meeting--somebody's been
getting away with watches and jewellery on the campus and we're
sure it's a student.'

Mr Kresge, having played his role, got up to leave.

'Like something good for the fifth tomorrow?'

'Not me,' said Mr Doolan.

'You, Mr Hobby?'

'Not me,' said Pat.


IV


Ending their alliance with the underworld, Pat Hobby and
Superintendent Doolan walked down the corridor of the Administration
Building.  Outside the Dean's office Doolan said:  'As soon as
I can, I'll bring you in and introduce you.'  As an accredited
representative neither of Jack Berners' nor of the studio, Pat
waited with a certain malaise.  He did not look forward to
confronting a group of highbrows but he remembered that he bore
an humble but warming piece of merchandise in his threadbare
overcoat.  The Dean's assistant had left her desk to take notes at
the conference so he repleated his calories with a long, gagging
draught.

In a moment, there was a responsive glow and he settled down in his
chair, his eye fixed on the door marked:


                      SAMUEL K. WISKETH

                  DEAN OF THE STUDENT BODY


It might be a somewhat formidable encounter.

. . . but why?  There were stuffed shirts--everybody knew that.
They had college degrees but they could be bought.  If they'd play
ball with the studio they'd get a lot of good publicity for U.W.C.
And that meant bigger salaries for them, didn't it, and more jack?

The door to the conference room opened and closed tentatively.  No
one came out but Pat sat up and readied himself.  Representing the
fourth biggest industry in America, or ALMOST representing it, he
must not let a bunch of highbrows stare him down.  He was not
without an inside view of higher education--in his early youth he
had once been the 'Buttons' in the DKE House at the University of
Pennsylvania.  And with encouraging chauvinism he assured himself
that Pennsylvania had it over this pioneer enterprise like a tent.

The door opened--a flustered young man with beads of sweat on his
forehead came tearing out, tore through--and disappeared.  Mr
Doolan stood calmly in the doorway.

'All right, Mr Hobby,' he said.

Nothing to be scared of.  Memories of old college days continued to
flood over Pat as he walked in.  And instantaneously, as the juice
of confidence flowed through his system, he had his idea . . .

'. . . it's more of a realistic idea,' he was saying five minutes
later.  'Understand?'

Dean Wiskith, a tall, pale man with an earphone, seemed to
understand--if not exactly to approve.  Pat hammered in his point
again.

'It's up-to-the-minute,' he said patiently, 'what we call "a
topical".  You admit that young squirt who went out of here was
stealing watches, don't you?'

The faculty committee, all except Doolan, exchanged glances, but no
one interrupted.

'There you are,' went on Pat triumphantly.  'You turn him in to the
newspapers.  But here's the twist.  In the Picture we make it turns
out he steals the watches to support his young BRO-ther--and his
young brother is the mainstay of the football team!  He's the
climax runner.  We probably try to borrow Tyrone Power but we use
one of YOUR players as a double.'

Pat paused, trying to think of everything.

'--of course, we've got to release it in the southern states, so
it's got to be one of your players that's white.'

There was an unquiet pause.  Mr Doolan came to his rescue.

'Not a bad idea,' he suggested.

'It's an appalling idea,' broke out Dean Wiskith.  'It's--'

Doolan's face tightened slowly.

'Wait a minute,' he said.  'Who's telling WHO around here?  You
listen to him!'

The Dean's assistant, who had recently vanished from the room at
the call of a buzzer, had reappeared and was whispering in the
Dean's ear.  The latter started.

'Just a minute, Mr Doolan,' he said.  He turned to the other
members of the committee.

'The proctor has a disciplinary case outside and he can't legally
hold the offender.  Can we settle it first?  And then get back to
this--'  He glared at Mr Doolan,'--to this preposterous idea?'

At his nod the assistant opened the door.

This proctor, thought Pat, ranging back to his days on the
vineclad, leafy campus, looked like all proctors, an intimidated
cop, a scarcely civilized beast of prey.

'Gentlemen,' the proctor said, with delicately modulated respect,
'I've got something that can't be explained away.'  He shook his
head, puzzled, and then continued:  'I know it's all wrong--but I
can't seem to get to the point of it.  I'd like to turn it over to
YOU--I'll just show you the evidence and the offender . . .  Come
in, you.'

As Evylyn Lascalles entered, followed shortly by a big clinking
pillow cover which the proctor deposited beside her, Pat thought
once more of the elm-covered campus of the University of
Pennsylvania.  He wished passionately that he were there.  He
wished it more than anything in the world.  Next to that he wished
that Doolan's back, behind which he tried to hide by a shifting of
his chair, were broader still.

'There you are!' she cried gratefully.  'Oh, Mr Hobby--Thank God!
I couldn't get rid of them--and I couldn't take them home--my
mother would kill me.  So I came here to find you--and this man
packed into the back seat of my car.'

'What's in that sack?' demanded Dean Wiskith.  'Bombs?  What?'

Seconds before the proctor had picked up the sack and bounced it on
the floor, so that it gave out a clear unmistakable sound, Pat
could have told them.  There were dead soldiers--pints, half-pints,
quarts--the evidence of four strained weeks at two-fifty--empty
bottles collected from his office drawers.  Since his contract was
up tomorrow he had thought it best not to leave such witnesses
behind.

Seeking for escape his mind reached back for the last time to those
careless days of fetch and carry at the University of Pennsylvania.

'I'll take it,' he said rising.

Slinging the sack over his shoulder, he faced the faculty committee
and said surprisingly:

'Think it over.'


V


'We did,' Mr Doolan told his wife that night.  'But we never made
head nor tail of it.'

'It's kind of spooky,' said Mrs Doolan.  'I hope I don't dream
tonight.  The poor man with that sack!  I keep thinking he'll be
down in purgatory--and they'll make him carve a ship in EVERY ONE
of those bottles--before he can go to heaven.'

'Don't!' said Doolan quickly.  'You'll have ME dreaming.  There
were plenty bottles.'



THE END




THE PERFECT LIFE


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)



The Saturday Evening Post (5 January, 1929)



I


When he came into the dining room, a little tired, but with his
clothes hanging cool and free on him after his shower, the whole
school stood up and clapped and cheered until he slunk down into
his seat.  From one end of the table to the other, people leaned
forward and smiled at him.

"Nice work, Lee.  Not your fault we didn't win."

Basil knew that he had been good.  Up to the last whistle he could
feel his expended energy miraculously replacing itself after each
surpassing effort.  But he couldn't realize his success all at
once, and only little episodes lingered with him, such as when that
shaggy Exeter tackle stood up big in the line and said, "Let's get
that quarter!  He's yellow."  Basil shouted back, "Yellow your
gra'mother!" and the linesman grinned good-naturedly, knowing it
wasn't true.  During that gorgeous hour bodies had no weight or
force; Basil lay under piles of them, tossed himself in front of
them without feeling the impact, impatient only to be on his feet
dominating those two green acres once more.  At the end of the
first half he got loose for sixty yards and a touchdown, but the
whistle had blown and it was not allowed.  That was the high point
of the game for St. Regis.  Outweighed ten pounds to the man, they
wilted down suddenly in the fourth quarter and Exeter put over two
touchdowns, glad to win over a school whose membership was only one
hundred and thirty-five.

When lunch was over and the school was trooping out of the dining
hall, the Exeter coach came over to Basil and said:

"Lee, that was about the best game I've ever seen played by a prep-
school back, and I've seen a lot of them."

Doctor Bacon beckoned to him.  He was standing with two old St.
Regis boys, up from Princeton for the day.

"It was a very exciting game, Basil.  We are all very proud of the
team and--ah--especially of you."  And, as if this praise had been
an indiscretion, he hastened to add:  "And of all the others."

He presented him to the two alumni.  One of them, John Granby,
Basil knew by reputation.  He was said to be a "big man" at
Princeton--serious, upright, handsome, with a kindly smile and
large, earnest blue eyes.  He had graduated from St. Regis before
Basil entered.

"That was pretty work, Lee!"  Basil made the proper deprecatory
noises.  "I wonder if you've got a moment this afternoon when we
could have a little talk."

"Why, yes, sir."  Basil was flattered.  "Any time you say."

"Suppose we take a walk about three o'clock.  My train goes at
five."

"I'd like to very much."

He walked on air to his room in the Sixth Form House.  One short
year ago he had been perhaps the most unpopular boy at St. Regis--
"Bossy" Lee.  Only occasionally did people forget and call him
"Bossy" now, and then they corrected themselves immediately.

A youngster leaned out of the window of Mitchell House as he passed
and cried, "Good work!"  The negro gardener, trimming a hedge,
chuckled and called, "You almost beatum by y' own self."  Mr. Hicks
the housemaster cried, "They ought to have given you that
touchdown!  That was a crime!" as Basil passed his door.  It was a
frosty gold October day, tinged with the blue smoke of Indian
summer, weather that set him dreaming of future splendors,
triumphant descents upon cities, romantic contacts with mysterious
and scarcely mortal girls.  In his room he floated off into an
ambulatory dream in which he walked up and down repeating to
himself tag ends of phrases:  "by a prep-school back, and I've seen
a lot of them." . . . "Yellow your gra'mother!" . . . "You get off
side again and I'll kick your fat bottom for you!"

Suddenly he rolled on his bed with laughter.  The threatened one
had actually apologized between quarters--it was Pork Corrigan who
only last year had chased him up two flights of stairs.

At three he met John Granby and they set off along the Grunwald
Pike, following a long, low red wall that on fair mornings always
suggested to Basil an adventurous quest like in "The Broad
Highway."  John Granby talked awhile about Princeton, but when he
realized that Yale was an abstract ideal deep in Basil's heart, he
gave up.  After a moment a far-away expression, a smile that seemed
a reflection of another and brighter world, spread over his
handsome face.

"Lee, I love St. Regis School," he said suddenly.  "I spent the
happiest years of my life here.  I owe it a debt I can never
repay."  Basil didn't answer and Granby turned to him suddenly.  "I
wonder if you realize what you could do here."

"What?  Me?"

"I wonder if you know the effect on the whole school of that
wonderful game you played this morning."

"It wasn't so good."

"It's like you to say that," declared Granby emphatically, "but it
isn't the truth.  However, I didn't come out here to sing your
praises.  Only I wonder if you realize your power for good.  I mean
your power of influencing all these boys to lead clean, upright,
decent lives."

"I never thought about that," said Basil, somewhat startled; "I
never thought about--"

Granby slapped him smartly on the shoulder.

"Since this morning a responsibility has come to you that you can't
dodge.  From this morning every boy in this school who goes around
smoking cigarettes behind the gym and reeking with nicotine is a
little bit your responsibility; every bit of cursing and swearing,
or of learning to take the property of others by stealing milk and
food supplies out of the pantry at night is a little bit your
responsibility."

He broke off.  Basil looked straight ahead, frowning.

"Gee!" he said.

"I mean it," continued Granby, his eyes shining.  "You have the
sort of opportunity very few boys have.  I'm going to tell you a
little story.  Up at Princeton I knew two boys who were wrecking
their lives with drink.  I could have said, 'It's not my affair,'
and let them go to pieces their own way, but when I looked deep
into my own heart I found I couldn't.  So I went to them frankly
and put it up to them fairly and squarely, and those two boys
haven't--at least one of them hasn't--touched a single drop of
liquor from that day to this."

"But I don't think anybody in school drinks," objected Basil.  "At
least there was a fellow named Bates that got fired last year--"

"It doesn't matter," John Granby interrupted.  "Smoking leads to
drinking and drinking leads to--other things."

For an hour Granby talked and Basil listened; the red wall beside
the road and the apple-heavy branches overhead seemed to become
less vivid minute by minute as his thoughts turned inward.  He was
deeply affected by what he considered the fine unselfishness of
this man who took the burdens of others upon his shoulders.  Granby
missed his train, but he said that didn't matter if he had
succeeded in planting a sense of responsibility in Basil's mind.

Basil returned to his room awed, sobered and convinced.  Up to this
time he had always considered himself rather bad; in fact, the last
hero character with which he had been able to identify himself was
Hairbreadth Harry in the comic supplement, when he was ten.  Though
he often brooded, his brooding was dark and nameless and never
concerned with moral questions.  The real restraining influence on
him was fear--the fear of being disqualified from achievement and
power.

But this meeting with John Granby had come at a significant moment.
After this morning's triumph, life at school scarcely seemed to
hold anything more--and here was something new.  To be perfect,
wonderful inside and out--as Granby had put it, to try to lead the
perfect life.  Granby had outlined the perfect life to him, not
without a certain stress upon its material rewards such as honor
and influence at college, and Basil's imagination was already far
in the future.  When he was tapped last man for Skull and Bones at
Yale and shook his head with a sad sweet smile, somewhat like John
Granby's, pointing to another man who wanted it more, a burst of
sobbing would break from the assembled crowd.  Then, out into the
world, where, at the age of twenty-five, he would face the nation
from the inaugural platform on the Capitol steps, and all around
him his people would lift up their faces in admiration and
love. . . .

As he thought he absent-mindedly consumed half a dozen soda
crackers and a bottle of milk, left from a pantry raid the night
before.  Vaguely he realized that this was one of the things he was
giving up, but he was very hungry.  However, he reverently broke
off the train of his reflections until he was through.

Outside his window the autumn dusk was split with shafts of lights
from passing cars.  In these cars were great football players and
lovely d‚butantes, mysterious adventuresses and international spies--
rich, gay, glamorous people moving toward brilliant encounters in
New York, at fashionable dances and secret cafés, or on roof
gardens under the autumn moon.  He sighed; perhaps he could blend
in these more romantic things later.  To be of great wit and
conversational powers, and simultaneously strong and serious and
silent.  To be generous and open and self-sacrificing, yet to be
somewhat mysterious and sensitive and even a little bitter with
melancholy.  To be both light and dark.  To harmonize this, to melt
all this down into a single man--ah, there was something to be
done.  The very thought of such perfection crystallized his
vitality into an ecstasy of ambition.  For a moment longer his soul
followed the speeding lights toward the metropolis; then resolutely
he arose, put out his cigarette on the window sill, and turning on
his reading lamp, began to note down a set of requirements for the
perfect life.


II


One month later George Dorsey, engaged in the painful duty of
leading his mother around the school grounds, reached the
comparative seclusion of the tennis courts and suggested eagerly
that she rest herself upon a bench.

Hitherto his conversation had confined itself to a few hoarse
advices, such as "That's the gym," . . . "That's Cuckoo Conklin
that teaches French.  Everybody hates him." . . . "Please don't
call me 'Brother' in front of boys."  Now his face took on the
preoccupied expression peculiar to adolescents in the presence of
their parents.  He relaxed.  He waited to be asked things.

"Now, about Thanksgiving, George.  Who is this boy you're bringing
home?"

"His name is Basil Lee."

"Tell me something about him."

"There isn't anything to tell.  He's just a boy in the Sixth Form,
about sixteen."

"Is he a nice boy?"

"Yes.  He lives in St. Paul, Minnesota.  I asked him a long time
ago."

A certain reticence in her son's voice interested Mrs. Dorsey.

"Do you mean you're sorry you asked him?  Don't you like him any
more?"

"Sure I like him."

"Because there's no use bringing anyone you don't like.  You could
just explain that your mother has made other plans."

"But I like him," George insisted, and then he added hesitantly:
"It's just some funny way he's got to be lately."

"How?"

"Oh, just sort of queer."

"But how, George?  I don't want you to bring anyone into the house
that's queer."

"He isn't exactly queer.  He just gets people aside and talks to
them.  Then he sort of smiles at them."

Mrs. Dorsey was mystified.  "Smiles at them?"

"Yeah.  He gets them off in a corner somewheres and talks to them
as long as they can stand it, and then he smiles"--his own lips
twisted into a peculiar grimace--"like that."

"What does he talk about?"

"Oh, about swearing and smoking and writing home and a lot of stuff
like that.  Nobody pays any attention except one boy he's got doing
the same thing.  He got stuck up or something because he was so
good at football."

"Well, if you don't want him, don't let's have him."

"Oh, no," George cried in alarm.  "I've got to have him.  I asked
him."

Naturally, Basil was unaware of this conversation when, one
morning, a week later, the Dorseys' chauffeur relieved them of
their bags in the Grand Central station.  There was a slate-pink
light over the city and people in the streets carried with them
little balloons of frosted breath.  About them the buildings broke
up through many planes toward heaven, at their base the wintry
color of an old man's smile, on through diagonals of diluted gold,
edged with purple where the cornices floated past the stationary
sky.

In a long, low, English town car--the first of the kind that Basil
had ever seen--sat a girl of about his own age.  As they came up
she received her brother's kiss perfunctorily, nodded stiffly to
Basil and murmured, "how-d'y'-do" without smiling.  She said
nothing further but seemed absorbed in meditations of her own.  At
first, perhaps because of her extreme reserve, Basil received no
especial impression of her, but before they reached the Dorseys'
house he began to realize that she was one of the prettiest girls
he had ever seen in his life.

It was a puzzling face.  Her long eyelashes lay softly against her
pale cheeks, almost touching them, as if to conceal the infinite
boredom in her eyes, but when she smiled, her expression was
illumined by a fiery and lovely friendliness, as if she were
saying, "Go on; I'm listening.  I'm fascinated.  I've been waiting--
oh, ages--for just this moment with you."  Then she remembered
that she was shy or bored; the smile vanished, the gray eyes half
closed again.  Almost before it had begun, the moment was over,
leaving a haunting and unsatisfied curiosity behind.

The Dorseys' house was on Fifty-third Street.  Basil was astonished
first at the narrowness of its white stone front and then at the
full use to which the space was put inside.  The formal chambers
ran the width of the house, artificial sunlight bloomed in the
dining-room windows, a small elevator navigated the five stories in
deferential silence.  For Basil there was a new world in its
compact luxury.  It was thrilling and romantic that a foothold on
this island was more precious than the whole rambling sweep of the
James J. Hill house at home.  In his excitement the feel of school
dropped momentarily away from him.  He was possessed by the same
longing for a new experience, that his previous glimpses of New
York had aroused.  In the hard bright glitter of Fifth Avenue, in
this lovely girl with no words to waste beyond a mechanical "How-
d'y'-do," in the perfectly organized house, he recognized nothing,
and he knew that to recognize nothing in his surroundings was
usually a guaranty of adventure.

But his mood of the last month was not to be thrown off so lightly.
There was now an ideal that came first.  A day mustn't pass when he
wasn't, as John Granby put it, "straight with himself"--and that
meant to help others.  He could get in a good deal of work on
George Dorsey in these five days; other opportunities might turn
up, besides.  Meanwhile, with the consciousness of making the best
of both worlds, he unpacked his grip and got ready for luncheon.

He sat beside Mrs. Dorsey, who found him somewhat precipitately
friendly in a Midwestern way, but polite, apparently not
unbalanced.  He told her he was going to be a minister and
immediately he didn't believe it himself; but he saw that it
interested Mrs. Dorsey and let it stand.

The afternoon was already planned; they were going dancing--for
those were the great days: Maurice was tangoing in "Over the
River," the Castles were doing a swift stiff-legged walk in the
third act of "The Sunshine Girl"--a walk that gave the modern dance
a social position and brought the nice girl into the café, thus
beginning a profound revolution in American life.  The great rich
empire was feeling its oats and was out for some not too plebeian,
yet not too artistic, fun.

By three o'clock seven young people were assembled, and they
started in a limousine for Emil's.  There were two stylish, anæmic
girls of sixteen--one bore an impressive financial name--and two
freshmen from Harvard who exchanged private jokes and were
attentive only to Jobena Dorsey.  Basil expected that presently
everyone would begin asking each other such familiar questions as
"Where do you go to school?" and "Oh, do you know So-and-So?" and
the party would become more free and easy, but nothing of the sort
happened.  The atmosphere was impersonal; he doubted if the other
four guests knew his name.  "In fact," he thought, "it's just as if
everyone's waiting for some one else to make a fool of himself."
Here again was something new and unrecognizable; he guessed that it
was a typical part of New York.

They reached Emil's.  Only in certain Paris restaurants where the
Argentines step untiringly through their native coils does anything
survive of the dance craze as it existed just before the war.  At
that time it was not an accompaniment to drinking or love-making or
hailing in the dawn--it was an end in itself.  Sedentary
stockbrokers, grandmothers of sixty, Confederate veterans,
venerable statesmen and scientists, sufferers from locomotor
ataxia, wanted not only to dance but to dance beautifully.
Fantastic ambitions bloomed in hitherto sober breasts, violent
exhibitionism cropped out in families modest for generations.
Nonentities with long legs became famous overnight, and there were
rendezvous where they could renew the dance, if they wished, next
morning.  Because of a neat glide or an awkward stumble careers
were determined and engagements were made or broken, while the tall
Englishman and the girl in the Dutch cap called the tune.

As they went into the cabaret sudden anxiety attacked Basil--modern
dancing was one of the things upon which John Granby had been most
severe.

He approached George Dorsey in the coat room.

"There's an extra man, so do you suppose I'd be all right if I only
danced when there's a waltz?  I'm no good at anything else."

"Sure.  It's all right with me."  He looked curiously at Basil.
"Gosh, have you sworn off everything?"

"No, not everything," answered Basil uncomfortably.

The floor was already crowded.  All ages and several classes of
society shuffled around tensely to the nervous, disturbing beats of
"Too Much Mustard."  Automatically the other three couples were up
and away, leaving Basil at the table.  He watched, trying to
pretend to himself that he disapproved of it all but was too polite
to show it.  However, with so much to see, it was difficult to
preserve that attitude, and he was gazing with fascination at
Jobena's active feet when a good-looking young man of about
nineteen sat down beside him at the table.

"Excuse me," he said with exaggerated deference.  "This Miss Jobena
Dorsey's table?"

"Yes, it is."

"I'm expected.  Name's De Vinci.  Don't ask me if I'm any relation
to the painter."

"My name's Lee."

"All right, Lee.  What'll you have?  What are you having?"  The
waiter arrived with a tray, and De Vinci looked at its contents
with disgust.  "Tea--all tea. . . .  Waiter, bring me a double
Bronx. . . .  How about you, Lee?  Another double Bronx?"

"Oh, no, thanks," said Basil quickly.

"One then, waiter."

De Vinci sighed; he had the unmistakable lush look of a man who has
been drinking hard for several days.

"Nice dog under that table over there.  They oughtn't to let people
smoke if they're going to bring dogs in here."

"Why?"

"Hurts their eyes."

Confusedly Basil deliberated this piece of logic.

"But don't talk to me about dogs," said De Vinci with a profound
sigh; "I'm trying to keep from thinking of dogs."

Basil obligingly changed the subject for him by asking him if he
was in college.

"Two weeks."  For emphasis De Vinci held up two fingers.  "I passed
quickly through Yale.  First man fired out of '15 Sheff."

"That's too bad," said Basil earnestly.  He took a deep breath and
his lips twisted up in a kindly smile.  "Your parents must have
felt pretty badly about that."

De Vinci stared at him as if over a pair of spectacles, but before
he could answer, the dance ended and the others came back to the
table.

"Hello there, Skiddy."

"Well, well, Skiddy!"

They all knew him.  One of the freshmen yielded him a place next to
Jobena and they began to talk together in lowered voices.

"Skiddy De Vinci," George whispered to Basil.  "He and Jobena were
engaged last summer, but I think she's through."  He shook his
head.  "They used to go off in his mother's electric up at Bar
Harbor; it was disgusting."

Basil glowed suddenly with excitement as if he had been snapped on
like an electric torch.  He looked at Jobena--her face, infinitely
reserved, lightened momentarily, but this time her smile had gone
sad; there was the deep friendliness but not the delight.  He
wondered if Skiddy De Vinci cared about her being through with him.
Perhaps, if he reformed and stopped drinking and went back to Yale,
she would change her mind.

The music began again.  Basil stared uncomfortably into his cup of
tea.

"This is a tango," said George.  "You can dance the tango, can't
you?  It's all right; it's Spanish."

Basil considered.

"Sure you can," insisted George.  "It's Spanish, I tell you.
There's nothing to stop your dancing if it's Spanish, is there?"

One of the freshmen looked at them curiously.  Basil leaned over
the table and asked Jobena to dance.

She made a last low-voiced remark to De Vinci before she rose;
then, to atone for the slight rudeness, she smiled up at Basil.  He
was light-headed as they moved out on the floor.

Abruptly she made an outrageous remark and Basil started and nearly
stumbled, doubtful that he had heard aright.

"I'll bet you've kissed about a thousand girls in your time," she
said, "with that mouth."

"What!"

"Not so?"

"Oh, no," declared Basil.  "Really, I--"

Her lids and lashes had drooped again indifferently; she was
singing the band's tune:


     "Tango makes you warm inside;
     You bend and sway and glide;
     There's nothing far and wide--"


What was the implication--that kissing people was all right; was
even admirable?  He remembered what John Granby had said:  "Every
time you kiss a nice girl you may have started her on the road to
the devil."

He thought of his own past--an afternoon on the Kampf's porch with
Minnie Bibble, a ride home from Black Bear Lake with Imogene Bissel
in the back seat of the car, a miscellany of encounters running
back to games of post office and to childish kisses that were
consummated upon an unwilling nose or ear.

That was over; he was never going to kiss another girl until he
found the one who would become his wife.  It worried him that this
girl whom he found lovely should take the matter so lightly.  The
strange thrill he had felt when George spoke of her "behaving
disgustingly" with Skiddy De Vinci in his electric, was transformed
into indignation--steadily rising indignation.  It was criminal--a
girl not yet seventeen.

Suddenly it occurred to him that this was perhaps his
responsibility, his opportunity.  If he could implant in her mind
the futility of it all, the misery she was laying up for herself,
his visit to New York would not have been in vain.  He could go
back to school happy, knowing he had brought to one girl the sort
of peace she had never known before.

In fact, the more he thought of Jobena and Skiddy De Vinci in the
electric, the madder it made him.

At five they left Emil's to go to Castle House.  There was a thin
rain falling and the streets were gleaming.  In the excitement of
going out into the twilight Jobena slipped her arm quickly through
Basil's.

"There's too many for the car.  Let's take the hansom."

She gave the address to a septuagenarian in faded bottle green, and
the slanting doors closed upon them, shutting them back away from
the rain.

"I'm tired of them," she whispered.  "Such empty faces, except
Skiddy's, and in another hour he won't be able to even talk
straight.  He's beginning to get maudlin about his dog Eggshell
that died last month, and that's always a sign.  Do you ever feel
the fascination of somebody that's doomed; who just goes on and on
in the way he was born to go, never complaining, never hoping; just
sort or resigned to it all?"

His fresh heart cried out against this.

"Nobody has to go to pieces," he assured her.  "They can just turn
over a new leaf."

"Not Skiddy."

"Anybody," he insisted.  "You just make up your mind and resolve to
live a better life, and you'd be surprised how easy it is and how
much happier you are."

She didn't seem to hear him.

"Isn't it nice, rolling along in this hansom with the damp blowing
in, and you and I back here"--she turned to him and smiled--
"together."

"Yes," said Basil abstractedly.  "The thing is that everybody
should try to make their life perfect.  They can't start young
enough; in fact, they ought to start about eleven or twelve in
order to make their life absolutely perfect."

"That's true," she said.  "In a way Skiddy's life is perfect.  He
never worries, never regrets.  You could put him back at the time
of the--oh, the eighteenth century, or whenever it was they had the
bucks and beaux--and he'd fit right in."

"I didn't mean that," said Basil in alarm.  "That isn't at all what
I mean by the perfect life."

"You mean something more masterful," she supplied.  "I thought so,
when I saw that chin of yours.  I'll bet you just take everything
you want."

Again she looked at him, swayed close to him.

"You don't understand--" he began.

She put her hand on his arm.  "Wait a minute; we're almost there.
Let's not go in yet.  It's so nice with all the lights going on and
it'll be so hot and crowded in there.  Tell him to drive out a few
blocks more.  I noticed you only danced a few times; I like that.
I hate men that pop up at the first sound of music as if their life
depended on it.  Is it true you're only sixteen?"

"Yes."

"You seem older.  There's so much in your face."

"You don't understand--" Basil began again desperately.

She spoke through the trap to the cabby:

"Go up Broadway till we tell you to stop."  Sitting back in the
cab, she repeated dreamily, "The perfect life.  I'd like my life to
be perfect.  I'd like to suffer, if I could find something worth
suffering for, and I'd like to never do anything low or small or
mean, but just have big sins."

"Oh, no!" said Basil, aghast.  "That's no way to feel; that's
morbid.  Why, look, you oughtn't to talk like that--a girl sixteen
years old.  You ought to--to talk things over with yourself--you
ought to think more of the after life."  He stopped, half expecting
to be interrupted, but Jobena was silent.  "Why, up to a month ago
I used to smoke as many as twelve or fifteen cigarettes a day,
unless I was training for football.  I used to curse and swear and
only write home once in a while, so they had to telegraph sometimes
to see if I was sick.  I had no sense of responsibility.  I never
thought I could lead a perfect life until I tried."

He paused, overcome by his emotion.

"Didn't you?" said Jobena, in a small voice.

"Never.  I was just like everybody else, only worse.  I used to
kiss girls and never think anything about it."

"What--what changed you?"

"A man I met."  Suddenly he turned to her and, with an effort,
caused to spread over his face a caricature of John Granby's sad
sweet smile.  "Jobena, you--you have the makings of a fine girl in
you.  It grieved me a lot this afternoon to see you smoking
nicotine and dancing modern suggestive dances that are simply
savagery.  And the way you talk about kissing.  What if you meet
some man that has kept himself pure and never gone around kissing
anybody except his family, and you have to tell him that you went
around behaving disgustingly?"

She leaned back suddenly and spoke crisply through the panel.

"You can go back now--the address we gave you."

"You ought to cut it out." Again Basil smiled at her, straining and
struggling to lift her up out of herself to a higher plane.
"Promise me you'll try.  It isn't so hard.  And then some day when
some upright and straightforward man comes along and says, 'Will
you marry me?' you'll be able to say you never danced suggestive
modern dances, except the Spanish tango and the Boston, and you
never kissed anybody--that is, since you were sixteen, and maybe
you wouldn't have to say that you ever kissed anybody at all."

"That wouldn't be the truth," she said in an odd voice.  "Shouldn't
I tell him the truth?"

"You could tell him you didn't know any better."

"Oh."

To Basil's regret the cab drew up at Castle House.  Jobena hurried
in, and to make up for her absence, devoted herself exclusively to
Skiddy and the Harvard freshmen for the remainder of the afternoon.
But doubtless she was thinking hard--as he had done a month before.
With a little more time he could have clinched his argument by
showing the influence that one leading a perfect life could exert
on others.  He must find an opportunity tomorrow.

But next day he scarcely saw her.  She was out for luncheon and she
did not appear at her rendezvous with Basil and George after the
matinée; they waited in vain in the Biltmore grill for an hour.
There was company at dinner and Basil began to feel a certain
annoyance when she disappeared immediately afterwards.  Was it
possible that his seriousness had frightened her?  In that case it
was all the more necessary to see her, reassure her, bind her with
the invisible cords of high purpose to himself.  Perhaps--perhaps
she was the ideal girl that he would some day marry.  At the
gorgeous idea his whole being was flooded with ecstasy.  He planned
out the years of waiting, each one helping the other to lead the
perfect life, neither of them ever kissing anybody else--he would
insist on that, absolutely insist on it; she must promise not even
to see Skiddy De Vinci--and then marriage and a life of service,
perfection, fame and love.

The two boys went to the theatre again that night.  When they came
home a little after eleven, George went upstairs to say good night
to his mother, leaving Basil to make reconnaissance in the ice box.
The intervening pantry was dark and as he fumbled unfamiliarly for
the light he was startled by hearing a voice in the kitchen
pronounce his name:

"--Mr. Basil Duke Lee."

"Seemed all right to me."  Basil recognized the drawling tone of
Skiddy De Vinci.  "Just a kid."

"On the contrary, he's a nasty little prig," said Jobena
decisively.  "He gave me the old-fashioned moral lecture about
nicotine and modern dancing and kissing, and about that upright,
straightforward man that was going to come along some day--you know
that upright straightforward man they're always talking about.  I
suppose he meant himself, because he told me he led a perfect life.
Oh, it was all so oily and horrible, it made me positively sick.
Skiddy.  For the first time in my life I was tempted to take a
cocktail."

"Oh, he's just a kid," said Skiddy moderately.  "It's a phase.
He'll get over it."

Basil listened in horror; his face burning, his mouth ajar.  He
wanted above all things to get away, but his dismay rooted him to
the floor.

"What I think of righteous men couldn't be put on paper," said
Jobena after a moment.  "I suppose I'm just naturally bad, Skiddy;
at least, all my contacts with upright young men have affected me
like this."

"Then how about it, Jobena?"

There was a long silence.

"This has done something to me," she said finally.  "Yesterday I
thought I was through with you, Skiddy, but ever since this
happened I've had a vision of a thousand Mr. Basil Duke Lees, all
grown up and asking me to share their perfect lives.  I refuse to--
definitely.  If you like, I'll marry you in Greenwich tomorrow."


III


At one Basil's light was still burning.  Walking up and down his
room, he made out case after case for himself, with Jobena in the
role of villainness, but each case was wrecked upon the rock of his
bitter humiliation.  "A nasty little prig"--the words, uttered with
conviction and scorn, had driven the high principles of John Granby
from his head.  He was a slave to his own admirations, and in the
past twenty-four hours Jobena's personality had become the
strongest force in his life; deep in his heart he believed that
what she had said was true.

He woke up on Thanksgiving morning with dark circles rimming his
eyes.  His bag, packed for immediate departure, brought back the
debacle of the night before, and as he lay staring at the ceiling,
relaxed by sleep, giant tears welled up into his eyes.  An older
man might have taken refuge behind the virtue of his intentions,
but Basil knew no such refuge.  For sixteen years he had gone his
own way without direction, due to his natural combativeness and to
the fact that no older man save John Granby had yet captured his
imagination.  Now John Granby had vanished in the night, and it
seemed the natural thing to Basil that he should struggle back to
rehabilitation unguided and alone.

One thing he knew--Jobena must not marry Skiddy De Vinci.  That was
a responsibility she could not foist upon him.  If necessary, he
would go to her father and tell what he knew.

Emerging from his room half an hour later, he met her in the hall.
She was dressed in a smart blue street suit with a hobble skirt and
a ruff of linen at her throat.  Her eyes opened a little and she
wished him a polite good morning.

"I've got to talk to you," he said quickly.

"I'm terribly sorry."  To his intense discomfort she flashed her
smile at him, just as if nothing had happened.  "I've only a minute
now."

"It's something very important.  I know you don't like me--"

"What nonsense!"  She laughed cheerfully.  "Of course I like you.
How did you get such a silly idea in your head?"

Before he could answer, she waved her hand hastily and ran down the
stairs.

George had gone to town and Basil spent the morning walking through
large deliberate snowflakes in Central Park rehearsing what he
should say to Mr. Dorsey.

"It's nothing to me, but I cannot see your only daughter throw away
her life on a dissipated man.  If I had a daughter of my own who
was about to throw away her life, I would want somebody to tell me,
and so I have come to tell you.  Of course, after this I cannot
stay in your house, and so I bid you good-by."

At quarter after twelve, waiting anxiously in the drawing-room, he
heard Mr. Dorsey come in.  He rushed downstairs, but Mr. Dorsey had
already entered the lift and closed the door.  Turning about, Basil
raced against the machine to the third story and caught him in the
hall.

"In regard to your daughter," he began excitedly--"in regard to
your daughter--"

"Well," said Mr. Dorsey, "is something the matter with Jobena?"

"I want to talk to you about her."

Mr. Dorsey laughed.  "Are you going to ask her hand in marriage?"

"Oh, no."

"Well, suppose we have a talk after dinner when we're full of
turkey and stuffing, and feeling happy."

He clapped his hand on Basil's shoulder and went on into his room.

It was a large family dinner party, and under cover of the
conversation Basil kept an attentive eye on Jobena, trying to
determine her desperate intention from her clothes and the
expression of her face.  She was adept at concealing her real
emotions, as he had discovered this morning, but once or twice he
saw her eyes wander to her watch and a look of abstraction come
into them.

There was coffee afterward in the library, and, it seemed to Basil,
interminable chatter.  When Jobena arose suddenly and left the
room, he moved just as quickly to Mr. Dorsey's side.

"Well, young man, what can I do for you?"

"Why--" Basil hesitated.

"Now is the time to ask me--when I'm well fed and happy."

"Why--"  Again Basil stopped.

"Don't be shy.  It's something about my Jobena."

But a peculiar thing had happened to Basil.  In sudden detachment
he saw himself from the outside--saw himself sneaking to Mr.
Dorsey, in a house in which he was a guest, to inform against a
girl.

"Why--" he repeated blankly.

"The question is:  Can you support her?" said Mr. Dorsey jovially.
"And the second is:  Can you control her?"

"I forgot what it was I wanted to say," Basil blurted out.

He hurried from the library, his brain in a turmoil.  Dashing
upstairs, he knocked at the door of Jobena's room.  There was no
answer and he opened the door and glanced inside.  The room was
empty, but a half-packed suitcase lay on the bed.

"Jobena," he called anxiously.  There was no answer.  A maid
passing along the hall told him Miss Jobena was having a marcel
wave in her mother's room.

He hurried downstairs and into his hat and coat, racking his brains
for the address where they had dropped Skiddy De Vinci the other
afternoon.  Sure that he would recognize the building, he drove
down Lexington Avenue in a taxi, tried three doors, and trembled
with excitement as he found the name "Leonard Edward Davies De
Vinci" on a card beside a bell.  When he rang, a latch clicked on
an inner door.

He had no plan.  Failing argument, he had a vague melodramatic idea
of knocking him down, tying him up and letting him lie there until
it blew over.  In view of the fact that Skiddy outweighed him by
forty pounds, this was a large order.

Skiddy was packing--the overcoat he tossed hastily over his
suitcase did not serve to hide this fact from Basil.  There was an
open bottle of whisky on his littered dresser, and beside it a half-
full glass.

Concealing his surprise, he invited Basil to sit down.

"I had to come and see you"--Basil tried to make his voice calm--
"about Jobena."

"Jobena?"  Skiddy frowned.  "What about her?  Did she send you
here?"

"Oh, no."  Basil swallowed hard, stalling for time.  "I thought--
maybe you could advise me--you see, I don't think she likes me, and
I don't know why."

Skiddy's face relaxed.  "That's nonsense.  Of course she likes you.
Have a drink?"

"No.  At least not now."

Skiddy finished his glass.  After a slight hesitation he removed
his overcoat from the suitcase.

"Excuse me if I go on packing, will you?  I'm going out of town."

"Certainly."

"Better have a drink."

"No, I'm on the water wagon--just now."

"When you get worrying about nothing, the thing to do is to have a
drink."

The phone rang and he answered it, squeezing the receiver close to
his ear:

"Yes. . . .  I can't talk now. . . .  Yes. . . .  At half-past five
then.  It's now about four. . . .  I'll explain why when I see
you. . . .  Good-by."  He hung up.  "My office," he said with
affected nonchalance . . .  "Won't you have a little drink?"

"No, thanks."

"Never worry.  Enjoy yourself."

"It's hard to be visiting in a house and know somebody doesn't like
you."

"But she does like you.  Told me so herself the other day."

While Skiddy packed they discussed the question.  He was a little
hazy and extremely nervous, and a single question asked in the
proper serious tone would send him rambling along indefinitely.  As
yet Basil had evolved no plan save to stay with Skiddy and wait for
the best opportunity of coming into the open.

But staying with Skiddy was going to be difficult; he was becoming
worried at Basil's tenacity.  Finally he closed his suitcase with
one of those definite snaps, took down a large drink quickly and
said:

"Well, guess I ought to get started."

They went out together and Skiddy hailed a taxi.

"Which way are you going?" Basil asked.

"Uptown--I mean downtown."

"I'll ride with you," volunteered Basil.  "We might--we might have
a drink in the--Biltmore."

Skiddy hesitated.  "I'll drop you there," he said.

When they reached the Biltmore, Basil made no move to get out.

"You're coming in with me, aren't you?" he asked in a surprised
voice.

Frowning, Skiddy looked at his watch.  "I haven't got much time."

Basil's face fell; he sat back in the car.

"Well, there's no use my going in alone, because I look sort of
young and they wouldn't give me anything unless I was with an older
man."

The appeal succeeded.  Skiddy got out, saying, "I'll have to
hurry," and they went into the bar.

"What'll it be?"

"Something strong," Basil said, lighting his first cigarette in a
month.

"Two stingers," ordered Skiddy.

"Let's have something really strong."

"Two double stingers then."

Out of the corner of his eye Basil looked at the clock.  It was
twenty after five.  Waiting until Skiddy was in the act of taking
down his drink he signalled to the waiter to repeat the order.

"Oh, no!" cried Skiddy.

"You'll have to have one on me."

"You haven't touched yours."

Basil sipped his drink, hating it.  He saw that with the new
alcohol Skiddy had relaxed a little.

"Got to be going," he said automatically.  "Important engagement."

Basil had an inspiration.

"I'm thinking of buying a dog," he announced.

"Don't talk about dogs," said Skiddy mournfully.  "I had an awful
experience about a dog.  I've just got over it."

"Tell me about it."

"I don't even like to talk about it; it was awful."

"I think a dog is the best friend a man has," Basil said.

"Do you?"  Skiddy slapped the table emphatically with his open
hand.  "So do I, Lee.  So do I."

"Nobody ever loves him like a dog," went on Basil, staring off
sentimentally into the distance.

The second round of double stingers arrived.

"Let me tell you about my dog that I lost," said Skiddy.  He looked
at his watch.  "I'm late, but a minute won't make any difference,
if you like dogs."

"I like them better than anything in the world."  Basil raised his
first glass, still half full.  "Here's to man's best friend--a
dog."

They drank.  There were tears in Skiddy's eyes.

"Let me tell you.  I raised this dog Eggshell from a pup.  He was a
beauty--an Airedale, sired by McTavish VI."

"I bet he was a beauty."

"He was!  Let me tell you--"

As Skiddy warmed to his subject, Basil pushed his new drink toward
Skiddy, whose hand presently closed upon the stem.  Catching the
bartender's attention, he ordered two more.  The clock stood at
five minutes of six.

Skiddy rambled on.  Ever afterward the sight of a dog story in a
magazine caused Basil an attack of acute nausea.  At half-past six
Skiddy rose uncertainly.

"I've gotta go.  Got important date.  Be mad."

"All right.  We'll stop by the bar and have one more."

The bartender knew Skiddy and they talked for a few minutes, for
time seemed of no account now.  Skiddy had a drink with his old
friend to wish him luck on a very important occasion.  Then he had
another.

At a quarter before eight o'clock Basil piloted Leonard Edward
Davies De Vinci from the hotel bar, leaving his suitcase in care of
the bartender.

"Important engagement," Skiddy mumbled as they hailed a taxi.

"Very important," Basil agreed.  "I'm going to see that you get
there."

When the car rolled up, Skiddy tumbled in and Basil gave the
address to the driver.

"Good-by and thanks!" Skiddy called fervently.  "Ought to go in,
maybe, and drink once more to best friend man ever had."

"Oh, no," said Basil, "it's too important."

"You're right.  It's too important."

The car rolled off and Basil followed it with his eye as it turned
the corner.  Skiddy was going out on Long Island to visit
Eggshell's grave.


IV


Basil had never had a drink before and, now with his jubilant
relief, the three cocktails that he had been forced to down mounted
swiftly to his head.  On his way to the Dorseys' house he threw
back his head and roared with laughter.  The self-respect he had
lost last night rushed back to him; he felt himself tingling with
the confidence of power.

As the maid opened the door for him he was aware subconsciously
that there was someone in the lower hall.  He waited till the maid
disappeared; then stepping to the door of the coat room, he pulled
it open.  Beside her suitcase stood Jobena, wearing a look of
mingled impatience and fright.  Was he deceived by his ebullience
or, when she saw him, did her face lighten with relief?

"Hello."  She took off her coat and hung it up as if that was her
purpose there, and came out under the lights.  Her face, pale and
lovely, composed itself, as if she had sat down and folded her
hands.

"George was looking for you," she said indifferently.

"Was he?  I've been with a friend."

With an expression of surprise she sniffed the faint aroma of
cocktails.

"But my friend went to visit his dog's tomb, so I came home."

She stiffened suddenly.  "You've been with Skiddy?"

"He was telling me about his dog," said Basil gravely.  "A man's
best friend is his dog after all."

She sat down and stared at him, wide-eyed.

"Has Skiddy passed out?"

"He went to see a dog."

"Oh, the fool!" she cried.

"Were you expecting him?  Is it possible that that's your
suitcase?"

"It's none of your business."

Basil took it out of the closet and deposited it in the elevator.

"You won't need it tonight," he said.

Her eyes shone with big despairing tears.

"You oughtn't to drink," she said brokenly.  "Can't you see what
it's made of him?"

"A man's best friend is a stinger."

"You're just sixteen.  I suppose all that you told me the other
afternoon was a joke--I mean, about the perfect life."

"All a joke," he agreed.

"I thought you meant it.  Doesn't anybody ever mean anything?"

"I like you better than any girl I ever knew," Basil said quietly.
"I mean that."

"I liked you, too, until you said that about my kissing people."

He went and stood over her and took her hand.

"Let's take the bag upstairs before the maid comes in."

They stepped into the dark elevator and closed the door.

"There's a light switch somewhere," she said.

Still holding her hand, he drew her close and tightened his arm
around her in the darkness.  "Just for this once we don't need the
light."


Going back on the train, George Dorsey came to a sudden resolution.
His mouth tightened.

"I don't want to say anything, Basil--"  He hesitated.  "But look--
Did you have something to drink Thanksgiving Day?"

Basil frowned and nodded.

"Sometimes I've got to," he said soberly.  "I don't know what it
is.  All my family died of liquor."

"Gee!" exclaimed George.

"But I'm through.  I promised Jobena I wouldn't touch anything more
till I'm twenty-one.  She feels that if I go on with this constant
dissipation it'll ruin my life."

George was silent for a moment.

"What were you and she talking about those last few days?  Gosh, I
thought you were supposed to be visiting ME."

"It's--it's sort of sacred," Basil said placidly. . . .  "Look
here; if we don't have anything fit to eat for dinner, let's get
Sam to leave the pantry window unlocked tonight."





RAGS MARTIN-JONES AND THE PR-NCE OF W-LES


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


McCall's (July 1924)



The Majestic came gliding into New York harbor on an April morning.
She sniffed at the tugboats and turtle-gaited ferries, winked at a
gaudy young yacht, and ordered a cattle-boat out of her way with a
snarling whistle of steam.  Then she parked at her private dock
with all the fuss of a stout lady sitting down, and announced
complacently that she had just come from Cherbourg and Southampton
with a cargo of the very best people in the world.

The very best people in the world stood on the deck and waved
idiotically to their poor relations who were waiting on the dock
for gloves from Paris.  Before long a great toboggan had connected
the Majestic with the North American continent, and the ship began
to disgorge these very best people in the world--who turned out to
be Gloria Swanson, two buyers from Lord & Taylor, the financial
minister from Graustark with a proposal for funding the debt, and
an African king who had been trying to land somewhere all winter
and was feeling violently seasick.

The photographers worked passionately as the stream of passengers
flowed on to the dock.  There was a burst of cheering at the
appearance of a pair of stretchers laden with two Middle-Westerners
who had drunk themselves delirious on the last night out.

The deck gradually emptied, but when the last bottle of Benedictine
had reached shore the photographers still remained at their posts.
And the officer in charge of debarkation still stood at the foot of
the gangway, glancing first at his watch and then at the deck as if
some important part of the cargo was still on board.  At last from
the watchers on the pier there arose a long-drawn "Ah-h-h!" as a
final entourage began to stream down from deck B.

First came two French maids, carrying small, purple dogs, and
followed by a squad of porters, blind and invisible under
innumerable bunches and bouquets of fresh flowers.  Another maid
followed, leading a sad-eyed orphan child of a French flavor, and
close upon its heels walked the second officer pulling along three
neurasthenic wolfhounds, much to their reluctance and his own.

A pause.  Then the captain, Sir Howard George Witchcraft, appeared
at the rail, with something that might have been a pile of gorgeous
silver-fox fur standing by his side.

Rags Martin-Jones, after five years in the capitals of Europe, was
returning to her native land!

Rags Martin-Jones was not a dog.  She was half a girl and half a
flower, and as she shook hands with Captain Sir Howard George
Witchcraft she smiled as if some one had told her the newest,
freshest joke in the world.  All the people who had not already
left the pier felt that smile trembling on the April air and turned
around to see.

She came slowly down the gangway.  Her hat, an expensive,
inscrutable experiment, was crushed under her arm, so that her
scant boy's hair, convict's hair, tried unsuccessfully to toss and
flop a little in the harbor wind.  Her face was like seven o'clock
on a wedding morning save where she had slipped a preposterous
monocle into an eye of clear childish blue.  At every few steps her
long lashes would tilt out the monocle, and she would laugh, a
bored, happy laugh, and replace the supercilious spectacle in the
other eye.

Tap!  Her one hundred and five pounds reached the pier and it
seemed to sway and bend from the shock of her beauty.  A few
porters fainted.  A large, sentimental shark which had followed the
ship across made a despairing leap to see her once more, and then
dove, broken-hearted, back into the deep sea.  Rags Martin-Jones
had come home.

There was no member of her family there to meet her, for the simple
reason that she was the only member of her family left alive.  In
1913 her parents had gone down on the Titanic together rather than
be separated in this world, and so the Martin-Jones fortune of
seventy-five millions had been inherited by a very little girl on
her tenth birthday.  It was what the consumer always refers to as a
"shame."

Rags Martin-Jones (everybody had forgotten her real name long ago)
was now photographed from all sides.  The monocle persistently fell
out, and she kept laughing and yawning and replacing it, so no very
clear picture of her was taken--except by the motion-picture
camera.  All the photographs, however, included a flustered,
handsome young man, with an almost ferocious love-light burning in
his eyes, who had met her on the dock.  His name was John M.
Chestnut, he had already written the story of his success for the
American Magazine, and he had been hopelessly in love with Rags
ever since the time when she, like the tides, had come under the
influence of the summer moon.

When Rags became really aware of his presence they were walking
down the pier, and she looked at him blankly as though she had
never seen him before in this world.

"Rags," he began, "Rags--"

"John M. Chestnut?" she inquired, inspecting him with great
interest.

"Of course!" he exclaimed angrily.  "Are you trying to pretend you
don't know me?  That you didn't write me to meet you here?"

She laughed.  A chauffeur appeared at her elbow, and she twisted
out of her coat, revealing a dress made in great splashy checks of
sea-blue and gray.  She shook herself like a wet bird.

"I've got a lot of junk to declare," she remarked absently.

"So have I," said Chestnut anxiously, "and the first thing I want
to declare is that I've loved you, Rags, every minute since you've
been away."

She stopped him with a groan.

"Please!  There were some young Americans on the boat.  The subject
has become a bore."

"My God!" cried Chestnut, "do you mean to say that you class MY
love with what was said to you on a BOAT?"

His voice had risen, and several people in the vicinity turned to
hear.

"Sh!" she warned him, "I'm not giving a circus.  If you want me to
even see you while I'm here, you'll have to be less violent."

But John M. Chestnut seemed unable to control his voice.

"Do you mean to say"--it trembled to a carrying pitch--"that you've
forgotten what you said on this very pier five years ago last
Thursday?"

Half the passengers from the ship were now watching the scene on
the dock, and another little eddy drifted out of the customs-house
to see.

"John"--her displeasure was increasing--"if you raise your voice
again I'll arrange it so you'll have plenty of chance to cool off.
I'm going to the Ritz.  Come and see me there this afternoon."

"But, Rags!" he protested hoarsely.  "Listen to me.  Five years
ago--"

Then the watchers on the dock were treated to a curious sight.  A
beautiful lady in a checkered dress of sea-blue and gray took a
brisk step forward so that her hands came into contact with an
excited young man by her side.  The young man retreating
instinctively reached back with his foot, but, finding nothing,
relapsed gently off the thirty-foot dock and plopped, after a not
ungraceful revolution, into the Hudson River.

A shout of alarm went up, and there was a rush to the edge just as
his head appeared above water.  He was swimming easily, and,
perceiving this, the young lady who had apparently been the cause
of the accident leaned over the pier and made a megaphone of her
hands.

"I'll be in at half past four," she cried.

And with a cheerful wave of her hand, which the engulfed gentleman
was unable to return, she adjusted her monocle, threw one haughty
glance at the gathered crowd, and walked leisurely from the scene.


II


The five dogs, the three maids, and the French orphan were
installed in the largest suite at the Ritz, and Rags tumbled lazily
into a steaming bath, fragrant with herbs, where she dozed for the
greater part of an hour.  At the end of that time she received
business calls from a masseuse, a manicure, and finally a Parisian
hair-dresser, who restored her hair-cut to criminal's length.  When
John M. Chestnut arrived at four he found half a dozen lawyers and
bankers, the administrators of the Martin-Jones trust fund, waiting
in the hall.  They had been there since half past one, and were now
in a state of considerable agitation.

After one of the maids had subjected him to a severe scrutiny,
possibly to be sure that he was thoroughly dry, John was conducted
immediately into the presence of m'selle.  M'selle was in her
bedroom reclining on the chaise-longue among two dozen silk pillows
that had accompanied her from the other side.  John came into the
room somewhat stiffly and greeted her with a formal bow.

"You look better," she said, raising herself from her pillows and
staring at him appraisingly.  "It gave you a color."

He thanked her coldly for the compliment.

"You ought to go in every morning."  And then she added
irrelevantly:  "I'm going back to Paris tomorrow."

John Chestnut gasped.

"I wrote you that I didn't intend to stay more than a week anyhow,"
she added.

"But, Rags--"

"Why should I?  There isn't an amusing man in New York."

"But listen, Rags, won't you give me a chance?  Won't you stay for,
say, ten days and get to know me a little?"

"Know you!"  Her tone implied that he was already a far too open
book.  "I want a man who's capable of a gallant gesture."

"Do you mean you want me to express myself entirely in pantomime?"

Rags uttered a disgusted sigh.

"I mean you haven't any imagination," she explained patiently.  "No
Americans have any imagination.  Paris is the only large city where
a civilized woman can breathe."

"Don't you care for me at all any more?"

"I wouldn't have crossed the Atlantic to see you if I didn't.  But
as soon as I looked over the Americans on the boat, I knew I
couldn't marry one.  I'd just hate you, John, and the only fun I'd
have out of it would be the fun of breaking your heart."

She began to twist herself down among the cushions until she almost
disappeared from view.

"I've lost my monocle," she explained.

After an unsuccessful search in the silken depths she discovered
the illusive glass hanging down the back of her neck.

"I'd love to be in love," she went on, replacing the monocle in her
childish eye.  "Last spring in Sorrento I almost eloped with an
Indian rajah, but he was half a shade too dark, and I took an
intense dislike to one of his other wives."

"Don't talk that rubbish!" cried John, sinking his face into his
hands.

"Well, I didn't marry him," she protested.  "But in one way he had
a lot to offer.  He was the third richest subject of the British
Empire.  That's another thing--are you rich?"

"Not as rich as you."

"There you are.  What have you to offer me?"

"Love."

"Love!"  She disappeared again among the cushions.  "Listen, John.
Life to me is a series of glistening bazaars with a merchant in
front of each one rubbing his hands together and saying 'Patronize
this place here.  Best bazaar in the world.'  So I go in with my
purse full of beauty and money and youth, all prepared to buy.
'What have you got for sale?' I ask him, and he rubs his hands
together and says:  'Well, Mademoiselle, to-day we have some
perfectly be-OO-tiful love.'  Sometimes he hasn't even got that in
stock, but he sends out for it when he finds I have so much money
to spend.  Oh, he always gives me love before I go--and for
nothing.  That's the one revenge I have."

John Chestnut rose despairingly to his feet and took a step toward
the window.

"Don't throw yourself out," Rags exclaimed quickly.

"All right."  He tossed his cigarette down into Madison Avenue.

"It isn't just you," she said in a softer voice.  "Dull and
uninspired as you are, I care for you more than I can say.  But
life's so endless here.  Nothing ever comes off."

"Loads of things come off," he insisted.  "Why, to-day there was an
intellectual murder in Hoboken and a suicide by proxy in Maine.  A
bill to sterilize agnostics is before Congress--"

"I have no interest in humor," she objected, "but I have an almost
archaic predilection for romance.  Why, John, last month I sat at a
dinner-table while two men flipped a coin for the kingdom of
Schwartzberg-Rhineminster.  In Paris I knew a man named Blutchdak
who really started the war, and has a new one planned for year
after next."

"Well, just for a rest you come out with me tonight," he said
doggedly.

"Where to?" demanded Rags with scorn.  "Do you think I still thrill
at a night-club and a bottle of sugary mousseaux?  I prefer my own
gaudy dreams."

"I'll take you to the most highly-strung place in the city."

"What'll happen?  You've got to tell me what'll happen."

John Chestnut suddenly drew a long breath and looked cautiously
around as if he were afraid of being overheard.

"Well, to tell you the truth," he said in a low, worried tone, "if
everything was known, something pretty awful would be liable to
happen to ME."

She sat upright and the pillows tumbled about her like leaves.

"Do you mean to imply that there's anything shady in your life?"
she cried, with laughter in her voice.  "Do you expect me to
believe that?  No, John, you'll have your fun by plugging ahead on
the beaten path--just plugging ahead."

Her mouth, a small insolent rose, dropped the words on him like
thorns.  John took his hat and coat from the chair and picked up
his cane.

"For the last time--will you come along with me to-night and see
what you will see?"

"See what?  See who?  Is there anything in this country worth
seeing?"

"Well," he said, in a matter-of-fact tone, "for one thing you'll
see the Prince of Wales."

"What?"  She left the chaise-longue at a bound.  "Is he back in New
York?"

"He will be to-night.  Would you care to see him?"

"Would I?  I've never seen him.  I've missed him everywhere.  I'd
give a year of my life to see him for an hour."  Her voice trembled
with excitement.

"He's been in Canada.  He's down here incognito for the big prize-
fight this afternoon.  And I happen to know where he's going to be
to-night."

Rags gave a sharp ecstatic cry:

"Dominic!  Louise!  Germaine!"

The three maids came running.  The room filled suddenly with
vibrations of wild, startled light.

"Dominic, the car!" cried Rags in French.  "St. Raphael, my gold
dress and the slippers with the real gold heels.  The big pearls
too--all the pearls, and the egg-diamond and the stockings with the
sapphire clocks.  Germaine--send for a beauty-parlor on the run.
My bath again--ice cold and half full of almond cream.  Dominic--
Tiffany's, like lightning, before they close.  Find me a brooch, a
pendant, a tiara, anything--it doesn't matter--with the arms of the
house of Windsor."

She was fumbling at the buttons of her dress--and as John turned
quickly to go, it was already sliding from her shoulders.

"Orchids!" she called after him, "orchids, for the love of heaven!
Four dozen, so I can choose four."

And then maids flew here and there about the room like frightened
birds.  "Perfume, St. Raphael, open the perfume trunk, and my rose-
colored sables, and my diamond garters, and the sweet-oil for my
hands!  Here, take these things!  This too--and this--ouch!--and
this!"

With becoming modesty John Chestnut closed the outside door.  The
six trustees in various postures of fatigue, of ennui, of
resignation, of despair, were still cluttering up the outer hall.

"Gentlemen," announced John Chestnut, "I fear that Miss Martin-
Jones is much too weary from her trip to talk to you this
afternoon."


III


"This place, for no particular reason, is called the Hole in the
Sky."

Rags looked around her.  They were on a roof-garden wide open to
the April night.  Overhead the true stars winked cold, and there
was a lunar sliver of ice in the dark west.  But where they stood
it was warm as June, and the couples dining or dancing on the
opaque glass floor were unconcerned with the forbidding sky.

"What makes it so warm?" she whispered as they moved toward a
table.

"It's some new invention that keeps the warm air from rising.  I
don't know the principle of the thing, but I know that they can
keep it open like this even in the middle of winter--"

"Where's the Prince of Wales?" she demanded tensely.

John looked around.

"He hasn't arrived yet.  He won't be here for about half an hour."

She sighed profoundly.

"It's the first time I've been excited in four years."

Four years--one year less than he had loved her.  He wondered if
when she was sixteen, a wild lovely child, sitting up all night in
restaurants with officers who were to leave for Brest next day,
losing the glamour of life too soon in the old, sad, poignant days
of the war, she had ever been so lovely as under these amber lights
and this dark sky.  From her excited eyes to her tiny slipper
heels, which were striped with layers of real silver and gold, she
was like one of those amazing ships that are carved complete in a
bottle.  She was finished with that delicacy, with that care; as
though the long lifetime of some worker in fragility had been used
to make her so.  John Chestnut wanted to take her up in his hands,
turn her this way and that, examine the tip of a slipper or the tip
of an ear or squint closely at the fairy stuff from which her
lashes were made.

"Who's that?"  She pointed suddenly to a handsome Latin at a table
over the way.

"That's Roderigo Minerlino, the movie and face-cream star.  Perhaps
he'll dance after a while."

Rags became suddenly aware of the sound of violins and drums, but
the music seemed to come from far away, seemed to float over the
crisp night and on to the floor with the added remoteness of a
dream.

"The orchestra's on another roof," explained John.  "It's a new
idea--Look, the entertainment's beginning."

A negro girl, thin as a reed, emerged suddenly from a masked
entrance into a circle of harsh barbaric light, startled the music
to a wild minor, and commenced to sing a rhythmic, tragic song.
The pipe of her body broke abruptly and she began a slow incessant
step, without progress and without hope, like the failure of a
savage insufficient dream.  She had lost Papa Jack, she cried over
and over with a hysterical monotony at once despairing and
unreconciled.  One by one the loud horns tried to force her from
the steady beat of madness but she listened only to the mutter of
the drums which were isolating her in some lost place in time,
among many thousand forgotten years.  After the failure of the
piccolo, she made herself again into a thin brown line, wailed once
with sharp and terrible intensity, then vanished into sudden
darkness.

"If you lived in New York you wouldn't need to be told who she is,"
said John when the amber light flashed on.  "The next fella is
Sheik B. Smith, a comedian of the fatuous, garrulous sort--"

He broke off.  Just as the lights went down for the second number
Rags had given a long sigh, and leaned forward tensely in her
chair.  Her eyes were rigid like the eyes of a pointer dog, and
John saw that they were fixed on a party that had come through a
side entrance, and were arranging themselves around a table in the
half-darkness.

The table was shielded with palms, and Rags at first made out only
three dim forms.  Then she distinguished a fourth who seemed to be
placed well behind the other three--a pale oval of a face topped
with a glimmer of dark-yellow hair.

"Hello!" ejaculated John.  "There's his majesty now."

Her breath seemed to die murmurously in her throat.  She was dimly
aware that the comedian was now standing in a glow of white light
on the dancing floor, that he had been talking for some moments,
and that there was a constant ripple of laughter in the air.  But
her eyes remained motionless, enchanted.  She saw one of the party
bend and whisper to another, and after the low glitter of a match
the bright button of a cigarette end gleamed in the background.
How long it was before she moved she did not know.  Then something
seemed to happen to her eyes, something white, something terribly
urgent, and she wrenched about sharply to find herself full in the
center of a baby spot-light from above.  She became aware that
words were being said to her from somewhere, and that a quick trail
of laughter was circling the roof, but the light blinded her, and
instinctively she made a half-movement from her chair.

"Sit still!" John was whispering across the table.  "He picks
somebody out for this every night."

Then she realized--it was the comedian, Sheik B. Smith.  He was
talking to her, arguing with her--about something that seemed
incredibly funny to every one else, but came to her ears only as a
blur of muddled sound.  Instinctively she had composed her face at
the first shock of the light and now she smiled.  It was a gesture
of rare self-possession.  Into this smile she insinuated a vast
impersonality, as if she were unconscious of the light, unconscious
of his attempt to play upon her loveliness--but amused at an
infinitely removed HIM, whose darts might have been thrown just as
successfully at the moon.  She was no longer a "lady"--a lady would
have been harsh or pitiful or absurd; Rags stripped her attitude to
a sheer consciousness of her own impervious beauty, sat there
glittering until the comedian began to feel alone as he had never
felt alone before.  At a signal from him the spot-light was
switched suddenly out.  The moment was over.

The moment was over, the comedian left the floor, and the far-away
music began.  John leaned toward her.

"I'm sorry.  There really wasn't anything to do.  You were
wonderful."

She dismissed the incident with a casual laugh--then she started,
there were now only two men sitting at the table across the floor.

"He's gone!" she exclaimed in quick distress.

"Don't worry--he'll be back.  He's got to be awfully careful, you
see, so he's probably waiting outside with one of his aides until
it gets dark again."

"Why has he got to be careful?"

"Because he's not supposed to be in New York.  He's even under one
of his second-string names."

The lights dimmed again, and almost immediately a tall man appeared
out of the darkness and approached their table.

"May I introduce myself?" he said rapidly to John in a supercilious
British voice.  "Lord Charles Este, of Baron Marchbanks' party."
He glanced at John closely as if to be sure that he appreciated the
significance of the name.

John nodded.

"That is between ourselves, you understand."

"Of course."

Rags groped on the table for her untouched champagne, and tipped
the glassful down her throat.

"Baron Marchbanks requests that your companion will join his party
during this number."

Both men looked at Rags.  There was a moment's pause.

"Very well," she said, and glanced back again interrogatively at
John.  Again he nodded.  She rose and with her heart beating wildly
threaded the tables, making the half-circuit of the room; then
melted, a slim figure in shimmering gold, into the table set in
half-darkness.


IV


The number drew to a close, and John Chestnut sat alone at his
table, stirring auxiliary bubbles in his glass of champagne.  Just
before the lights went on, there was a soft rasp of gold cloth, and
Rags, flushed and breathing quickly, sank into her chair.  Her eyes
were shining with tears.

John looked at her moodily.

"Well, what did he say?"

"He was very quiet."

"Didn't he say a word?"

Her hand trembled as she took up her glass of champagne.

"He just looked at me while it was dark.  And he said a few
conventional things.  He was like his pictures, only he looks very
bored and tired.  He didn't even ask my name."

"Is he leaving New York to-night?"

"In half an hour.  He and his aides have a car outside, and they
expect to be over the border before dawn."

"Did you find him--fascinating?"

She hesitated and then slowly nodded her head.

"That's what everybody says," admitted John glumly.  "Do they
expect you back there?"

"I don't know."  She looked uncertainly across the floor but the
celebrated personage had again withdrawn from his table to some
retreat outside.  As she turned back an utterly strange young man
who had been standing for a moment in the main entrance came toward
them hurriedly.  He was a deathly pale person in a dishevelled and
inappropriate business suit, and he had laid a trembling hand on
John Chestnut's shoulder.

"Monte!" exclaimed John, starting up so suddenly that he upset his
champagne.  "What is it?  What's the matter?"

"They've picked up the trail!" said the young man in a shaken
whisper.  He looked around.  "I've got to speak to you alone."

John Chestnut jumped to his feet, and Rags noticed that his face
too had become white as the napkin in his hand.  He excused himself
and they retreated to an unoccupied table a few feet away.  Rags
watched them curiously for a moment, then she resumed her scrutiny
of the table across the floor.  Would she be asked to come back?
The prince had simply risen and bowed and gone outside.  Perhaps
she should have waited until he returned, but though she was still
tense with excitement she had, to some extent, become Rags Martin-
Jones again.  Her curiosity was satisfied--any new urge must come
from him.  She wondered if she had really felt an intrinsic charm--
she wondered especially if he had in any marked way responded to
her beauty.

The pale person called Monte disappeared and John returned to the
table.  Rags was startled to find that a tremendous change had come
over him.  He lurched into his chair like a drunken man.

"John!  What's the matter?"

Instead of answering, he reached for the champagne bottle, but his
fingers were trembling so that the splattered wine made a wet
yellow ring around his glass.

"Are you sick?"

"Rags," he said unsteadily, "I'm all through."

"What do you mean?"

"I'm all through, I tell you."  He managed a sickly smile.
"There's been a warrant out for me for over an hour."

"What have you done?" she demanded in a frightened voice.  "What's
the warrant for?"

The lights went out for the next number, and he collapsed suddenly
over the table.

"What is it?" she insisted, with rising apprehension.  She leaned
forward--his answer was barely audible.

"Murder?"  She could feel her body grow cold as ice.

He nodded.  She took hold of both arms and tried to shake him
upright, as one shakes a coat into place.  His eyes were rolling in
his head.

"Is it true?  Have they got proof?"

Again he nodded drunkenly.

"Then you've got to get out of the country now!  Do you understand,
John?  You've got to get out NOW, before they come looking for you
here!"

He loosed a wild glance of terror toward the entrance.

"Oh, God!" cried Rags, "why don't you do something?"  Her eyes
strayed here and there in desperation, became suddenly fixed.  She
drew in her breath sharply, hesitated, and then whispered fiercely
into his ear.

"If I arrange it, will you go to Canada tonight?"

"How?"

"I'll arrange it--if you'll pull yourself together a little.  This
is Rags talking to you, don't you understand, John?  I want you to
sit here and not move until I come back!"

A minute later she had crossed the room under cover of the
darkness.

"Baron Marchbanks," she whispered softly, standing just behind his
chair.

He motioned her to sit down.

"Have you room in your car for two more passengers to-night?"

One of the aides turned around abruptly.

"His lordship's car is full," he said shortly.

"It's terribly urgent."  Her voice was trembling.

"Well," said the prince hesitantly, "I don't know."

Lord Charles Este looked at the prince and shook his head.

"I don't think it's advisable.  This is a ticklish business anyhow
with contrary orders from home.  You know we agreed there'd be no
complications."

The prince frowned.

"This isn't a complication," he objected.

Este turned frankly to Rags.

"Why is it urgent?"

Rags hesitated.

"Why"--she flushed suddenly--"it's a runaway marriage."

The prince laughed.

"Good!" he exclaimed.  "That settles it.  Este is just being
official.  Bring him over right away.  We're leaving shortly,
what?"

Este looked at his watch.

"Right now!"

Rags rushed away.  She wanted to move the whole party from the roof
while the lights were still down.

"Hurry!" she cried in John's ear.  "We're going over the border--
with the Prince of Wales.  You'll be safe by morning."

He looked up at her with dazed eyes.  She hurriedly paid the check,
and seizing his arm piloted him as inconspicuously as possible to
the other table, where she introduced him with a word.  The prince
acknowledged his presence by shaking hands--the aides nodded, only
faintly concealing their displeasure.

"We'd better start," said Este, looking impatiently at his watch.

They were on their feet when suddenly an exclamation broke from all
of them--two policemen and a red-haired man in plain clothes had
come in at the main door.

"Out we go," breathed Este, impelling the party toward the side
entrance.  "There's going to be some kind of riot here."  He
swore--two more blue-coats barred the exit there.  They paused
uncertainly.  The plain-clothes man was beginning a careful
inspection of the people at the tables.

Este looked sharply at Rags and then at John, who shrank back
behind the palms.

"Is that one of your revenue fellas out there?" demanded Este.

"No," whispered Rags.  "There's going to be trouble.  Can't we get
out this entrance?"

The prince with rising impatience sat down again in his chair.

"Let me know when you chaps are ready to go."  He smiled at Rags.
"Now just suppose we all get in trouble just for that jolly face of
yours."

Then suddenly the lights went up.  The plain-clothes man whirled
around quickly and sprang to the middle of the cabaret floor.

"Nobody try to leave this room!" he shouted.  "Sit down, that party
behind the palms!  Is John M. Chestnut in this room?"

Rags gave a short involuntary cry.

"Here!" cried the detective to the policeman behind him.  "Take a
look at that funny bunch across over there.  Hands up, you men!"

"My God!" whispered Este, "we've got to get out of here!"  He
turned to the prince.  "This won't do, Ted.  You can't be seen
here.  I'll stall them off while you get down to the car."

He took a step toward the side entrance.

"Hands up, there!" shouted the plain-clothes man.  "And when I say
hands up I mean it!  Which one of you's Chestnut?"

"You're mad!" cried Este.  "We're British subjects.  We're not
involved in this affair in any way!"

A woman screamed somewhere, and there was a general movement toward
the elevator, a movement which stopped short before the muzzles of
two automatic pistols.  A girl next to Rags collapsed in a dead
faint to the floor, and at the same moment the music on the other
roof began to play.

"Stop that music!" bellowed the plain-clothes man.  "And get some
earrings on that whole bunch--quick!"

Two policemen advanced toward the party, and simultaneously Este
and the other aides drew their revolvers, and, shielding the prince
as they best could, began to edge toward the side.  A shot rang out
and then another, followed by a crash of silver and china as half a
dozen diners overturned their tables and dropped quickly behind.

The panic became general.  There were three shots in quick
succession, and then a fusillade.  Rags saw Este firing coolly at
the eight amber lights above, and a thick fume of gray smoke began
to fill the air.  As a strange undertone to the shouting and
screaming came the incessant clamor of the distant jazz band.

Then in a moment it was all over.  A shrill whistle rang out over
the roof, and through the smoke Rags saw John Chestnut advancing
toward the plain-clothes man, his hands held out in a gesture of
surrender.  There was a last nervous cry, a chill clatter as some
one inadvertently stepped into a pile of dishes, and then a heavy
silence fell on the roof--even the band seemed to have died away.

"It's all over!"  John Chestnut's voice rang out wildly on the
night air.  "The party's over.  Everybody who wants to can go
home!"

Still there was silence--Rags knew it was the silence of awe--the
strain of guilt had driven John Chestnut insane.

"It was a great performance," he was shouting.  "I want to thank
you one and all.  If you can find any tables still standing,
champagne will be served as long as you care to stay."

It seemed to Rags that the roof and the high stars suddenly began
to swim round and round.  She saw John take the detective's hand
and shake it heartily, and she watched the detective grin and
pocket his gun.  The music had recommenced, and the girl who had
fainted was suddenly dancing with Lord Charles Este in the corner.
John was running here and there patting people on the back, and
laughing and shaking hands.  Then he was coming toward her, fresh
and innocent as a child.

"Wasn't it wonderful?" he cried.

Rags felt a faintness stealing over her.  She groped backward with
her hand toward a chair.

"What was it?" she cried dazedly.  "Am I dreaming?"

"Of course not!  You're wide awake.  I made it up, Rags, don't you
see?  I made up the whole thing for you.  I had it invented!  The
only thing real about it was my name!"

She collapsed suddenly against his coat, clung to his lapels, and
would have wilted to the floor if he had not caught her quickly in
his arms.

"Some champagne--quick!" he called, and then he shouted at the
Prince of Wales, who stood near by.  "Order my car quick, you!
Miss Martin-Jones has fainted from excitement."


V


The skyscraper rose bulkily through thirty tiers of windows before
it attenuated itself to a graceful sugar-loaf of shining white.
Then it darted up again another hundred feet, thinned to a mere
oblong tower in its last fragile aspiration toward the sky.  At the
highest of its high windows Rags Martin-Jones stood full in the
stiff breeze, gazing down at the city.

"Mr. Chestnut wants to know if you'll come right in to his private
office."

Obediently her slim feet moved along the carpet into a high, cool
chamber overlooking the harbor and the wide sea.

John Chestnut sat at his desk, waiting, and Rags walked to him and
put her arms around his shoulder.

"Are you sure YOU'RE real?" she asked anxiously.  "Are you
absolutely SURE?"

"You only wrote me a week before you came," he protested modestly,
"or I could have arranged a revolution."

"Was the whole thing just MINE?" she demanded.  "Was it a perfectly
useless, gorgeous thing, just for me?"

"Useless?"  He considered.  "Well, it started out to be.  At the
last minute I invited a big restaurant man to be there, and while
you were at the other table I sold him the whole idea of the night-
club."

He looked at his watch.

"I've got one more thing to do--and then we've got just time to be
married before lunch."  He picked up his telephone.  "Jackson? . . .
Send a triplicated cable to Paris, Berlin, and Budapest and have
those two bogus dukes who tossed up for Schwartzberg-Rhineminster
chased over the Polish border.  If the Dutchy won't act, lower the
rate of exchange to point triple zero naught two.  Also, that idiot
Blutchdak is in the Balkans again, trying to start a new war.  Put
him on the first boat for New York or else throw him in a Greek
jail."

He rang off, turned to the startled cosmopolite with a laugh.

"The next stop is the City Hall.  Then, if you like, we'll run over
to Paris."

"John," she asked him intently, "who was the Prince of Wales?"

He waited till they were in the elevator, dropping twenty floors at
a swoop.  Then he leaned forward and tapped the lift-boy on the
shoulder.

"Not so fast, Cedric.  This lady isn't used to falls from high
places."

The elevator-boy turned around, smiled.  His face was pale, oval,
framed in yellow hair.  Rags blushed like fire.

"Cedric's from Wessex," explained John.  "The resemblance is, to
say the least, amazing.  Princes are not particularly discreet, and
I suspect Cedric of being a Guelph in some left-handed way."

Rags took the monocle from around her neck and threw the ribbon
over Cedric's head.

"Thank you," she said simply, "for the second greatest thrill of my
life."

John Chestnut began rubbing his hands together in a commercial
gesture.

"Patronize this place, lady," he besought her.  "Best bazaar in the
city!"

"What have you got for sale?"

"Well, m'selle, to-day we have some perfectly bee-OO-tiful love."

"Wrap it up, Mr. Merchant," cried Rags Martin-Jones.  "It looks
like a bargain to me."



THE END






THE RICH BOY


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Red Book (January and February 1926)



Begin with an individual, and before you know it you find that you
have created a type; begin with a type, and you find that you have
created--nothing.  That is because we are all queer fish, queerer
behind our faces and voices than we want any one to know or than we
know ourselves.  When I hear a man proclaiming himself an "average,
honest, open fellow," I feel pretty sure that he has some definite
and perhaps terrible abnormality which he has agreed to conceal--
and his protestation of being average and honest and open is his
way of reminding himself of his misprision.

There are no types, no plurals.  There is a rich boy, and this is
his and not his brothers' story.  All my life I have lived among
his brothers but this one has been my friend.  Besides, if I wrote
about his brothers I should have to begin by attacking all the lies
that the poor have told about the rich and the rich have told about
themselves--such a wild structure they have erected that when we
pick up a book about the rich, some instinct prepares us for
unreality.  Even the intelligent and impassioned reporters of life
have made the country of the rich as unreal as fairy-land.

Let me tell you about the very rich.  They are different from you
and me.  They possess and enjoy early, and it does something to
them, makes them soft where we are hard, and cynical where we are
trustful, in a way that, unless you were born rich, it is very
difficult to understand.  They think, deep in their hearts, that
they are better than we are because we had to discover the
compensations and refuges of life for ourselves.  Even when they
enter deep into our world or sink below us, they still think that
they are better than we are.  They are different.  The only way I
can describe young Anson Hunter is to approach him as if he were a
foreigner and cling stubbornly to my point of view.  If I accept
his for a moment I am lost--I have nothing to show but a
preposterous movie.


II


Anson was the eldest of six children who would some day divide a
fortune of fifteen million dollars, and he reached the age of
reason--is it seven?--at the beginning of the century when daring
young women were already gliding along Fifth Avenue in electric
"mobiles."  In those days he and his brother had an English
governess who spoke the language very clearly and crisply and well,
so that the two boys grew to speak as she did--their words and
sentences were all crisp and clear and not run together as ours
are.  They didn't talk exactly like English children but acquired
an accent that is peculiar to fashionable people in the city of New
York.

In the summer the six children were moved from the house on 71st
Street to a big estate in northern Connecticut.  It was not a
fashionable locality--Anson's father wanted to delay as long as
possible his children's knowledge of that side of life.  He was a
man somewhat superior to his class, which composed New York
society, and to his period, which was the snobbish and formalized
vulgarity of the Gilded Age, and he wanted his sons to learn habits
of concentration and have sound constitutions and grow up into
right-living and successful men.  He and his wife kept an eye on
them as well as they were able until the two older boys went away
to school, but in huge establishments this is difficult--it was
much simpler in the series of small and medium-sized houses in
which my own youth was spent--I was never far out of the reach of
my mother's voice, of the sense of her presence, her approval or
disapproval.

Anson's first sense of his superiority came to him when he realized
the half-grudging American deference that was paid to him in the
Connecticut village.  The parents of the boys he played with always
inquired after his father and mother, and were vaguely excited when
their own children were asked to the Hunters' house.  He accepted
this as the natural state of things, and a sort of impatience with
all groups of which he was not the center--in money, in position,
in authority--remained with him for the rest of his life.  He
disdained to struggle with other boys for precedence--he expected
it to be given him freely, and when it wasn't he withdrew into his
family.  His family was sufficient, for in the East money is still
a somewhat feudal thing, a clan-forming thing.  In the snobbish
West, money separates families to form "sets."

At eighteen, when he went to New Haven, Anson was tall and thick-
set, with a clear complexion and a healthy color from the ordered
life he had led in school.  His hair was yellow and grew in a funny
way on his head, his nose was beaked--these two things kept him
from being handsome--but he had a confident charm and a certain
brusque style, and the upper-class men who passed him on the street
knew without being told that he was a rich boy and had gone to one
of the best schools.  Nevertheless, his very superiority kept him
from being a success in college--the independence was mistaken for
egotism, and the refusal to accept Yale standards with the proper
awe seemed to belittle all those who had.  So, long before he
graduated, he began to shift the center of his life to New York.

He was at home in New York--there was his own house with "the kind
of servants you can't get any more"--and his own family, of which,
because of his good humor and a certain ability to make things go,
he was rapidly becoming the center, and the débutante parties, and
the correct manly world of the men's clubs, and the occasional wild
spree with the gallant girls whom New Haven only knew from the
fifth row.  His aspirations were conventional enough--they included
even the irreproachable shadow he would some day marry, but they
differed from the aspirations of the majority of young men in that
there was no mist over them, none of that quality which is variously
known as "idealism" or "illusion."  Anson accepted without
reservation the world of high finance and high extravagance, of
divorce and dissipation, of snobbery and of privilege.  Most of our
lives end as a compromise--it was as a compromise that his life
began.

He and I first met in the late summer of 1917 when he was just out
of Yale, and, like the rest of us, was swept up into the
systematized hysteria of the war.  In the blue-green uniform of the
naval aviation he came down to Pensacola, where the hotel
orchestras played "I'm sorry, dear," and we young officers danced
with the girls.  Every one liked him, and though he ran with the
drinkers and wasn't an especially good pilot, even the instructors
treated him with a certain respect.  He was always having long
talks with them in his confident, logical voice--talks which ended
by his getting himself, or, more frequently, another officer, out
of some impending trouble.  He was convivial, bawdy, robustly avid
for pleasure, and we were all surprised when he fell in love with a
conservative and rather proper girl.

Her name was Paula Legendre, a dark, serious beauty from somewhere
in California.  Her family kept a winter residence just outside of
town, and in spite of her primness she was enormously popular;
there is a large class of men whose egotism can't endure humor in a
woman.  But Anson wasn't that sort, and I couldn't understand the
attraction of her "sincerity"--that was the thing to say about her--
for his keen and somewhat sardonic mind.

Nevertheless, they fell in love--and on her terms.  He no longer
joined the twilight gathering at the De Sota bar, and whenever they
were seen together they were engaged in a long, serious dialogue,
which must have gone on several weeks.  Long afterward he told me
that it was not about anything in particular but was composed on
both sides of immature and even meaningless statements--the
emotional content that gradually came to fill it grew up not out of
the words but out of its enormous seriousness.  It was a sort of
hypnosis.  Often it was interrupted, giving way to that emasculated
humor we call fun; when they were alone it was resumed again,
solemn, low-keyed, and pitched so as to give each other a sense of
unity in feeling and thought.  They came to resent any interruptions
of it, to be unresponsive to facetiousness about life, even to the
mild cynicism of their contemporaries.  They were only happy when
the dialogue was going on, and its seriousness bathed them like the
amber glow of an open fire.  Toward the end there came an
interruption they did not resent--it began to be interrupted by
passion.

Oddly enough, Anson was as engrossed in the dialogue as she was and
as profoundly affected by it, yet at the same time aware that on
his side much was insincere, and on hers much was merely simple.
At first, too, he despised her emotional simplicity as well, but
with his love her nature deepened and blossomed, and he could
despise it no longer.  He felt that if he could enter into Paula's
warm safe life he would be happy.  The long preparation of the
dialogue removed any constraint--he taught her some of what he had
learned from more adventurous women, and she responded with a rapt
holy intensity.  One evening after a dance they agreed to marry,
and he wrote a long letter about her to his mother.  The next day
Paula told him that she was rich, that she had a personal fortune
of nearly a million dollars.


III


It was exactly as if they could say "Neither of us has anything: we
shall be poor together"--just as delightful that they should be
rich instead.  It gave them the same communion of adventure.  Yet
when Anson got leave in April, and Paula and her mother accompanied
him North, she was impressed with the standing of his family in New
York and with the scale on which they lived.  Alone with Anson for
the first time in the rooms where he had played as a boy, she was
filled with a comfortable emotion, as though she were pre-eminently
safe and taken care of.  The pictures of Anson in a skull cap at
his first school, of Anson on horseback with the sweetheart of a
mysterious forgotten summer, of Anson in a gay group of ushers and
bridesmaid at a wedding, made her jealous of his life apart from
her in the past, and so completely did his authoritative person
seem to sum up and typify these possessions of his that she was
inspired with the idea of being married immediately and returning
to Pensacola as his wife.

But an immediate marriage wasn't discussed--even the engagement was
to be secret until after the war.  When she realized that only two
days of his leave remained, her dissatisfaction crystallized in the
intention of making him as unwilling to wait as she was.  They were
driving to the country for dinner and she determined to force the
issue that night.

Now a cousin of Paula's was staying with them at the Ritz, a
severe, bitter girl who loved Paula but was somewhat jealous of her
impressive engagement, and as Paula was late in dressing, the
cousin, who wasn't going to the party, received Anson in the parlor
of the suite.

Anson had met friends at five o'clock and drunk freely and
indiscreetly with them for an hour.  He left the Yale Club at a
proper time, and his mother's chauffeur drove him to the Ritz, but
his usual capacity was not in evidence, and the impact of the steam-
heated sitting-room made him suddenly dizzy.  He knew it, and he
was both amused and sorry.

Paula's cousin was twenty-five, but she was exceptionally naïve,
and at first failed to realize what was up.  She had never met
Anson before, and she was surprised when he mumbled strange
information and nearly fell off his chair, but until Paula appeared
it didn't occur to her that what she had taken for the odor of a
dry-cleaned uniform was really whiskey.  But Paula understood as
soon as she appeared; her only thought was to get Anson away before
her mother saw him, and at the look in her eyes the cousin
understood too.

When Paula and Anson descended to the limousine they found two men
inside, both asleep; they were the men with whom he had been
drinking at the Yale Club, and they were also going to the party.
He had entirely forgotten their presence in the car.  On the way to
Hempstead they awoke and sang.  Some of the songs were rough, and
though Paula tried to reconcile herself to the fact that Anson had
few verbal inhibitions, her lips tightened with shame and distaste.

Back at the hotel the cousin, confused and agitated, considered the
incident, and then walked into Mrs. Legendre's bedroom, saying:
"Isn't he funny?"

"Who is funny?"

"Why--Mr. Hunter.  He seemed so funny."

Mrs. Legendre looked at her sharply.

"How is he funny?"

"Why, he said he was French.  I didn't know he was French."

"That's absurd.  You must have misunderstood."  She smiled:  "It
was a joke."

The cousin shook her head stubbornly.

"No.  He said he was brought up in France.  He said he couldn't
speak any English, and that's why he couldn't talk to me.  And he
couldn't!"

Mrs. Legendre looked away with impatience just as the cousin added
thoughtfully, "Perhaps it was because he was so drunk," and walked
out of the room.

This curious report was true.  Anson, finding his voice thick and
uncontrollable, had taken the unusual refuge of announcing that he
spoke no English.  Years afterward he used to tell that part of the
story, and he invariably communicated the uproarious laughter which
the memory aroused in him.

Five times in the next hour Mrs. Legendre tried to get Hempstead on
the phone.  When she succeeded, there was a ten-minute delay before
she heard Paula's voice on the wire.

"Cousin Jo told me Anson was intoxicated."

"Oh, no. . . ."

"Oh, yes.  Cousin Jo says he was intoxicated.  He told her he was
French, and fell off his chair and behaved as if he was very
intoxicated.  I don't want you to come home with him."

"Mother, he's all right!  Please don't worry about--"

"But I do worry.  I think it's dreadful.  I want you to promise me
not to come home with him."

"I'll take care of it, mother. . . ."

"I don't want you to come home with him."

"All right, mother.  Good-by."

"Be sure now, Paula.  Ask some one to bring you."

Deliberately Paula took the receiver from her ear and hung it up.
Her face was flushed with helpless annoyance.  Anson was stretched
asleep out in a bedroom up-stairs, while the dinner-party below was
proceeding lamely toward conclusion.

The hour's drive had sobered him somewhat--his arrival was merely
hilarious--and Paula hoped that the evening was not spoiled, after
all, but two imprudent cocktails before dinner completed the
disaster.  He talked boisterously and somewhat offensively to the
party at large for fifteen minutes, and then slid silently under
the table; like a man in an old print--but, unlike an old print, it
was rather horrible without being at all quaint.  None of the young
girls present remarked upon the incident--it seemed to merit only
silence.  His uncle and two other men carried him up-stairs, and it
was just after this that Paula was called to the phone.

An hour later Anson awoke in a fog of nervous agony, through which
he perceived after a moment the figure of his uncle Robert standing
by the door.

". . . I said are you better?"

"What?"

"Do you feel better, old man?"

"Terrible," said Anson.

"I'm going to try you on another bromo-seltzer.  If you can hold it
down, it'll do you good to sleep."

With an effort Anson slid his legs from the bed and stood up.

"I'm all right," he said dully.

"Take it easy."

"I thin' if you gave me a glassbrandy I could go down-stairs."

"Oh, no--"

"Yes, that's the only thin'.  I'm all right now. . . .  I suppose
I'm in Dutch dow' there."

"They know you're a little under the weather," said his uncle
deprecatingly.  "But don't worry about it.  Schuyler didn't even
get here.  He passed away in the locker-room over at the Links."

Indifferent to any opinion, except Paula's, Anson was nevertheless
determined to save the débris of the evening, but when after a cold
bath he made his appearance most of the party had already left.
Paula got up immediately to go home.

In the limousine the old serious dialogue began.  She had known
that he drank, she admitted, but she had never expected anything
like this--it seemed to her that perhaps they were not suited to
each other, after all.  Their ideas about life were too different,
and so forth.  When she finished speaking, Anson spoke in turn,
very soberly.  Then Paula said she'd have to think it over; she
wouldn't decide to-night; she was not angry but she was terribly
sorry.  Nor would she let him come into the hotel with her, but
just before she got out of the car she leaned and kissed him
unhappily on the cheek.

The next afternoon Anson had a long talk with Mrs. Legendre while
Paula sat listening in silence.  It was agreed that Paula was to
brood over the incident for a proper period and then, if mother and
daughter thought it best, they would follow Anson to Pensacola.  On
his part he apologized with sincerity and dignity--that was all;
with every card in her hand Mrs. Legendre was unable to establish
any advantage over him.  He made no promises, showed no humility,
only delivered a few serious comments on life which brought him off
with rather a moral superiority at the end.  When they came South
three weeks later, neither Anson in his satisfaction nor Paula in
her relief at the reunion realized that the psychological moment
had passed forever.


IV


He dominated and attracted her, and at the same time filled her
with anxiety.  Confused by his mixture of solidity and self-
indulgence, of sentiment and cynicism--incongruities which her
gentle mind was unable to resolve--Paula grew to think of him as
two alternating personalities.  When she saw him alone, or at a
formal party, or with his casual inferiors, she felt a tremendous
pride in his strong, attractive presence, the paternal,
understanding stature of his mind.  In other company she became
uneasy when what had been a fine imperviousness to mere gentility
showed its other face.  The other face was gross, humorous,
reckless of everything but pleasure.  It startled her mind
temporarily away from him, even led her into a short covert
experiment with an old beau, but it was no use--after four months
of Anson's enveloping vitality there was an anæmic pallor in all
other men.

In July he was ordered abroad, and their tenderness and desire
reached a crescendo.  Paula considered a last-minute marriage--
decided against it only because there were always cocktails on his
breath now, but the parting itself made her physically ill with
grief.  After his departure she wrote him long letters of regret
for the days of love they had missed by waiting.  In August Anson's
plane slipped down into the North Sea.  He was pulled onto a
destroyer after a night in the water and sent to hospital with
pneumonia; the armistice was signed before he was finally sent
home.

Then, with every opportunity given back to them, with no material
obstacle to overcome, the secret weavings of their temperaments
came between them, drying up their kisses and their tears, making
their voices less loud to one another, muffling the intimate
chatter of their hearts until the old communication was only
possible by letters, from far away.  One afternoon a society
reporter waited for two hours in the Hunters' house for a
confirmation of their engagement.  Anson denied it; nevertheless an
early issue carried the report as a leading paragraph--they were
"constantly seen together at Southampton, Hot Springs, and Tuxedo
Park."  But the serious dialogue had turned a corner into a long-
sustained quarrel, and the affair was almost played out.  Anson got
drunk flagrantly and missed an engagement with her, whereupon Paula
made certain behavioristic demands.  His despair was helpless
before his pride and his knowledge of himself: the engagement was
definitely broken.

"Dearest," said their letters now, "Dearest, Dearest, when I wake
up in the middle of the night and realize that after all it was not
to be, I feel that I want to die.  I can't go on living any more.
Perhaps when we meet this summer we may talk things over and decide
differently--we were so excited and sad that day, and I don't feel
that I can live all my life without you.  You speak of other
people.  Don't you know there are no other people for me, but only
you. . . ."

But as Paula drifted here and there around the East she would
sometimes mention her gaieties to make him wonder.  Anson was too
acute to wonder.  When he saw a man's name in her letters he felt
more sure of her and a little disdainful--he was always superior to
such things.  But he still hoped that they would some day marry.

Meanwhile he plunged vigorously into all the movement and glitter
of post-bellum New York, entering a brokerage house, joining half a
dozen clubs, dancing late, and moving in three worlds--his own
world, the world of young Yale graduates, and that section of the
half-world which rests one end on Broadway.  But there was always a
thorough and infractible eight hours devoted to his work in Wall
Street, where the combination of his influential family connection,
his sharp intelligence, and his abundance of sheer physical energy
brought him almost immediately forward.  He had one of those
invaluable minds with partitions in it; sometimes he appeared at
his office refreshed by less than an hour's sleep, but such
occurrences were rare.  So early as 1920 his income in salary and
commissions exceeded twelve thousand dollars.

As the Yale tradition slipped into the past he became more and more
of a popular figure among his classmates in New York, more popular
than he had ever been in college.  He lived in a great house, and
had the means of introducing young men into other great houses.
Moreover, his life already seemed secure, while theirs, for the
most part, had arrived again at precarious beginnings.  They
commenced to turn to him for amusement and escape, and Anson
responded readily, taking pleasure in helping people and arranging
their affairs.

There were no men in Paula's letters now, but a note of tenderness
ran through them that had not been there before.  From several
sources he heard that she had "a heavy beau," Lowell Thayer, a
Bostonian of wealth and position, and though he was sure she still
loved him, it made him uneasy to think that he might lose her,
after all.  Save for one unsatisfactory day she had not been in New
York for almost five months, and as the rumors multiplied he became
increasingly anxious to see her.  In February he took his vacation
and went down to Florida.

Palm Beach sprawled plump and opulent between the sparkling
sapphire of Lake Worth, flawed here and there by house-boats at
anchor, and the great turquoise bar of the Atlantic Ocean.  The
huge bulks of the Breakers and the Royal Poinciana rose as twin
paunches from the bright level of the sand, and around them
clustered the Dancing Glade, Bradley's House of Chance, and a dozen
modistes and milliners with goods at triple prices from New York.
Upon the trellissed veranda of the Breakers two hundred women
stepped right, stepped left, wheeled, and slid in that then
celebrated calisthenic known as the double-shuffle, while in half-
time to the music two thousand bracelets clicked up and down on two
hundred arms.

At the Everglades Club after dark Paula and Lowell Thayer and Anson
and a casual fourth played bridge with hot cards.  It seemed to
Anson that her kind, serious face was wan and tired--she had been
around now for four, five, years.  He had known her for three.

"Two spades."

"Cigarette? . . .  Oh, I beg your pardon.  By me."

"By."

"I'll double three spades."

There were a dozen tables of bridge in the room, which was filling
up with smoke.  Anson's eyes met Paula's, held them persistently
even when Thayer's glance fell between them. . . .

"What was bid?" he asked abstractedly.


          "Rose of Washington Square"


sang the young people in the corners:


          "I'm withering there
          In basement air--"


The smoke banked like fog, and the opening of a door filled the
room with blown swirls of ectoplasm.  Little Bright Eyes streaked
past the tables seeking Mr. Conan Doyle among the Englishmen who
were posing as Englishmen about the lobby.

"You could cut it with a knife."

". . . cut it with a knife."

". . . a knife."

At the end of the rubber Paula suddenly got up and spoke to Anson
in a tense, low voice.  With scarcely a glance at Lowell Thayer,
they walked out the door and descended a long flight of stone steps--
in a moment they were walking hand in hand along the moonlit beach.

"Darling, darling. . . ."  They embraced recklessly, passionately,
in a shadow. . . .  Then Paula drew back her face to let his lips
say what she wanted to hear--she could feel the words forming as
they kissed again. . . .  Again she broke away, listening, but as
he pulled her close once more she realized that he had said nothing--
only "Darling!  Darling!" in that deep, sad whisper that always
made her cry.  Humbly, obediently, her emotions yielded to him and
the tears streamed down her face, but her heart kept on crying:
"Ask me--oh, Anson, dearest, ask me!"

"Paula. . . .  PAULA!"

The words wrung her heart like hands, and Anson, feeling her
tremble, knew that emotion was enough.  He need say no more, commit
their destinies to no practical enigma.  Why should he, when he
might hold her so, biding his own time, for another year--forever?
He was considering them both, her more than himself.  For a moment,
when she said suddenly that she must go back to her hotel, he
hesitated, thinking, first, "This is the moment, after all," and
then:  "No, let it wait--she is mine. . . ."

He had forgotten that Paula too was worn away inside with the
strain of three years.  Her mood passed forever in the night.

He went back to New York next morning filled with a certain
restless dissatisfaction.  There was a pretty débutante he knew in
his car, and for two days they took their meals together.  At first
he told her a little about Paula and invented an esoteric
incompatibility that was keeping them apart.  The girl was of a
wild, impulsive nature, and she was flattered by Anson's
confidences.  Like Kipling's soldier, he might have possessed
himself of most of her before he reached New York, but luckily he
was sober and kept control.  Late in April, without warning, he
received a telegram from Bar Harbor in which Paula told him that
she was engaged to Lowell Thayer, and that they would be married
immediately in Boston.  What he never really believed could happen
had happened at last.

Anson filled himself with whiskey that morning, and going to the
office, carried on his work without a break--rather with a fear of
what would happen if he stopped.  In the evening he went out as
usual, saying nothing of what had occurred; he was cordial,
humorous, unabstracted.  But one thing he could not help--for three
days, in any place, in any company, he would suddenly bend his head
into his hands and cry like a child.


V


In 1922 when Anson went abroad with the junior partner to
investigate some London loans, the journey intimated that he was to
be taken into the firm.  He was twenty-seven now, a little heavy
without being definitely stout, and with a manner older than his
years.  Old people and young people liked him and trusted him, and
mothers felt safe when their daughters were in his charge, for he
had a way, when he came into a room, of putting himself on a
footing with the oldest and most conservative people there.  "You
and I," he seemed to say, "we're solid.  We understand."

He had an instinctive and rather charitable knowledge of the
weaknesses of men and women, and, like a priest, it made him the
more concerned for the maintenance of outward forms.  It was
typical of him that every Sunday morning he taught in a fashionable
Episcopal Sunday-school--even though a cold shower and a quick
change into a cutaway coat were all that separated him from the
wild night before.  Once, by some mutual instinct, several children
got up from the front row and moved to the last.  He told this
story frequently, and it was usually greeted with hilarious
laughter.

After his father's death he was the practical head of his family,
and, in effect, guided the destinies of the younger children.
Through a complication his authority did not extend to his father's
estate, which was administrated by his Uncle Robert, who was the
horsey member of the family, a good-natured, hard-drinking member
of that set which centers about Wheatley Hills.

Uncle Robert and his wife, Edna, had been great friends of Anson's
youth, and the former was disappointed when his nephew's
superiority failed to take a horsey form.  He backed him for a city
club which was the most difficult in America to enter--one could
only join if one's family had "helped to build up New York" (or, in
other words, were rich before 1880)--and when Anson, after his
election, neglected it for the Yale Club, Uncle Robert gave him a
little talk on the subject.  But when on top of that Anson declined
to enter Robert Hunter's own conservative and somewhat neglected
brokerage house, his manner grew cooler.  Like a primary teacher
who has taught all he knew, he slipped out of Anson's life.

There were so many friends in Anson's life--scarcely one for whom
he had not done some unusual kindness and scarcely one whom he did
not occasionally embarrass by his bursts of rough conversation or
his habit of getting drunk whenever and however he liked.  It
annoyed him when any one else blundered in that regard--about his
own lapses he was always humorous.  Odd things happened to him and
he told them with infectious laughter.

I was working in New York that spring, and I used to lunch with him
at the Yale Club, which my university was sharing until the
completion of our own.  I had read of Paula's marriage, and one
afternoon, when I asked him about her, something moved him to tell
me the story.  After that he frequently invited me to family
dinners at his house and behaved as though there was a special
relation between us, as though with his confidence a little of that
consuming memory had passed into me.

I found that despite the trusting mothers, his attitude toward
girls was not indiscriminately protective.  It was up to the girl--
if she showed an inclination toward looseness, she must take care
of herself, even with him.

"Life," he would explain sometimes, "has made a cynic of me."

By life he meant Paula.  Sometimes, especially when he was
drinking, it became a little twisted in his mind, and he thought
that she had callously thrown him over.

This "cynicism," or rather his realization that naturally fast
girls were not worth sparing, led to his affair with Dolly Karger.
It wasn't his only affair in those years, but it came nearest to
touching him deeply, and it had a profound effect upon his attitude
toward life.

Dolly was the daughter of a notorious "publicist" who had married
into society.  She herself grew up into the Junior League, came out
at the Plaza, and went to the Assembly; and only a few old families
like the Hunters could question whether or not she "belonged," for
her picture was often in the papers, and she had more enviable
attention than many girls who undoubtedly did.  She was dark-
haired, with carmine lips and a high, lovely color, which she
concealed under pinkish-gray powder all through the first year out,
because high color was unfashionable--Victorian-pale was the thing
to be.  She wore black, severe suits and stood with her hands in
her pockets leaning a little forward, with a humorous restraint on
her face.  She danced exquisitely--better than anything she liked
to dance--better than anything except making love.  Since she was
ten she had always been in love, and, usually, with some boy who
didn't respond to her.  Those who did--and there were many--bored
her after a brief encounter, but for her failures she reserved the
warmest spot in her heart.  When she met them she would always try
once more--sometimes she succeeded, more often she failed.

It never occurred to this gypsy of the unattainable that there was
a certain resemblance in those who refused to love her--they shared
a hard intuition that saw through to her weakness, not a weakness
of emotion but a weakness of rudder.  Anson perceived this when he
first met her, less than a month after Paula's marriage.  He was
drinking rather heavily, and he pretended for a week that he was
falling in love with her.  Then he dropped her abruptly and forgot--
immediately he took up the commanding position in her heart.

Like so many girls of that day Dolly was slackly and indiscreetly
wild.  The unconventionality of a slightly older generation had
been simply one facet of a post-war movement to discredit obsolete
manners--Dolly's was both older and shabbier, and she saw in Anson
the two extremes which the emotionally shiftless woman seeks, an
abandon to indulgence alternating with a protective strength.  In
his character she felt both the sybarite and the solid rock, and
these two satisfied every need of her nature.

She felt that it was going to be difficult, but she mistook the
reason--she thought that Anson and his family expected a more
spectacular marriage, but she guessed immediately that her
advantage lay in his tendency to drink.

They met at the large débutante dances, but as her infatuation
increased they managed to be more and more together.  Like most
mothers, Mrs. Karger believed that Anson was exceptionally
reliable, so she allowed Dolly to go with him to distant country
clubs and suburban houses without inquiring closely into their
activities or questioning her explanations when they came in late.
At first these explanations might have been accurate, but Dolly's
worldly ideas of capturing Anson were soon engulfed in the rising
sweep of her emotion.  Kisses in the back of taxis and motor-cars
were no longer enough; they did a curious thing:

They dropped out of their world for a while and made another world
just beneath it where Anson's tippling and Dolly's irregular hours
would be less noticed and commented on.  It was composed, this
world, of varying elements--several of Anson's Yale friends and
their wives, two or three young brokers and bond salesmen and a
handful of unattached men, fresh from college, with money and a
propensity to dissipation.  What this world lacked in spaciousness
and scale it made up for by allowing them a liberty that it
scarcely permitted itself.  Moreover, it centered around them and
permitted Dolly the pleasure of a faint condescension--a pleasure
which Anson, whose whole life was a condescension from the
certitudes of his childhood, was unable to share.

He was not in love with her, and in the long feverish winter of
their affair he frequently told her so.  In the spring he was weary--
he wanted to renew his life at some other source--moreover, he saw
that either he must break with her now or accept the responsibility
of a definite seduction.  Her family's encouraging attitude
precipitated his decision--one evening when Mr. Karger knocked
discreetly at the library door to announce that he had left a
bottle of old brandy in the dining-room, Anson felt that life was
hemming him in.  That night he wrote her a short letter in which he
told her that he was going on his vacation, and that in view of all
the circumstances they had better meet no more.

It was June.  His family had closed up the house and gone to the
country, so he was living temporarily at the Yale Club.  I had
heard about his affair with Dolly as it developed--accounts salted
with humor, for he despised unstable women, and granted them no
place in the social edifice in which he believed--and when he told
me that night that he was definitely breaking with her I was glad.
I had seen Dolly here and there, and each time with a feeling of
pity at the hopelessness of her struggle, and of shame at knowing
so much about her that I had no right to know.  She was what is
known as "a pretty little thing," but there was a certain
recklessness which rather fascinated me.  Her dedication to the
goddess of waste would have been less obvious had she been less
spirited--she would most certainly throw herself away, but I was
glad when I heard that the sacrifice would not be consummated in my
sight.

Anson was going to leave the letter of farewell at her house next
morning.  It was one of the few houses left open in the Fifth
Avenue district, and he knew that the Kargers, acting upon
erroneous information from Dolly, had foregone a trip abroad to
give their daughter her chance.  As he stepped out the door of the
Yale Club into Madison Avenue the postman passed him, and he
followed back inside.  The first letter that caught his eye was in
Dolly's hand.

He knew what it would be--a lonely and tragic monologue, full of
the reproaches he knew, the invoked memories, the "I wonder if's"--
all the immemorial intimacies that he had communicated to Paula
Legendre in what seemed another age.  Thumbing over some bills, he
brought it on top again and opened it.  To his surprise it was a
short, somewhat formal note, which said that Dolly would be unable
to go to the country with him for the weekend, because Perry Hull
from Chicago had unexpectedly come to town.  It added that Anson
had brought this on himself:  "--if I felt that you loved me as I
love you I would go with you at any time, any place, but Perry is
SO nice, and he so much wants me to marry him--"

Anson smiled contemptuously--he had had experience with such decoy
epistles.  Moreover, he knew how Dolly had labored over this plan,
probably sent for the faithful Perry and calculated the time of his
arrival--even labored over the note so that it would make him
jealous without driving him away.  Like most compromises, it had
neither force nor vitality but only a timorous despair.

Suddenly he was angry.  He sat down in the lobby and read it again.
Then he went to the phone, called Dolly and told her in his clear,
compelling voice that he had received her note and would call for
her at five o'clock as they had previously planned.  Scarcely
waiting for the pretended uncertainty of her "Perhaps I can see you
for an hour," he hung up the receiver and went down to his office.
On the way he tore his own letter into bits and dropped it in the
street.

He was not jealous--she meant nothing to him--but at her pathetic
ruse everything stubborn and self-indulgent in him came to the
surface.  It was a presumption from a mental inferior and it could
not be overlooked.  If she wanted to know to whom she belonged she
would see.

He was on the door-step at quarter past five.  Dolly was dressed
for the street, and he listened in silence to the paragraph of "I
can only see you for an hour," which she had begun on the phone.

"Put on your hat, Dolly," he said, "we'll take a walk."

They strolled up Madison Avenue and over to Fifth while Anson's
shirt dampened upon his portly body in the deep heat.  He talked
little, scolding her, making no love to her, but before they had
walked six blocks she was his again, apologizing for the note,
offering not to see Perry at all as an atonement, offering
anything.  She thought that he had come because he was beginning to
love her.

"I'm hot," he said when they reached 71st Street.  "This is a
winter suit.  If I stop by the house and change, would you mind
waiting for me downstairs?  I'll only be a minute."

She was happy; the intimacy of his being hot, of any physical fact
about him, thrilled her.  When they came to the iron-grated door
and Anson took out his key she experienced a sort of delight.

Down-stairs it was dark, and after he ascended in the lift Dolly
raised a curtain and looked out through opaque lace at the houses
over the way.  She heard the lift machinery stop, and with the
notion of teasing him pressed the button that brought it down.
Then on what was more than an impulse she got into it and sent it
up to what she guessed was his floor.

"Anson," she called, laughing a little.

"Just a minute," he answered from his bedroom . . . then after a
brief delay:  "Now you can come in."

He had changed and was buttoning his vest.  "This is my room," he
said lightly.  "How do you like it?"

She caught sight of Paula's picture on the wall and stared at it in
fascination, just as Paula had stared at the pictures of Anson's
childish sweethearts five years before.  She knew something about
Paula--sometimes she tortured herself with fragments of the story.

Suddenly she came close to Anson, raising her arms.  They embraced.
Outside the area window a soft artificial twilight already hovered,
though the sun was still bright on a back roof across the way.  In
half an hour the room would be quite dark.  The uncalculated
opportunity overwhelmed them, made them both breathless, and they
clung more closely.  It was eminent, inevitable.  Still holding one
another, they raised their heads--their eyes fell together upon
Paula's picture, staring down at them from the wall.

Suddenly Anson dropped his arms, and sitting down at his desk tried
the drawer with a bunch of keys.

"Like a drink?" he asked in a gruff voice.

"No, Anson."

He poured himself half a tumbler of whiskey, swallowed it, and then
opened the door into the hall.

"Come on," he said.

Dolly hesitated.

"Anson--I'm going to the country with you tonight, after all.  You
understand that, don't you?"

"Of course," he answered brusquely.

In Dolly's car they rode on to Long Island, closer in their
emotions than they had ever been before.  They knew what would
happen--not with Paula's face to remind them that something was
lacking, but when they were alone in the still, hot Long Island
night they did not care.

The estate in Port Washington where they were to spend the week-end
belonged to a cousin of Anson's who had married a Montana copper
operator.  An interminable drive began at the lodge and twisted
under imported poplar saplings toward a huge, pink, Spanish house.
Anson had often visited there before.

After dinner they danced at the Linx Club.  About midnight Anson
assured himself that his cousins would not leave before two--then
he explained that Dolly was tired; he would take her home and
return to the dance later.  Trembling a little with excitement,
they got into a borrowed car together and drove to Port Washington.
As they reached the lodge he stopped and spoke to the night-
watchman.

"When are you making a round, Carl?"

"Right away."

"Then you'll be here till everybody's in?"

"Yes, sir."

"All right.  Listen: if any automobile, no matter whose it is,
turns in at this gate, I want you to phone the house immediately."
He put a five-dollar bill into Carl's hand.  "Is that clear?"

"Yes, Mr. Anson."  Being of the Old World, he neither winked nor
smiled.  Yet Dolly sat with her face turned slightly away.

Anson had a key.  Once inside he poured a drink for both of them--
Dolly left hers untouched--then he ascertained definitely the
location of the phone, and found that it was within easy hearing
distance of their rooms, both of which were on the first floor.

Five minutes later he knocked at the door of Dolly's room.

"Anson?"  He went in, closing the door behind him.  She was in bed,
leaning up anxiously with elbows on the pillow; sitting beside her
he took her in his arms.

"Anson, darling."

He didn't answer.

"Anson. . . .  Anson!  I love you. . . .  Say you love me.  Say it
now--can't you say it now?  Even if you don't mean it?"

He did not listen.  Over her head he perceived that the picture of
Paula was hanging here upon this wall.

He got up and went close to it.  The frame gleamed faintly with
thrice-reflected moonlight--within was a blurred shadow of a face
that he saw he did not know.  Almost sobbing, he turned around and
stared with abomination at the little figure on the bed.

"This is all foolishness," he said thickly.  "I don't know what I
was thinking about.  I don't love you and you'd better wait for
somebody that loves you.  I don't love you a bit, can't you
understand?"

His voice broke, and he went hurriedly out.  Back in the salon he
was pouring himself a drink with uneasy fingers, when the front
door opened suddenly, and his cousin came in.

"Why, Anson, I hear Dolly's sick," she began solicitously.  "I hear
she's sick. . . ."

"It was nothing," he interrupted, raising his voice so that it
would carry into Dolly's room.  "She was a little tired.  She went
to bed."

For a long time afterward Anson believed that a protective God
sometimes interfered in human affairs.  But Dolly Karger, lying
awake and staring at the ceiling, never again believed in anything
at all.


VI


When Dolly married during the following autumn, Anson was in London
on business.  Like Paula's marriage, it was sudden, but it affected
him in a different way.  At first he felt that it was funny, and
had an inclination to laugh when he thought of it.  Later it
depressed him--it made him feel old.

There was something repetitive about it--why, Paula and Dolly had
belonged to different generations.  He had a foretaste of the
sensation of a man of forty who hears that the daughter of an old
flame has married.  He wired congratulations and, as was not the
case with Paula, they were sincere--he had never really hoped that
Paula would be happy.

When he returned to New York, he was made a partner in the firm,
and, as his responsibilities increased, he had less time on his
hands.  The refusal of a life-insurance company to issue him a
policy made such an impression on him that he stopped drinking for
a year, and claimed that he felt better physically, though I think
he missed the convivial recounting of those Celliniesque adventures
which, in his early twenties, had played such a part of his life.
But he never abandoned the Yale Club.  He was a figure there, a
personality, and the tendency of his class, who were now seven
years out of college, to drift away to more sober haunts was
checked by his presence.

His day was never too full nor his mind too weary to give any sort
of aid to any one who asked it.  What had been done at first
through pride and superiority had become a habit and a passion.
And there was always something--a younger brother in trouble at New
Haven, a quarrel to be patched up between a friend and his wife, a
position to be found for this man, an investment for that.  But his
specialty was the solving of problems for young married people.
Young married people fascinated him and their apartments were
almost sacred to him--he knew the story of their love-affair,
advised them where to live and how, and remembered their babies'
names.  Toward young wives his attitude was circumspect: he never
abused the trust which their husbands--strangely enough in view of
his unconcealed irregularities--invariably reposed in him.

He came to take a vicarious pleasure in happy marriages, and to be
inspired to an almost equally pleasant melancholy by those that
went astray.  Not a season passed that he did not witness the
collapse of an affair that perhaps he himself had fathered.  When
Paula was divorced and almost immediately remarried to another
Bostonian, he talked about her to me all one afternoon.  He would
never love any one as he had loved Paula, but he insisted that he
no longer cared.

"I'll never marry," he came to say; "I've seen too much of it, and
I know a happy marriage is a very rare thing.  Besides, I'm too
old."

But he did believe in marriage.  Like all men who spring from a
happy and successful marriage, he believed in it passionately--
nothing he had seen would change his belief, his cynicism dissolved
upon it like air.  But he did really believe he was too old.  At
twenty-eight he began to accept with equanimity the prospect of
marrying without romantic love; he resolutely chose a New York girl
of his own class, pretty, intelligent, congenial, above reproach--
and set about falling in love with her.  The things he had said to
Paula with sincerity, to other girls with grace, he could no longer
say at all without smiling, or with the force necessary to
convince.

"When I'm forty," he told his friends, "I'll be ripe.  I'll fall
for some chorus girl like the rest."

Nevertheless, he persisted in his attempt.  His mother wanted to
see him married, and he could now well afford it--he had a seat on
the Stock Exchange, and his earned income came to twenty-five
thousand a year.  The idea was agreeable: when his friends--he
spent most of his time with the set he and Dolly had evolved--
closed themselves in behind domestic doors at night, he no longer
rejoiced in his freedom.  He even wondered if he should have
married Dolly.  Not even Paula had loved him more, and he was
learning the rarity, in a single life, of encountering true
emotion.

Just as this mood began to creep over him a disquieting story
reached his ear.  His aunt Edna, a woman just this side of forty,
was carrying on an open intrigue with a dissolute, hard-drinking
young man named Cary Sloane.  Every one knew of it except Anson's
Uncle Robert, who for fifteen years had talked long in clubs and
taken his wife for granted.

Anson heard the story again and again with increasing annoyance.
Something of his old feeling for his uncle came back to him, a
feeling that was more than personal, a reversion toward that family
solidarity on which he had based his pride.  His intuition singled
out the essential point of the affair, which was that his uncle
shouldn't be hurt.  It was his first experiment in unsolicited
meddling, but with his knowledge of Edna's character he felt that
he could handle the matter better than a district judge or his
uncle.

His uncle was in Hot Springs.  Anson traced down the sources of the
scandal so that there should be no possibility of mistake and then
he called Edna and asked her to lunch with him at the Plaza next
day.  Something in his tone must have frightened her, for she was
reluctant, but he insisted, putting off the date until she had no
excuse for refusing.

She met him at the appointed time in the Plaza lobby, a lovely,
faded, gray-eyed blonde in a coat of Russian sable.  Five great
rings, cold with diamonds and emeralds, sparkled on her slender
hands.  It occurred to Anson that it was his father's intelligence
and not his uncle's that had earned the fur and the stones, the
rich brilliance that buoyed up her passing beauty.

Though Edna scented his hostility, she was unprepared for the
directness of his approach.

"Edna, I'm astonished at the way you've been acting," he said in a
strong, frank voice.  "At first I couldn't believe it."

"Believe what?" she demanded sharply.

"You needn't pretend with me, Edna.  I'm talking about Cary Sloane.
Aside from any other consideration, I didn't think you could treat
Uncle Robert--"

"Now look here, Anson--" she began angrily, but his peremptory
voice broke through hers:

"--and your children in such a way.  You've been married eighteen
years, and you're old enough to know better."

"You can't talk to me like that!  You--"

"Yes, I can.  Uncle Robert has always been my best friend."  He was
tremendously moved.  He felt a real distress about his uncle, about
his three young cousins.

Edna stood up, leaving her crab-flake cocktail untasted.

"This is the silliest thing--"

"Very well, if you won't listen to me I'll go to Uncle Robert and
tell him the whole story--he's bound to hear it sooner or later.
And afterward I'll go to old Moses Sloane."

Edna faltered back into her chair.

"Don't talk so loud," she begged him.  Her eyes blurred with tears.
"You have no idea how your voice carries.  You might have chosen a
less public place to make all these crazy accusations."

He didn't answer.

"Oh, you never liked me, I know," she went on.  "You're just taking
advantage of some silly gossip to try and break up the only
interesting friendship I've ever had.  What did I ever do to make
you hate me so?"

Still Anson waited.  There would be the appeal to his chivalry,
then to his pity, finally to his superior sophistication--when he
had shouldered his way through all these there would be admissions,
and he could come to grips with her.  By being silent, by being
impervious, by returning constantly to his main weapon, which was
his own true emotion, he bullied her into frantic despair as the
luncheon hour slipped away.  At two o'clock she took out a mirror
and a handkerchief, shined away the marks of her tears and powdered
the slight hollows where they had lain.  She had agreed to meet him
at her own house at five.

When he arrived she was stretched on a chaise-longue which was
covered with cretonne for the summer, and the tears he had called
up at luncheon seemed still to be standing in her eyes.  Then he
was aware of Cary Sloane's dark anxious presence upon the cold
hearth.

"What's this idea of yours?" broke out Sloane immediately.  "I
understand you invited Edna to lunch and then threatened her on the
basis of some cheap scandal."

Anson sat down.

"I have no reason to think it's only scandal."

"I hear you're going to take it to Robert Hunter, and to my
father."

Anson nodded.

"Either you break it off--or I will," he said.

"What God damned business is it of yours, Hunter?"

"Don't lose your temper, Cary," said Edna nervously.  "It's only a
question of showing him how absurd--"

"For one thing, it's my name that's being handed around,"
interrupted Anson.  "That's all that concerns you, Cary."

"Edna isn't a member of your family."

"She most certainly is!"  His anger mounted.  "Why--she owes this
house and the rings on her fingers to my father's brains.  When
Uncle Robert married her she didn't have a penny."

They all looked at the rings as if they had a significant bearing
on the situation.  Edna made a gesture to take them from her hand.

"I guess they're not the only rings in the world," said Sloane.

"Oh, this is absurd," cried Edna.  "Anson, will you listen to me?
I've found out how the silly story started.  It was a maid I
discharged who went right to the Chilicheffs--all these Russians
pump things out of their servants and then put a false meaning on
them."  She brought down her fist angrily on the table:  "And after
Tom lent them the limousine for a whole month when we were South
last winter--"

"Do you see?" demanded Sloane eagerly.  "This maid got hold of the
wrong end of the thing.  She knew that Edna and I were friends, and
she carried it to the Chilicheffs.  In Russia they assume that if a
man and a woman--"

He enlarged the theme to a disquisition upon social relations in
the Caucasus.

"If that's the case it better be explained to Uncle Robert," said
Anson dryly, "so that when the rumors do reach him he'll know
they're not true."

Adopting the method he had followed with Edna at luncheon he let
them explain it all away.  He knew that they were guilty and that
presently they would cross the line from explanation into
justification and convict themselves more definitely than he could
ever do.  By seven they had taken the desperate step of telling him
the truth--Robert Hunter's neglect, Edna's empty life, the casual
dalliance that had flamed up into passion--but like so many true
stories it had the misfortune of being old, and its enfeebled body
beat helplessly against the armor of Anson's will.  The threat to
go to Sloane's father sealed their helplessness, for the latter, a
retired cotton broker out of Alabama, was a notorious fundamentalist
who controlled his son by a rigid allowance and the promise that at
his next vagary the allowance would stop forever.

They dined at a small French restaurant, and the discussion
continued--at one time Sloane resorted to physical threats, a
little later they were both imploring him to give them time.  But
Anson was obdurate.  He saw that Edna was breaking up, and that her
spirit must not be refreshed by any renewal of their passion.

At two o'clock in a small night-club on 53d Street, Edna's nerves
suddenly collapsed, and she cried to go home.  Sloane had been
drinking heavily all evening, and he was faintly maudlin, leaning
on the table and weeping a little with his face in his hands.
Quickly Anson gave them his terms.  Sloane was to leave town for
six months, and he must be gone within forty-eight hours.  When he
returned there was to be no resumption of the affair, but at the
end of a year Edna might, if she wished, tell Robert Hunter that
she wanted a divorce and go about it in the usual way.

He paused, gaining confidence from their faces for his final word.

"Or there's another thing you can do," he said slowly, "if Edna
wants to leave her children, there's nothing I can do to prevent
your running off together."

"I want to go home!" cried Edna again.  "Oh, haven't you done
enough to us for one day?"

Outside it was dark, save for a blurred glow from Sixth Avenue down
the street.  In that light those two who had been lovers looked for
the last time into each other's tragic faces, realizing that
between them there was not enough youth and strength to avert their
eternal parting.  Sloane walked suddenly off down the street and
Anson tapped a dozing taxi-driver on the arm.

It was almost four; there was a patient flow of cleaning water
along the ghostly pavement of Fifth Avenue, and the shadows of two
night women flitted over the dark façade of St. Thomas's church.
Then the desolate shrubbery of Central Park where Anson had often
played as a child, and the mounting numbers, significant as names,
of the marching streets.  This was his city, he thought, where his
name had flourished through five generations.  No change could
alter the permanence of its place here, for change itself was the
essential substratum by which he and those of his name identified
themselves with the spirit of New York.  Resourcefulness and a
powerful will--for his threats in weaker hands would have been less
than nothing--had beaten the gathering dust from his uncle's name,
from the name of his family, from even this shivering figure that
sat beside him in the car.

Cary Sloane's body was found next morning on the lower shelf of a
pillar of Queensboro Bridge.  In the darkness and in his excitement
he had thought that it was the water flowing black beneath him, but
in less than a second it made no possible difference--unless he had
planned to think one last thought of Edna, and call out her name as
he struggled feebly in the water.


VII


Anson never blamed himself for his part in this affair--the
situation which brought it about had not been of his making.  But
the just suffer with the unjust, and he found that his oldest and
somehow his most precious friendship was over.  He never knew what
distorted story Edna told, but he was welcome in his uncle's house
no longer.

Just before Christmas Mrs. Hunter retired to a select Episcopal
heaven, and Anson became the responsible head of his family.  An
unmarried aunt who had lived with them for years ran the house, and
attempted with helpless inefficiency to chaperone the younger
girls.  All the children were less self-reliant than Anson, more
conventional both in their virtues and in their shortcomings.  Mrs.
Hunter's death had postponed the début of one daughter and the
wedding of another.  Also it had taken something deeply material
from all of them, for with her passing the quiet, expensive
superiority of the Hunters came to an end.

For one thing, the estate, considerably diminished by two
inheritance taxes and soon to be divided among six children, was
not a notable fortune any more.  Anson saw a tendency in his
youngest sisters to speak rather respectfully of families that
hadn't "existed" twenty years ago.  His own feeling of precedence
was not echoed in them--sometimes they were conventionally
snobbish, that was all.  For another thing, this was the last
summer they would spend on the Connecticut estate; the clamor
against it was too loud:  "Who wants to waste the best months of
the year shut up in that dead old town?"  Reluctantly he yielded--
the house would go into the market in the fall, and next summer
they would rent a smaller place in Westchester County.  It was a
step down from the expensive simplicity of his father's idea, and,
while he sympathized with the revolt, it also annoyed him; during
his mother's lifetime he had gone up there at least every other
week-end--even in the gayest summers.

Yet he himself was part of this change, and his strong instinct for
life had turned him in his twenties from the hollow obsequies of
that abortive leisure class.  He did not see this clearly--he still
felt that there was a norm, a standard of society.  But there was
no norm, it was doubtful if there had ever been a true norm in New
York.  The few who still paid and fought to enter a particular set
succeeded only to find that as a society it scarcely functioned--
or, what was more alarming, that the Bohemia from which they fled
sat above them at table.

At twenty-nine Anson's chief concern was his own growing
loneliness.  He was sure now that he would never marry.  The number
of weddings at which he had officiated as best man or usher was
past all counting--there was a drawer at home that bulged with the
official neckties of this or that wedding-party, neckties standing
for romances that had not endured a year, for couples who had
passed completely from his life.  Scarf-pins, gold pencils, cuff-
buttons, presents from a generation of grooms had passed through
his jewel-box and been lost--and with every ceremony he was less
and less able to imagine himself in the groom's place.  Under his
hearty good-will toward all those marriages there was despair about
his own.

And as he neared thirty he became not a little depressed at the
inroads that marriage, especially lately, had made upon his
friendships.  Groups of people had a disconcerting tendency to
dissolve and disappear.  The men from his own college--and it was
upon them he had expended the most time and affection--were the
most elusive of all.  Most of them were drawn deep into
domesticity, two were dead, one lived abroad, one was in Hollywood
writing continuities for pictures that Anson went faithfully to
see.

Most of them, however, were permanent commuters with an intricate
family life centering around some suburban country club, and it was
from these that he felt his estrangement most keenly.

In the early days of their married life they had all needed him; he
gave them advice about their slim finances, he exorcised their
doubts about the advisability of bringing a baby into two rooms and
a bath, especially he stood for the great world outside.  But now
their financial troubles were in the past and the fearfully
expected child had evolved into an absorbing family.  They were
always glad to see old Anson, but they dressed up for him and tried
to impress him with their present importance, and kept their
troubles to themselves.  They needed him no longer.

A few weeks before his thirtieth birthday the last of his early and
intimate friends was married.  Anson acted in his usual rôle of
best man, gave his usual silver tea-service, and went down to the
usual Homeric to say good-by.  It was a hot Friday afternoon in
May, and as he walked from the pier he realized that Saturday
closing had begun and he was free until Monday morning.

"Go where?" he asked himself.

The Yale Club, of course; bridge until dinner, then four or five
raw cocktails in somebody's room and a pleasant confused evening.
He regretted that this afternoon's groom wouldn't be along--they
had always been able to cram so much into such nights: they knew
how to attach women and how to get rid of them, how much
consideration any girl deserved from their intelligent hedonism.  A
party was an adjusted thing--you took certain girls to certain
places and spent just so much on their amusement; you drank a
little, not much, more than you ought to drink, and at a certain
time in the morning you stood up and said you were going home.  You
avoided college boys, sponges, future engagements, fights,
sentiment, and indiscretions.  That was the way it was done.  All
the rest was dissipation.

In the morning you were never violently sorry--you made no
resolutions, but if you had overdone it and your heart was slightly
out of order, you went on the wagon for a few days without saying
anything about it, and waited until an accumulation of nervous
boredom projected you into another party.

The lobby of the Yale Club was unpopulated.  In the bar three very
young alumni looked up at him, momentarily and without curiosity.

"Hello there, Oscar," he said to the bartender.  "Mr. Cahill been
around this afternoon?"

"Mr. Cahill's gone to New Haven."

"Oh . . . that so?"

"Gone to the ball game.  Lot of men gone up."

Anson looked once again into the lobby, considered for a moment,
and then walked out and over to Fifth Avenue.  From the broad
window of one of his clubs--one that he had scarcely visited in
five years--a gray man with watery eyes stared down at him.  Anson
looked quickly away--that figure sitting in vacant resignation, in
supercilious solitude, depressed him.  He stopped and, retracing
his steps, started over 47th Street toward Teak Warden's apartment.
Teak and his wife had once been his most familiar friends--it was a
household where he and Dolly Karger had been used to go in the days
of their affair.  But Teak had taken to drink, and his wife had
remarked publicly that Anson was a bad influence on him.  The
remark reached Anson in an exaggerated form--when it was finally
cleared up, the delicate spell of intimacy was broken, never to be
renewed.

"Is Mr. Warden at home?" he inquired.

"They've gone to the country."

The fact unexpectedly cut at him.  They were gone to the country
and he hadn't known.  Two years before he would have known the
date, the hour, come up at the last moment for a final drink, and
planned his first visit to them.  Now they had gone without a word.

Anson looked at his watch and considered a week-end with his
family, but the only train was a local that would jolt through the
aggressive heat for three hours.  And to-morrow in the country,
and Sunday--he was in no mood for porch-bridge with polite
undergraduates, and dancing after dinner at a rural roadhouse, a
diminutive of gaiety which his father had estimated too well.

"Oh, no," he said to himself. . . .  "No."

He was a dignified, impressive young man, rather stout now, but
otherwise unmarked by dissipation.  He could have been cast for a
pillar of something--at times you were sure it was not society, at
others nothing else--for the law, for the church.  He stood for a
few minutes motionless on the sidewalk in front of a 47th Street
apartment-house; for almost the first time in his life he had
nothing whatever to do.

Then he began to walk briskly up Fifth Avenue, as if he had just
been reminded of an important engagement there.  The necessity of
dissimulation is one of the few characteristics that we share with
dogs, and I think of Anson on that day as some well-bred specimen
who had been disappointed at a familiar back door.  He was going to
see Nick, once a fashionable bartender in demand at all private
dances, and now employed in cooling non-alcoholic champagne among
the labyrinthine cellars of the Plaza Hotel.

"Nick," he said, "what's happened to everything?"

"Dead," Nick said.

"Make me a whiskey sour."  Anson handed a pint bottle over the
counter.  "Nick, the girls are different; I had a little girl in
Brooklyn and she got married last week without letting me know."

"That a fact?  Ha-ha-ha," responded Nick diplomatically.  "Slipped
it over on you."

"Absolutely," said Anson.  "And I was out with her the night
before."

"Ha-ha-ha," said Nick, "ha-ha-ha!"

"Do you remember the wedding, Nick, in Hot Springs where I had the
waiters and the musicians singing 'God save the King'?"

"Now where was that, Mr. Hunter?"  Nick concentrated doubtfully.
"Seems to me that was--"

"Next time they were back for more, and I began to wonder how much
I'd paid them," continued Anson.

"--seems to me that was at Mr. Trenholm's wedding."

"Don't know him," said Anson decisively.  He was offended that a
strange name should intrude upon his reminiscences; Nick perceived
this.

"Naw--aw--" he admitted, "I ought to know that.  It was one of YOUR
crowd--Brakins. . . .  Baker--"

"Bicker Baker," said Anson responsively.  "They put me in a hearse
after it was over and covered me up with flowers and drove me
away."

"Ha-ha-ha," said Nick.  "Ha-ha-ha."

Nick's simulation of the old family servant paled presently and
Anson went up-stairs to the lobby.  He looked around--his eyes met
the glance of an unfamiliar clerk at the desk, then fell upon a
flower from the morning's marriage hesitating in the mouth of a
brass cuspidor.  He went out and walked slowly toward the blood-red
sun over Columbus Circle.  Suddenly he turned around and, retracing
his steps to the Plaza, immured himself in a telephone-booth.

Later he said that he tried to get me three times that afternoon,
that he tried every one who might be in New York--men and girls he
had not seen for years, an artist's model of his college days whose
faded number was still in his address book--Central told him that
even the exchange existed no longer.  At length his quest roved
into the country, and he held brief disappointing conversations
with emphatic butlers and maids.  So-and-so was out, riding,
swimming, playing golf, sailed to Europe last week.  Who shall I
say phoned?

It was intolerable that he should pass the evening alone--the
private reckonings which one plans for a moment of leisure lose
every charm when the solitude is enforced.  There were always women
of a sort, but the ones he knew had temporarily vanished, and to
pass a New York evening in the hired company of a stranger never
occurred to him--he would have considered that that was something
shameful and secret, the diversion of a travelling salesman in a
strange town.

Anson paid the telephone bill--the girl tried unsuccessfully to
joke with him about its size--and for the second time that
afternoon started to leave the Plaza and go he knew not where.
Near the revolving door the figure of a woman, obviously with
child, stood sideways to the light--a sheer beige cape fluttered at
her shoulders when the door turned and, each time, she looked
impatiently toward it as if she were weary of waiting.  At the
first sight of her a strong nervous thrill of familiarity went over
him, but not until he was within five feet of her did he realize
that it was Paula.

"Why, Anson Hunter!"

His heart turned over.

"Why, Paula--"

"Why, this is wonderful.  I can't believe it, ANSON!"

She took both his hands, and he saw in the freedom of the gesture
that the memory of him had lost poignancy to her.  But not to him--
he felt that old mood that she evoked in him stealing over his
brain, that gentleness with which he had always met her optimism as
if afraid to mar its surface.

"We're at Rye for the summer.  Pete had to come East on business--
you know of course I'm Mrs. Peter Hagerty now--so we brought the
children and took a house.  You've got to come out and see us."

"Can I?" he asked directly.  "When?"

"When you like.  Here's Pete."  The revolving door functioned,
giving up a fine tall man of thirty with a tanned face and a trim
mustache.  His immaculate fitness made a sharp contrast with
Anson's increasing bulk, which was obvious under the faintly tight
cut-away coat.

"You oughtn't to be standing," said Hagerty to his wife.  "Let's
sit down here."  He indicated lobby chairs, but Paula hesitated.

"I've got to go right home," she said.  "Anson, why don't you--why
don't you come out and have dinner with us to-night?  We're just
getting settled, but if you can stand that--"

Hagerty confirmed the invitation cordially.

"Come out for the night."

Their car waited in front of the hotel, and Paula with a tired
gesture sank back against silk cushions in the corner.

"There's so much I want to talk to you about," she said, "it seems
hopeless."

"I want to hear about you."

"Well"--she smiled at Hagerty--"that would take a long time too.  I
have three children--by my first marriage.  The oldest is five,
then four, then three."  She smiled again.  "I didn't waste much
time having them, did I?"

"Boys?"

"A boy and two girls.  Then--oh, a lot of things happened, and I
got a divorce in Paris a year ago and married Pete.  That's all--
except that I'm awfully happy."

In Rye they drove up to a large house near the Beach Club, from
which there issued presently three dark, slim children who broke
from an English governess and approached them with an esoteric cry.
Abstractedly and with difficulty Paula took each one into her arms,
a caress which they accepted stiffly, as they had evidently been
told not to bump into Mummy.  Even against their fresh faces
Paula's skin showed scarcely any weariness--for all her physical
languor she seemed younger than when he had last seen her at Palm
Beach seven years ago.

At dinner she was preoccupied, and afterward, during the homage to
the radio, she lay with closed eyes on the sofa, until Anson
wondered if his presence at this time were not an intrusion.  But
at nine o'clock, when Hagerty rose and said pleasantly that he was
going to leave them by themselves for a while, she began to talk
slowly about herself and the past.

"My first baby," she said--"the one we call Darling, the biggest
little girl--I wanted to die when I knew I was going to have her,
because Lowell was like a stranger to me.  It didn't seem as though
she could be my own.  I wrote you a letter and tore it up.  Oh, you
were SO bad to me, Anson."

It was the dialogue again, rising and falling.  Anson felt a sudden
quickening of memory.

"Weren't you engaged once?" she asked--"a girl named Dolly
something?"

"I wasn't ever engaged.  I tried to be engaged, but I never loved
anybody but you, Paula."

"Oh," she said.  Then after a moment:  "This baby is the first one
I ever really wanted.  You see, I'm in love now--at last."

He didn't answer, shocked at the treachery of her remembrance.  She
must have seen that the "at last" bruised him, for she continued:

"I was infatuated with you, Anson--you could make me do anything
you liked.  But we wouldn't have been happy.  I'm not smart enough
for you.  I don't like things to be complicated like you do."  She
paused.  "You'll never settle down," she said.

The phrase struck at him from behind--it was an accusation that of
all accusations he had never merited.

"I could settle down if women were different," he said.  "If I
didn't understand so much about them, if women didn't spoil you for
other women, if they had only a little pride.  If I could go to
sleep for a while and wake up into a home that was really mine--
why, that's what I'm made for, Paula, that's what women have seen
in me and liked in me.  It's only that I can't get through the
preliminaries any more."

Hagerty came in a little before eleven; after a whiskey Paula stood
up and announced that she was going to bed.  She went over and
stood by her husband.

"Where did you go, dearest?" she demanded.

"I had a drink with Ed Saunders."

"I was worried.  I thought maybe you'd run away."

She rested her head against his coat.

"He's sweet, isn't he, Anson?" she demanded.

"Absolutely," said Anson, laughing.

She raised her face to her husband.

"Well, I'm ready," she said.  She turned to Anson:  "Do you want to
see our family gymnastic stunt?"

"Yes," he said in an interested voice.

"All right.  Here we go!"

Hagerty picked her up easily in his arms.

"This is called the family acrobatic stunt," said Paula.  "He
carries me up-stairs.  Isn't it sweet of him?"

"Yes," said Anson.

Hagerty bent his head slightly until his face touched Paula's.

"And I love him," she said.  "I've just been telling you, haven't
I, Anson?"

"Yes," he said.

"He's the dearest thing that ever lived in this world; aren't you,
darling? . . .  Well, good night.  Here we go.  Isn't he strong?"

"Yes," Anson said.

"You'll find a pair of Pete's pajamas laid out for you.  Sweet
dreams--see you at breakfast."

"Yes," Anson said.


VIII


The older members of the firm insisted that Anson should go abroad
for the summer.  He had scarcely had a vacation in seven years,
they said.  He was stale and needed a change.  Anson resisted.

"If I go," he declared, "I won't come back any more."

"That's absurd, old man.  You'll be back in three months with all
this depression gone.  Fit as ever."

"No."  He shook his head stubbornly.  "If I stop, I won't go back
to work.  If I stop, that means I've given up--I'm through."

"We'll take a chance on that.  Stay six months if you like--we're
not afraid you'll leave us.  Why, you'd be miserable if you didn't
work."

They arranged his passage for him.  They liked Anson--every one
liked Anson--and the change that had been coming over him cast a
sort of pall over the office.  The enthusiasm that had invariably
signalled up business, the consideration toward his equals and his
inferiors, the lift of his vital presence--within the past four
months his intense nervousness had melted down these qualities into
the fussy pessimism of a man of forty.  On every transaction in
which he was involved he acted as a drag and a strain.

"If I go I'll never come back," he said.

Three days before he sailed Paula Legendre Hagerty died in
childbirth.  I was with him a great deal then, for we were crossing
together, but for the first time in our friendship he told me not a
word of how he felt, nor did I see the slightest sign of emotion.
His chief preoccupation was with the fact that he was thirty years
old--he would turn the conversation to the point where he could
remind you of it and then fall silent, as if he assumed that the
statement would start a chain of thought sufficient to itself.
Like his partners, I was amazed at the change in him, and I was
glad when the Paris moved off into the wet space between the
worlds, leaving his principality behind.

"How about a drink?" he suggested.

We walked into the bar with that defiant feeling that characterizes
the day of departure and ordered four Martinis.  After one cocktail
a change came over him--he suddenly reached across and slapped my
knee with the first joviality I had seen him exhibit for months.

"Did you see that girl in the red tam?" he demanded, "the one with
the high color who had the two police dogs down to bid her good-
by."

"She's pretty," I agreed.

"I looked her up in the purser's office and found out that she's
alone.  I'm going down to see the steward in a few minutes.  We'll
have dinner with her to-night."

After a while he left me, and within an hour he was walking up and
down the deck with her, talking to her in his strong, clear voice.
Her red tam was a bright spot of color against the steel-green sea,
and from time to time she looked up with a flashing bob of her
head, and smiled with amusement and interest, and anticipation.  At
dinner we had champagne, and were very joyous--afterward Anson ran
the pool with infectious gusto, and several people who had seen me
with him asked me his name.  He and the girl were talking and
laughing together on a lounge in the bar when I went to bed.

I saw less of him on the trip than I had hoped.  He wanted to
arrange a foursome, but there was no one available, so I saw him
only at meals.  Sometimes, though, he would have a cocktail in the
bar, and he told me about the girl in the red tam, and his
adventures with her, making them all bizarre and amusing, as he had
a way of doing, and I was glad that he was himself again, or at
least the self that I knew, and with which I felt at home.  I don't
think he was ever happy unless some one was in love with him,
responding to him like filings to a magnet, helping him to explain
himself, promising him something.  What it was I do not know.
Perhaps they promised that there would always be women in the world
who would spend their brightest, freshest, rarest hours to nurse
and protect that superiority he cherished in his heart.



THE END




THE ROUGH CROSSING


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


The Saturday Evening Post (8 June 1929)



I


Once on the long, covered piers, you have come into a ghostly
country that is no longer Here and not yet There.  Especially at
night.  There is a hazy yellow vault full of shouting, echoing
voices.  There is the rumble of trucks and the clump of trunks, the
strident chatter of a crane and the first salt smell of the sea.
You hurry through, even though there's time.  The past, the
continent, is behind you; the future is that glowing mouth in the
side of the ship; this dim turbulent alley is too confusedly the
present.

Up the gangplank, and the vision of the world adjusts itself,
narrows.  One is a citizen of a commonwealth smaller than Andorra.
One is no longer so sure of anything.  Curiously unmoved the men at
the purser's desk, cell-like the cabin, disdainful the eyes of
voyagers and their friends, solemn the officer who stands on the
deserted promenade deck thinking something of his own as he stares
at the crowd below.  A last odd idea that one didn't really have to
come, then the loud, mournful whistles, and the thing--certainly
not the boat, but rather a human idea, a frame of mind--pushes
forth into the big dark night.

Adrian Smith, one of the celebrities on board--not a very great
celebrity, but important enough to be bathed in flashlight by a
photographer who had been given his name, but wasn't sure what his
subject 'did'--Adrian Smith and his blonde wife, Eva, went up to
the promenade deck, passed the melancholy ship's officer, and,
finding a quiet aerie, put their elbows on the rail.

'We're going!' he cried presently, and they both laughed in
ecstasy.  'We've escaped.  They can't get us now.'

'Who?'

He waved his hand vaguely at the civic tiara.

'All those people out there.  They'll come with their posses and
their warrants and list of crimes we've committed, and ring the
bell at our door on Park Avenue and ask for the Adrian Smiths, but
what ho! the Adrian Smiths and their children and nurse are off for
France.'

'You make me think we really have committed crimes.'

'They can't have you,' he said frowning.  'That's one thing they're
after me about--they know I haven't got any right to a person like
you, and they're furious.  That's one reason I'm glad to get away.'

'Darling,' said Eva.

She was twenty-six--five years younger than he.  She was something
precious to everyone who knew her.

'I like this boat better than the Majestic or the Aquitania,' she
remarked, unfaithful to the ships that had served their honeymoon.

'It's much smaller.'

'But it's very slick and it has all those little shops along the
corridors.  And I think the staterooms are bigger.'

'The people are very formal--did you notice?--as if they thought
everyone else was a card sharp.  And in about four days half of
them will be calling the other half by their first names.'

Four of the people came by now--a quartet of young girls abreast,
making a circuit of the deck.  Their eight eyes swept momentarily
towards Adrian and Eva, and then swept automatically back, save for
one pair which lingered for an instant with a little start.  They
belonged to one of the girls in the middle, who was, indeed, the
only passenger of the four.  She was not more than eighteen--a dark
little beauty with the fine crystal gloss over her that, in
brunettes, takes the place of a blonde's bright glow.

'Now, who's that?' wondered Adrian.  'I've seen her before.'

'She's pretty,' said Eva.

'Yes.'  He kept wondering, and Eva deferred momentarily to his
distraction; then, smiling up at him, she drew him back into their
privacy.

'Tell me more,' she said.

'About what?'

'About us--what a good time we'll have, and how we'll be much
better and happier, and very close always.'

'How could we be any closer?'  His arm pulled her to him.

'But I mean never even quarrel any more about silly things.  You
know, I made up my mind when you gave me my birthday present last
week'--her fingers caressed the fine seed pearls at her throat--
'that I'd try never to say a mean thing to you again.'

'You never have, my precious.'

Yet even as he strained her against his side she knew that the
moment of utter isolation had passed almost before it had begun.
His antennae were already out, feeling over this new world.

'Most of the people look rather awful,' he said--'little and
swarthy and ugly.  Americans didn't use to look like that.'

'They look dreary,' she agreed.  'Let's not get to know anybody,
but just stay together.'

A gong was beating now, and stewards were shouting down the decks,
'Visitors ashore, please!' and voices rose to a strident chorus.
For a while the gangplanks were thronged; then they were empty,
and the jostling crowd behind the barrier waved and called
unintelligible things, and kept up a grin of good will.  As the
stevedores began to work at the ropes a flat-faced, somewhat
befuddled young man arrived in a great hurry and was assisted up
the gangplank by a porter and a taxi driver.  The ship having
swallowed him as impassively as though he were a missionary for
Beirut, a low, portentous vibration began.  The pier with its faces
commenced to slide by, and for a moment the boat was just a piece
accidentally split off from it; then the faces became remote,
voiceless, and the pier was one among many yellow blurs along the
water front.  Now the harbour flowed swiftly toward the sea.

On a northern parallel of latitude a hurricane was forming and
moving south by southeast preceded by a strong west wind.  On its
course it was destined to swamp the Peter I. Eudin of Amsterdam,
with a crew of sixty-six, to break a boom on the largest boat in
the world, and to bring grief and want to the wives of several
hundred seamen.  This liner, leaving New York Sunday evening, would
enter the zone of the storm Tuesday, and of the hurricane late
Wednesday night.


II


Tuesday afternoon Adrian and Eva paid their first visit to the
smoking-room.  This was not in accord with their intentions--they
had 'never wanted to see a cocktail again' after leaving America--
but they had forgotten the staccato loneliness of ships, and all
activity centred about the bar.  So they went in for just a minute.

It was full.  There were those who had been there since luncheon,
and those who would be there until dinner, not to mention a
faithful few who had been there since nine this morning.  It was a
prosperous assembly, taking its recreation at bridge, solitaire,
detective stories, alcohol, argument and love.  Up to this point
you could have matched it in the club or casino life of any
country, but over it all played a repressed nervous energy, a
barely disguised impatience that extended to old and young alike.
The cruise had begun, and they had enjoyed the beginning, but the
show was not varied enough to last six days, and already they
wanted it to be over.

At a table near them Adrian saw the pretty girl who had stared at
him on the deck the first night.  Again he was fascinated by her
loveliness; there was no mist upon the brilliant gloss that gleamed
through the smoky confusion of the room.  He and Eva had decided
from the passenger list that she was probably 'Miss Elizabeth
D'Amido and maid', and he had heard her called Betsy as he walked
past a deck-tennis game.  Among the young people with her was the
flat-nosed youth who had been 'poured on board', the night of their
departure; yesterday he had walked the deck morosely, but he was
apparently reviving.  Miss D'Amido whispered something to him, and
he looked over at the Smiths with curious eyes.  Adrian was new
enough at being a celebrity to turn self-consciously away.

'There's a little roll.  Do you feel it?' Eva demanded.

'Perhaps we'd better split a pint of champagne.'

While he gave the order a short colloquy was taking place at the
other table; presently a young man rose and came over to them.

'Isn't this Mr Adrian Smith?'

'Yes.'

'We wondered if we couldn't put you down for the deck-tennis
tournament.  We're going to have a deck-tennis tournament.'

'Why--'  Adrian hesitated.

'My name's Stacomb,' burst out the young man.  'We all know your--
your plays or whatever it is, and all that--and we wondered if you
wouldn't like to come over to our table.'

Somewhat overwhelmed, Adrian laughed: Mr Stacomb, glib, soft,
slouching, waited; evidently under the impression that he had
delivered himself of a graceful compliment.

Adrian, understanding that, too, replied:  'Thanks, but perhaps
you'd better come over here.'

'We've got a bigger table.'

'But we're older and more--more settled.'

The young man laughed kindly, as if to say, 'That's all right.'

'Put me down,' said Adrian.  'How much do I owe you?'

'One buck.  Call me Stac.'

'Why?' asked Adrian, startled.

'It's shorter.'

When he had gone they smiled broadly.

'Heavens,' Eva gasped, 'I believe they are coming over.'

They were.  With a great draining of glasses, calling of waiters,
shuffling of chairs, three boys and two girls moved to the Smiths'
table.  If there was any diffidence, it was confined to the hosts;
for the new additions gathered around them eagerly, eyeing Adrian
with respect--too much respect--as if to say:  'This was probably a
mistake and won't be amusing, but maybe we'll get something out of
it to help us in our after life, like at school.'

In a moment Miss D'Amido changed seats with one of the men and
placed her radiant self at Adrian's side, looking at him with
manifest admiration.

'I fell in love with you the minute I saw you,' she said audibly
and without self-consciousness; 'so I'll take all the blame for
butting in.  I've seen your play four times.'

Adrian called a waiter to take their orders.

'You see,' continued Miss D'Amido, 'we're going into a storm, and
you might be prostrated the rest of the trip, so I couldn't take
any chances.'

He saw that there was no undertone or innuendo in what she said,
nor the need of any.  The words themselves were enough, and the
deference with which she neglected the young men and bent her
politeness on him was somehow very touching.  A little glow went
over him; he was having rather more than a pleasant time.

Eva was less entertained; but the flat-nosed young man, whose name
was Butterworth, knew people that she did, and that seemed to make
the affair less careless and casual.  She did not like meeting new
people unless they had 'something to contribute', and she was often
bored by the great streams of them, of all types and conditions and
classes, that passed through Adrian's life.  She herself 'had
everything'--which is to say that she was well endowed with talents
and with charm--and the mere novelty of people did not seem a
sufficient reason for eternally offering everything up to them.

Half an hour later when she rose to go and see the children, she
was content that the episode was over.  It was colder on deck, with
a damp that was almost rain, and there was a perceptible motion.
Opening the door of her state-room she was surprised to find the
cabin steward sitting languidly on her bed, his head slumped upon
the upright pillow.  He looked at her listlessly as she came in,
but made no move to get up.

'When you've finished your nap you can fetch me a new pillow-case,'
she said briskly.

Still the man didn't move.  She perceived then that his face was
green.

'You can't be seasick in here,' she announced firmly.  'You go and
lie down in your own quarters.'

'It's me side,' he said faintly.  He tried to rise, gave out a
little rasping sound of pain and sank back again.  Eva rang for the
stewardess.

A steady pitch, toss, roll had begun in earnest and she felt no
sympathy for the steward, but only wanted to get him out as quick
as possible.  It was outrageous for a member of the crew to be
seasick.  When the stewardess came in Eva tried to explain this,
but now her own head was whirring, and throwing herself on the bed,
she covered her eyes.

'It's his fault,' she groaned when the man was assisted from the
room.  'I was all right and it made me sick to look at him.  I wish
he'd die.'

In a few minutes Adrian came in.

'Oh, but I'm sick!' she cried.

'Why, you poor baby.'  He leaned over and took her in his arms.
'Why didn't you tell me?'

'I was all right upstairs, but there was a steward--Oh, I'm too
sick to talk.'

'You'd better have dinner in bed.'

'Dinner!  Oh, my heavens!'

He waited solicitously, but she wanted to hear his voice, to have
it drown out the complaining sound of the beams.

'Where've you been?'

'Helping to sign up people for the tournament.'

'Will they have it if it's like this?  Because if they do I'll just
lose for you.'

He didn't answer; opening her eyes, she saw that he was frowning.

'I didn't know you were going in the doubles,' he said.

'Why, that's the only fun.'

'I told the D'Amido girl I'd play with her.'

'Oh.'

'I didn't think.  You know I'd much rather play with you.'

'Why didn't you, then?' she asked coolly.

'It never occurred to me.'

She remembered that on their honeymoon they had been in the finals
and won a prize.  Years passed.  But Adrian never frowned in this
regretful way unless he felt a little guilty.  He stumbled about,
getting his dinner clothes out of the trunk, and she shut her eyes.

When a particular violent lurch startled her awake again he was
dressed and tying his tie.  He looked healthy and fresh, and his
eyes were bright.

'Well, how about it?' he inquired.  'Can you make it, or no?'

'No.'

'Can I do anything for you before I go?'

'Where are you going?'

'Meeting those kids in the bar.  Can I do anything for you?'

'No.'

'Darling, I hate to leave you like this.'

'Don't be silly.  I just want to sleep.'

That solicitous frown--when she knew he was crazy to be out and
away from the close cabin.  She was glad when the door closed.  The
thing to do was to sleep, sleep.

Up--down--sideways.  Hey there, not so far!  Pull her round the
corner there!  Now roll her, right--left--Crea-eak!  Wrench!
Swoop!

Some hours later Eva was dimly conscious of Adrian bending over
her.  She wanted him to put his arms around her and draw her up out
of this dizzy lethargy, but by the time she was fully awake the
cabin was empty.  He had looked in and gone.  When she awoke next
the cabin was dark and he was in bed.

The morning was fresh and cool, and the sea was just enough calmer
to make Eva think she could get up.  They breakfasted in the cabin
and with Adrian's help she accomplished an unsatisfactory makeshift
toilet and they went up on the boat deck.  The tennis tournament
had already begun and was furnishing action for a dozen amateur
movie cameras, but the majority of passengers were represented by
lifeless bundles in deck chairs beside untasted trays.

Adrian and Miss D'Amido played their first match.  She was deft and
graceful; blatantly well.  There was even more warmth behind her
ivory skin than there had been the day before.  The strolling first
officer stopped and talked to her; half a dozen men whom she
couldn't have known three days ago called her Betsy.  She was
already the pretty girl of the voyage, the cynosure of starved
ship's eyes.

But after a while Eva preferred to watch the gulls in the wireless
masts and the slow slide of the roll-top sky.  Most of the
passengers looked silly with their movie cameras that they had all
rushed to get and now didn't know what to use for, but the sailors
painting the lifeboat stanchions were quiet and beaten and
sympathetic, and probably wished, as she did, that the voyage was
over.

Butterworth sat down on the deck beside her chair.

'They're operating on one of the stewards this morning.  Must be
terrible in this sea.'

'Operating?  What for?' she asked listlessly.

'Appendicitis.  They have to operate now because we're going into
worse weather.  That's why they're having the ship's party
tonight.'

'Oh, the poor man!' she cried, realizing it must be her steward.

Adrian was showing off now by being very courteous and thoughtful
in the game.

'Sorry.  Did you hurt yourself? . . .  No, it was my fault. . .
You better put on your coat right away, pardner, or you'll catch
cold.'

The match was over and they had won.  Flushed and hearty, he came
up to Eva's chair.

'How do you feel?'

'Terrible.'

'Winners are buying a drink in the bar,' he said apologetically.

'I'm coming, too,' Eva said, but an immediate dizziness made her
sink back in her chair.

'You'd better stay here.  I'll send you up something.'

She felt that his public manner had hardened towards her slightly.

'You'll come back?'

'Oh, right away.'

She was alone on the boat deck, save for a solitary ship's officer
who slanted obliquely as he paced the bridge.  When the cocktail
arrived she forced herself to drink it, and felt better.  Trying to
distract her mind with pleasant things, she reached back to the
sanguine talks that she and Adrian had had before sailing:  There
was the little villa in Brittany, the children learning French--
that was all she could think of now--the little villa in Brittany,
the children learning French--so she repeated the words over and
over to herself until they became as meaningless as the wide white
sky.  The why of their being here had suddenly eluded her; she felt
unmotivated, accidental, and she wanted Adrian to come back quick,
all responsive and tender, to reassure her.  It was in the hope
that there was some secret of graceful living, some real
compensation for the lost, careless confidence of twenty-one, that
they were going to spend a year in France.

The day passed darkly, with fewer people around and a wet sky
falling.  Suddenly it was five o'clock, and they were all in the
bar again, and Mr Butterworth was telling her about his past.  She
took a good deal of champagne, but she was seasick dimly through
it, as if the illness was her soul trying to struggle up through
some thickening incrustation of abnormal life.

'You're my idea of a Greek goddess, physically,' Butterworth was
saying.

It was pleasant to be Mr Butterworth's idea of a Greek goddess
physically, but where was Adrian?  He and Miss D'Amido had gone out
on a forward deck to feel the spray.  Eva heard herself promising
to get out her colours and paint the Eiffel Tower on Butterworth's
shirt front for the party tonight.

When Adrian and Betsy D'Amido, soaked with spray, opened the door
with difficulty against the driving wind and came into the now-
covered security of the promenade deck, they stopped and turned
toward each other.

'Well?' she said.  But he only stood with his back to the rail,
looking at her, afraid to speak.  She was silent, too, because she
wanted him to be first; so for a moment nothing happened.  Then she
made a step towards him, and he took her in his arms and kissed her
forehead.

'You're just sorry for me, that's all.'  She began to cry a little.
'You're just being kind.'

'I feel terribly about it.'  His voice was taut and trembling.

'Then kiss me.'

The deck was empty.  He bent over her swiftly.

'No, really kiss me.'

He could not remember when anything had felt so young and fresh as
her lips.  The rain lay, like tears shed for him, upon the softly
shining porcelain cheeks.  She was all new and immaculate, and her
eyes were wild.

'I love you,' she whispered.  'I can't help loving you, can I?
When I first saw you--oh, not on the boat, but over a year ago--
Grace Heally took me to a rehearsal and suddenly you jumped up in
the second row and began telling them what to do.  I wrote you a
letter and tore it up.'

'We've got to go.'

She was weeping as they walked along the deck.  Once more,
imprudently, she held up her face to him at the door of her cabin.
His blood was beating through him in wild tumult as he walked on to
the bar.

He was thankful that Eva scarcely seemed to notice him or to know
that he had been gone.  After a moment he pretended an interest in
what she was doing.

'What's that?'

'She's painting the Eiffel Tower on my shirt front for tonight,'
explained Butterworth.

'There,' Eva laid away her brush and wiped her hands.

'How's that?'

'A chef-d'oeuvre.'

Her eyes swept around the watching group, lingered casually upon
Adrian.

'You're wet.  Go and change.'

'You come too.'

'I want another champagne cocktail.'

'You've had enough.  It's time to dress for the party.'

Unwilling she closed her paints and preceded him.

'Stacomb's got a table for nine,' he remarked as they walked along
the corridor.

'The younger set,' she said with unnecessary bitterness.  'Oh, the
younger set.  And you just having the time of your life--with a
child.'

They had a long discussion in the cabin, unpleasant on her part and
evasive on his, which ended when the ship gave a sudden gigantic
heave, and Eva, the edge worn off her champagne, felt ill again.
There was nothing to do but to have a cocktail in the cabin, and
after that they decided to go to the party--she believed him now,
or she didn't care.

Adrian was ready first--he never wore fancy dress.

'I'll go on up.  Don't be long.'

'Wait for me, please; it's rocking so.'

He sat down on a bed, concealing his impatience.

'You don't mind waiting, do you?  I don't want to parade up there
all alone.'

She was taking a tuck in an oriental costume rented from the
barber.

'Ships make people feel crazy,' she said.  'I think they're awful.'

'Yes,' he muttered absently.

'When it gets very bad I pretend I'm in the top of a tree, rocking
to and fro.  But finally I get pretending everything, and finally I
have to pretend I'm sane when I know I'm not.'

'If you get thinking that way you will go crazy.'

'Look, Adrian.'  She held up the string of pearls before clasping
them on.  'Aren't they lovely?'

In Adrian's impatience she seemed to move around the cabin like a
figure in a slow-motion picture.  After a moment he demanded:

'Are you going to be long?  It's stifling in here.'

'You go on!' she fired up.

'I don't want--'

'Go on, please!  You just make me nervous trying to hurry me.'

With a show of reluctance he left her.  After a moment's hesitation
he went down a flight to a deck below and knocked at a door.

'Betsy.'

'Just a minute.'

She came out in the corridor attired in a red pea-jacket and
trousers borrowed from the elevator boy.

'Do elevator boys have fleas?' she demanded.  'I've got everything
in the world on under this as a precaution.'

'I had to see you,' he said quickly.

'Careful,' she whispered.  'Mrs Worden, who's supposed to be
chaperoning me, is across the way.  She's sick.'

'I'm sick for you.'

They kissed suddenly, clung close together in the narrow corridor,
swaying to and fro with the motion of the ship.

'Don't go away,' she murmured.

'I've got to.  I've--'

Her youth seemed to flow into him, bearing him up into a delicate
romantic ecstasy that transcended passion.  He couldn't relinquish
it; he had discovered something that he had thought was lost with
his own youth forever.  As he walked along the passage he knew that
he had stopped thinking, no longer dared to think.

He met Eva going into the bar.

'Where've you been?' she asked with a strained smile.

'To see about the table.'

She was lovely; her cool distinction conquered the trite costume
and filled him with a resurgence of approval and pride.  They sat
down at a table.

The gale was rising hour by hour and the mere traversing of a
passage had become a rough matter.  In every stateroom trunks were
lashed to the washstands, and the Vestris disaster was being
reviewed in detail by nervous ladies, tossing, ill and wretched,
upon their beds.  In the smoking-room a stout gentleman had been
hurled backward and suffered a badly cut head; and now the lighter
chairs and tables were stacked and roped against the wall.

The crowd who had donned fancy dress and were dining together had
swollen to about sixteen.  The only remaining qualification for
membership was the ability to reach the smoking-room.  They ranged
from a Groton-Harvard lawyer to an ungrammatical broker they had
nicknamed Gyp the Blood, but distinctions had disappeared; for the
moment they were samurai, chosen from several hundred for their
triumphant resistance to the storm.

The gala dinner, overhung sardonically with lanterns and streamers,
was interrupted by great communal slides across the room,
precipitate retirements and spilled wine, while the ship roared and
complained that under the panoply of a palace it was a ship after
all.  Upstairs afterward a dozen couples tried to dance, shuffling
and galloping here and there in a crazy fandango, thrust around
fantastically by a will alien to their own.  In view of the
condition of tortured hundreds below, there grew to be something
indecent about it like a revel in a house of mourning, and
presently there was an egress of the ever-dwindling survivors
towards the bar.

As the evening passed, Eva's feeling of unreality increased.
Adrian had disappeared--presumably with Miss D'Amido--and her mind,
distorted by illness and champagne, began to enlarge upon the fact;
annoyance changed slowly to dark and brooding anger, grief to
desperation.  She had never tried to bind Adrian, never needed to--
for they were serious people, with all sorts of mutual interests,
and satisfied with each other--but this was a breach of the
contract, this was cruel.  How could he think that she didn't know?

It seemed several hours later that he leaned over her chair in the
bar where she was giving some woman an impassioned lecture upon
babies, and said:

'Eva, we'd better turn in.'

Her lip curled.  'So that you can leave me there and then come back
to your eighteen-year--'

'Be quiet.'

'I won't come to bed.'

'Very well.  Good night.'

More time passed and the people at the table changed.  The stewards
wanted to close up the room, and thinking of Adrian--her Adrian--
off somewhere saying tender things to someone fresh and lovely, Eva
began to cry.

'But he's gone to bed,' her last attendants assured her.  'We saw
him go.'

She shook her head.  She knew better.  Adrian was lost.  The long
seven-year dream was broken.  Probably she was punished for
something she had done; as this thought occurred to her the
shrieking timbers overhead began to mutter that she had guessed at
last.  This was for the selfishness to her mother, who hadn't
wanted her to marry Adrian; for all the sins and omissions of her
life.  She stood up, saying she must go out and get some air.

The deck was dark and drenched with wind and rain.  The ship
pounded through valleys, fleeing from black mountains of water that
roared towards it.  Looking out at the night, Eva saw that there
was no chance for them unless she could make atonement, propitiate
the storm.  It was Adrian's love that was demanded of her.
Deliberately she unclasped her pearl necklace, lifted it to her
lips--for she knew that with it went the freshest, fairest part of
her life--and flung it out into the gale.


III


When Adrian awoke it was lunchtime, but he knew that some heavier
sound than the bugle had called him up from his deep sleep.  Then
he realized that the trunk had broken loose from its lashings and
was being thrown back and forth between a wardrobe and Eva's bed.
With an exclamation he jumped up, but she was unharmed--still in
costume and stretched out in deep sleep.  When the steward had
helped him secure the trunk, Eva opened a single eye.

'How are you?' he demanded, sitting on the side of her bed.

She closed the eye, opened it again.

'We're in a hurricane now,' he told her.  'The steward says it's
the worst he's seen in twenty years.'

'My head,' she muttered.  'Hold my head.'

'How?'

'In front.  My eyes are going out.  I think I'm dying.'

'Nonsense.  Do you want the doctor?'

She gave a funny little gasp that frightened him; he rang and sent
the steward for the doctor.

The young doctor was pale and tired.  There was a stubble of beard
upon his face.  He bowed curtly as he came in and, turning to
Adrian, said with scant ceremony:

'What's the matter?'

'My wife doesn't feel well.'

'Well, what is it you want--a bromide?'

A little annoyed by his shortness, Adrian said:  'You'd better
examine her and see what she needs.'

'She needs a bromide,' said the doctor.  'I've given orders that
she is not to have any more to drink on this ship.'

'Why not?' demanded Adrian in astonishment.

'Don't you know what happened last night?'

'Why, no, I was asleep.'

'Mrs Smith wandered around the boat for an hour, not knowing what
she was doing.  A sailor was sent to follow her, and then the
medical stewardess tried to get her to bed, and your wife insulted
her.'

'Oh, my heavens!' cried Eva faintly.

'The nurse and I had both been up all night with Steward Carton,
who died this morning.'  He picked up his case.  'I'll send down a
bromide for Mrs Smith.  Good-bye.'

For a few minutes there was silence in the cabin.  Then Adrian put
his arm around her quickly.

'Never mind,' he said.  'We'll straighten it out.'

'I remember now.'  Her voice was an awed whisper.  'My pearls.  I
threw them overboard.'

'Threw them overboard!'

'Then I began looking for you.'

'But I was here in bed.'

'I didn't believe it; I thought you were with that girl.'

'She collapsed during dinner.  I was taking a nap down here.'

Frowning, he rang the bell and asked the steward for luncheon and a
bottle of beer.

'Sorry, but we can't serve any beer to your cabin, sir.'

When he went out Adrian exploded:  'This is an outrage.  You were
simply crazy from that storm and they can't be so high-handed.
I'll see the captain.'

'Isn't that awful?' Eva murmured.  'The poor man died.'

She turned over and began to sob into her pillow.  There was a
knock at the door.

'Can I come in?'

The assiduous Mr Butterworth, surprisingly healthy and immaculate,
came into the crazily tipping cabin.

'Well, how's the mystic?' he demanded of Eva.  'Do you remember
praying to the elements in the bar last night?'

'I don't want to remember anything about last night.'

They told him about the stewardess, and with the telling the
situation lightened; they all laughed together.

'I'm going to get you some beer to have with your luncheon,'
Butterworth said.  'You ought to get up on deck.'

'Don't go,' Eva said.  'You look so cheerful and nice.'

'Just for ten minutes.'

When he had gone, Adrian rang for two baths.

'The thing is to put on our best clothes and walk proudly three
times around the deck,' he said.

'Yes.'  After a moment she added abstractedly:  'I like that young
man.  He was awfully nice to me last night when you'd disappeared.'

The bath steward appeared with the information that bathing was too
dangerous today.  They were in the midst of the wildest hurricane
on the North Atlantic in ten years; there were two broken arms this
morning from attempts to take baths.  An elderly lady had been
thrown down a staircase and was not expected to live.  Furthermore,
they had received the SOS signal from several boats this morning.

'Will we go to help them?'

'They're all behind us, sir, so we have to leave them to the
Mauretania.  If we tried to turn in this sea the portholes would be
smashed.'

This array of calamities minimized their own troubles.  Having
eaten a sort of luncheon and drunk the beer provided by
Butterworth, they dressed and went on deck.

Despite the fact that it was only possible to progress step by
step, holding on to rope or rail, more people were abroad than on
the day before.  Fear had driven them from their cabins, where the
trunks bumped and the waves pounded the portholes, and they awaited
momentarily the call to the boats.  Indeed, as Adrian and Eva stood
on the transverse deck above the second class, there was a bugle
call, followed by a gathering of stewards and stewardesses on the
deck below.  But the boat was sound: it had outlasted one of its
cargo--Steward James Carton was being buried at sea.

It was very British and sad.  There were the rows of stiff,
disciplined men and women standing in the driving rain, and there
was a shape covered by the flag of the Empire that lived by the
sea.  The chief purser read the service, a hymn was sung, the body
slid off into the hurricane.  With Eva's burst of wild weeping for
this humble end, some last string snapped within her.  Now she
really didn't care.  She responded eagerly when Butterworth
suggested that he get some champagne to their cabin.  Her mood
worried Adrian; she wasn't used to so much drinking and he wondered
what he ought to do.  At his suggestion that they sleep instead,
she merely laughed, and the bromide the doctor had sent stood
untouched on the washstand.  Pretending to listen to the
insipidities of several Mr Stacombs, he watched her; to his
surprise and discomfort she seemed on intimate and even sentimental
terms with Butterworth and he wondered if this was a form of
revenge for his attention to Betsy D'Amido.

The cabin was full of smoke, the voices went on incessantly, the
suspension of activity, the waiting for the storm's end, was
getting on his nerves.  They had been at sea only four days; it was
like a year.

The two Mr Stacombs left finally, but Butterworth remained.  Eva
was urging him to go for another bottle of champagne.

'We've had enough,' objected Adrian.  'We ought to go to bed.'

'I won't go to bed!' she burst out.  'You must be crazy!  You play
around all you want, and then, when I find somebody I--I like, you
want to put me to bed.'

'You're hysterical.'

'On the contrary, I've never been so sane.'

'I think you'd better leave us, Butterworth,' Adrian said.  'Eva
doesn't know what she's saying.'

'He won't go, I won't let him go.'  She clasped Butterworth's hand
passionately.  'He's the only person that's been half decent to
me.'

'You'd better go, Butterworth,' repeated Adrian.

The young man looked at him uncertainly.

'It seems to me you're being unjust to your wife,' he ventured.

'My wife isn't herself.'

'That's no reason for bullying her.'

Adrian lost his temper.  'You get out of here!' he cried.

The two men looked at each other for a moment in silence.  Then
Butterworth turned to Eva, said, 'I'll be back later,' and left the
cabin.

'Eva, you've got to pull yourself together,' said Adrian when the
door closed.

She didn't answer, looked at him from sullen, half-closed eyes.

'I'll order dinner here for us both and then we'll try to get some
sleep.'

'I want to go up and send a wireless.'

'Who to?'

'Some Paris lawyer.  I want a divorce.'

In spite of his annoyance, he laughed.  'Don't be silly.'

'Then I want to see the children.'

'Well, go and see them.  I'll order dinner.'

He waited for her in the cabin twenty minutes.  Then impatiently he
opened the door across the corridor; the nurse told him that Mrs
Smith had not been there.

With a sudden prescience of disaster he ran upstairs, glanced in
the bar, the salons, even knocked at Butterworth's door.  Then a
quick round of the decks, feeling his way through the black spray
and rain.  A sailor stopped him at a network of ropes.

'Orders are no one goes by, sir.  A wave has gone over the wireless
room.'

'Have you seen a lady?'

'There was a young lady here--'  He stopped and glanced around.
'Hello, she's gone.'

'She went up the stairs!' Adrian said anxiously.  'Up to the
wireless room!'

The sailor ran up to the boat deck; stumbling and slipping, Adrian
followed.  As he cleared the protected sides of the companionway, a
tremendous body struck the boat a staggering blow and, as she
keeled over to an angle of forty-five degrees, he was thrown in a
helpless roll down the drenched deck, to bring up dizzy and bruised
against a stanchion.

'Eva!' he called.  His voice was soundless in the black storm.
Against the faint light of the wireless-room window he saw the
sailor making his way forward.

'Eva!'

The wind blew him like a sail up against a lifeboat.  Then there
was another shuddering crash, and high over his head, over the very
boat, he saw a gigantic, glittering white wave, and in the split
second that it balanced there he became conscious of Eva, standing
beside a ventilator twenty feet away.  Pushing out from the
stanchion, he lunged desperately toward her, just as the wave broke
with a smashing roar.  For a moment the rushing water was five feet
deep, sweeping with enormous force towards the side, and then a
human body was washed against him, and frantically he clutched it
and was swept with it back towards the rail.  He felt his body bump
against it, but desperately he held on to his burden; then, as the
ship rocked slowly back, the two of them, still joined by his
fierce grip, were rolled out exhausted on the wet planks.  For a
moment he knew no more.


IV


Two days later, as the boat train moved tranquilly south toward
Paris, Adrian tried to persuade his children to look out the window
at the Norman countryside.

'It's beautiful,' he assured them.  'All the little farms like
toys.  Why, in heaven's name, won't you look?'

'I like the boat better,' said Estelle.

Her parents exchanged an infanticidal glance.

'The boat is still rocking for me,' Eva said with a shiver.  'Is it
for you?'

'No.  Somehow, it all seems a long way off.  Even the passengers
looked unfamiliar going through the customs.'

'Most of them hadn't appeared above ground before.'

He hesitated.  'By the way, I cashed Butterworth's cheque for him.'

'You're a fool.  You'll never see the money again.'

'He must have needed it pretty badly or he would not have come to
me.'

A pale and wan girl, passing along the corridor, recognized them
and put her head through the doorway.

'How do you feel?'

'Awful.'

'Me, too,' agreed Miss D'Amido.  'I'm vainly hoping my fiancé will
recognize me at the Gare du Nord.  Do you know two waves went over
the wireless room?'

'So we heard,' Adrian answered dryly.

She passed gracefully along the corridor and out of their life.

'The real truth is that none of it happened,' said Adrian after a
moment.  'It was a nightmare--an incredibly awful nightmare.'

'Then, where are my pearls?'

'Darling, there are better pearls in Paris.  I'll take the
responsibility for those pearls.  My real belief is that you saved
the boat.'

'Adrian, let's never get to know anyone else, but just stay
together always--just we two.'

He tucked her arm under his and they sat close.  'Who do you
suppose those Adrian Smiths on the boat were?' he demanded.  'It
certainly wasn't me.'

'Nor me.'

'It was two other people,' he said, nodding to himself.  'There are
so many Smiths in this world.'






THE SCANDAL DETECTIVES


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


The Saturday Evening Post (28 April, 1928)



I


It was a hot afternoon in May and Mrs. Buckner thought that a
pitcher of fruit lemonade might prevent the boys from filling up on
ice cream at the drug store.  She belonged to that generation,
since retired, upon whom the great revolution in American family
life was to be visited; but at that time she believed that her
children's relation to her was as much as hers had been to her
parents, for this was more than twenty years ago.

Some generations are close to those that succeed them; between
others the gap is infinite and unbridgeable.  Mrs. Buckner--a woman
of character, a member of Society in a large Middle-Western city--
carrying a pitcher of fruit lemonade through her own spacious back
yard, was progressing across a hundred years.  Her own thoughts
would have been comprehensible to her great-grandmother; what was
happening in a room above the stable would have been entirely
unintelligible to them both.  In what had once served as the
coachman's sleeping apartment, her son and a friend were not
behaving in a normal manner, but were, so to speak, experimenting
in a void.  They were making the first tentative combinations of
the ideas and materials they found ready at their hand--ideas
destined to become, in future years, first articulate, then
startling and finally commonplace.  At the moment when she called
up to them they were sitting with disarming quiet upon the still
unhatched eggs of the mid-twentieth century.

Riply Buckner descended the ladder and took the lemonade.  Basil
Duke Lee looked abstractedly down at the transaction and said,
"Thank you very much, Mrs. Buckner."

"Are you sure it isn't too hot up there?"

"No, Mrs. Buckner.  It's fine."

It was stifling; but they were scarcely conscious of the heat, and
they drank two tall glasses each of the lemonade without knowing
that they were thirsty.  Concealed beneath a sawed-out trapdoor
from which they presently took it was a composition book bound in
imitation red leather which currently absorbed much of their
attention.  On its first page was inscribed, if you penetrated the
secret of the lemon-juice ink:  "The Book of Scandal, written by
Riply Buckner, Jr., and Basil D. Lee, Scandal Detectives."

In this book they had set down such deviations from rectitude on
the part of their fellow citizens as had reached their ears.  Some
of these false steps were those of grizzled men, stories that had
become traditions in the city and were embalmed in the composition
book by virtue of indiscreet exhumations at family dinner tables.
Others were the more exciting sins, confirmed or merely rumored, of
boys and girls their own age.  Some of the entries would have been
read by adults with bewilderment, others might have inspired wrath,
and there were three or four contemporary reports that would have
prostrated the parents of the involved children with horror and
despair.

One of the mildest items, a matter they had hesitated about setting
down, though it had shocked them only last year, was:  "Elwood
Leaming has been to the Burlesque Show three or four times at the
Star."

Another, and perhaps their favorite, because of its uniqueness, set
forth that "H. P. Cramner committed some theft in the East he could
be imprisoned for and had to come here"--H. P. Cramner being now
one of the oldest and "most substantial" citizens of the city.

The single defect in the book was that it could only be enjoyed
with the aid of the imagination, for the invisible ink must keep
its secrets until that day when, the pages being held close to the
fire, the items would appear.  Close inspection was necessary to
determine which pages had been used--already a rather grave charge
against a certain couple had been superimposed upon the dismal
facts that Mrs. R. B. Cary had consumption and that her son, Walter
Cary, had been expelled from Pawling School.  The purpose of the
work as a whole was not blackmail.  It was treasured against the
time when its protagonists should "do something" to Basil and
Riply.  Its possession gave them a sense of power.  Basil, for
instance, had never seen Mr. H. P. Cramner make a single
threatening gesture in Basil's direction but let him even hint that
he was going to do something to Basil, and there preserved against
him was the record of his past.

It is only fair to say that at this point the book passes entirely
out of this story.  Years later a janitor discovered it beneath the
trapdoor, and finding it apparently blank, gave it to his little
girl; so the misdeeds of Elwood Leaming and H. P. Cramner were
definitely entombed at last beneath a fair copy of Lincoln's
Gettysburg Address.

The book was Basil's idea.  He was more the imaginative and in most
ways the stronger of the two.  He was a shining-eyed, brown-haired
boy of fourteen, rather small as yet, and bright and lazy at
school.  His favorite character in fiction was Arsčne Lupin, the
gentleman burglar, a romantic phenomenon lately imported from
Europe and much admired in the first bored decades of the century.

Riply Buckner, also in short pants, contributed to the partnership
a breathless practicality.  His mind waited upon Basil's
imagination like a hair trigger and no scheme was too fantastic for
his immediate "Let's do it!"  Since the school's third baseball
team, on which they had been pitcher and catcher, decomposed after
an unfortunate April season, they had spent their afternoons
struggling to evolve a way of life which should measure up to the
mysterious energies fermenting inside them.  In the cache beneath
the trapdoor were some "slouch" hats and bandanna handkerchiefs,
some loaded dice, half of a pair of handcuffs, a rope ladder of a
tenuous crochet persuasion for rear-window escapes into the alley,
and a make-up box containing two old theatrical wigs and crępe hair
of various colors--all to be used when they decided what illegal
enterprises to undertake.

Their lemonades finished, they lit Home Runs and held a desultory
conversation which touched on crime, professional baseball, sex and
the local stock company.  This broke off at the sound of footsteps
and familiar voices in the adjoining alley.

From the window, they investigated.  The voices belonged to
Margaret Torrence, Imogene Bissel and Connie Davies, who were
cutting through the alley from Imogene's back yard to Connie's at
the end of the block.  The young ladies were thirteen, twelve and
thirteen years old respectively, and they considered themselves
alone, for in time to their march they were rendering a mildly
daring parody in a sort of whispering giggle and coming out
strongly on the finale:  "Oh, my DAR-ling CLEMON-tine."

Basil and Riply leaned together from the window, then remembering
their undershirts sank down behind the sill.

"We heard you!" they cried together.

The girls stopped and laughed.  Margaret Torrence chewed
exaggeratedly to indicate gum, and gum with a purpose.  Basil
immediately understood.

"Whereabouts?" he demanded.

"Over at Imogene's house."

They had been at Mrs. Bissel's cigarettes.  The implied
recklessness of their mood interested and excited the two boys and
they prolonged the conversation.  Connie Davies had been Riply's
girl during dancing-school term; Margaret Torrence had played a
part in Basil's recent past; Imogene Bissel was just back from a
year in Europe.  During the last month neither Basil nor Riply had
thought about girls, and, thus refreshed, they become conscious
that the centre of the world had shifted suddenly from the secret
room to the little group outside.

"Come on up," they suggested.

"Come on out.  Come on down to the Whartons' yard."

"All right."

Barely remembering to put away the Scandal Book and the box of
disguises, the two boys hurried out, mounted their bicycles and
rode up the alley.

The Whartons' own children had long grown up, but their yard was
still one of those predestined places where young people gather in
the afternoon.  It had many advantages.  It was large, open to
other yards on both sides, and it could be entered upon skates or
bicycles from the street.  It contained an old seesaw, a swing and
a pair of flying rings; but it had been a rendezvous before these
were put up, for it had a child's quality--the thing that makes
young people huddle inextricably on uncomfortable steps and desert
the houses of their friends to herd on the obscure premises of
"people nobody knows."  The Whartons' yard had long been a happy
compromise; there were deep shadows there all day long and ever
something vague in bloom, and patient dogs around, and brown spots
worn bare by countless circling wheels and dragging feet.  In
sordid poverty, below the bluff two hundred feet away, lived the
"micks"--they had merely inherited the name, for they were now
largely of Scandinavian descent--and when other amusements palled,
a few cries were enough to bring a gang of them swarming up the
hill, to be faced if numbers promised well, to be fled from into
convenient houses if things went the other way.

It was five o'clock and there was a small crowd gathered there for
that soft and romantic time before supper--a time surpassed only by
the interim of summer dusk thereafter.  Basil and Riply rode their
bicycles around abstractedly, in and out of trees, resting now and
then with a hand on someone's shoulder, shading their eyes from the
glow of the late sun that, like youth itself, is too strong to face
directly, but must be kept down to an undertone until it dies away.

Basil rode over to Imogene Bissel and balanced idly on his wheel
before her.  Something in his face then must have attracted her,
for she looked up at him, looked at him really, and slowly smiled.
She was to be a beauty and belle of many proms in a few years.  Now
her large brown eyes and large beautifully shaped mouth and the
high flush over her thin cheek bones made her face gnome-like and
offended those who wanted a child to look like a child.  For a
moment Basil was granted an insight into the future, and the spell
of her vitality crept over him suddenly.  For the first time in his
life he realized a girl completely as something opposite and
complementary to him, and he was subject to a warm chill of mingled
pleasure and pain.  It was a definite experience and he was
immediately conscious of it.  The summer afternoon became lost in
her suddenly--the soft air, the shadowy hedges and banks of
flowers, the orange sunlight, the laughter and voices, the tinkle
of a piano over the way--the odor left all these things and went
into Imogene's face as she sat there looking up at him with a
smile.

For a moment it was too much for him.  He let it go, incapable of
exploiting it until he had digested it alone.  He rode around fast
in a circle on his bicycle, passing near Imogene without looking at
her.  When he came back after a while and asked if he could walk
home with her, she had forgotten the moment, if it had ever existed
for her, and was almost surprised.  With Basil wheeling his bicycle
beside her, they started down the street.

"Can you come out tonight?" he asked eagerly.  "There'll probably
be a bunch in the Whartons' yard."

"I'll ask mother."

"I'll telephone you.  I don't want to go unless you'll be there."

"Why?"  She smiled at him again, encouraging him.

"Because I don't want to."

"But why don't you want to?"

"Listen," he said quickly, "what boys do you like better than me?"

"Nobody.  I like you and Hubert Blair best."

Basil felt no jealousy at the coupling of this name with his.
There was nothing to do about Hubert Blair but accept him
philosophically, as other boys did when dissecting the hearts of
other girls.

"I like you better than anybody," he said deliriously.

The weight of the pink dappled sky above him was not endurable.  He
was plunging along through air of ineffable loveliness while warm
freshets sprang up in his blood and he turned them, and with them
his whole life, like a stream toward this girl.

They reached the carriage door at the side of her house.

"Can't you come in, Basil?"

"No."  He saw immediately that that was a mistake, but it was said
now.  The intangible present had eluded him.  Still he lingered.
"Do you want my school ring?"

"Yes, if you want to give it to me."

"I'll give it to you tonight."  His voice shook slightly as he
added, "That is, I'll trade."

"What for?"

"Something."

"What?"  Her color spread; she knew.

"You know.  Will you trade?"

Imogene looked around uneasily.  In the honey-sweet silence that
had gathered around the porch, Basil held his breath.  "You're
awful," she whispered.  "Maybe. . . .  Good-by."


II


It was the best hour of the day now and Basil was terribly happy.
This summer he and his mother and sister were going to the lakes
and next fall he was starting away to school.  Then he would go to
Yale and be a great athlete, and after that--if his two dreams had
fitted onto each other chronologically instead of existing
independently side by side--he was due to become a gentleman
burglar.  Everything was fine.  He had so many alluring things to
think about that it was hard to fall asleep at night.

That he was now crazy about Imogene Bissel was not a distraction,
but another good thing.  It had as yet no poignancy, only a
brilliant and dynamic excitement that was bearing him along toward
the Whartons' yard through the May twilight.

He wore his favorite clothes--white duck knickerbockers, pepper-and-
salt Norfolk jacket, a Belmont collar and a gray knitted tie.  With
his black hair wet and shining, he made a handsome little figure as
he turned in upon the familiar but now re-enchanted lawn and joined
the voices in the gathering darkness.  Three or four girls who
lived in neighboring houses were present, and almost twice as many
boys; and a slightly older group adorning the side veranda made a
warm, remote nucleus against the lamps of the house and contributed
occasional mysterious ripples of laughter to the already
overburdened night.

Moving from shadowy group to group, Basil ascertained that Imogene
was not yet here.  Finding Margaret Torrence, he spoke to her
aside, lightly.

"Have you still got that old ring of mine?"

Margaret had been his girl all year at dancing school, signified by
the fact that he had taken her to the cotillion which closed the
season.  The affair had languished toward the end; none the less,
his question was undiplomatic.

"I've got it somewhere," Margaret replied carelessly.  "Why?  Do
you want it back?"

"Sort of."

"All right.  I never did want it.  It was you that made me take it,
Basil.  I'll give it back to you tomorrow."

"You couldn't give it to me tonight, could you?"  His heart leaped
as he saw a small figure come in at the rear gate.  "I sort of want
to get it tonight."

"Oh, all right, Basil."

She ran across the street to her house and Basil followed.  Mr. and
Mrs. Torrence were on the porch, and while Margaret went upstairs
for the ring he overcame his excitement and impatience and answered
those questions as to the health of his parents which are so
meaningless to the young.  Then a sudden stiffening came over him,
his voice faded off and his glazed eyes fixed upon a scene that was
materializing over the way.

From the shadows far up the street, a swift, almost flying figure
emerged and floated into the patch of lamplight in front of the
Whartons' house.  The figure wove here and there in a series of
geometric patterns, now off with a flash of sparks at the impact of
skates and pavement, now gliding miraculously backward, describing
a fantastic curve, with one foot lifted gracefully in the air,
until the young people moved forward in groups out of the darkness
and crowded to the pavement to watch.  Basil gave a quiet little
groan as he realized that of all possible nights, Hubert Blair had
chosen this one to arrive.

"You say you're going to the lakes this summer, Basil.  Have you
taken a cottage?"

Basil became aware after a moment that Mr. Torrence was making this
remark for the third time.

"Oh, yes, sir," he answered--"I mean, no.  We're staying at the
club."

"Won't that be lovely?" said Mrs. Torrence.

Across the street, he saw Imogene standing under the lamp-post and
in front of her Hubert Blair, his jaunty cap on the side of his
head, maneuvering in a small circle.  Basil winced as he heard his
chuckling laugh.  He did not perceive Margaret until she was beside
him, pressing his ring into his hand like a bad penny.  He muttered
a strained hollow good-by to her parents, and weak with
apprehension, followed her back across the street.

Hanging back in a shadow, he fixed his eyes not on Imogene but on
Hubert Blair.  There was undoubtedly something rare about Hubert.
In the eyes of children less than fifteen, the shape of the nose is
the distinguishing mark of beauty.  Parents may call attention to
lovely eyes, shining hair or gorgeous coloring, but the nose and
its juxtaposition on the face is what the adolescent sees.  Upon
the lithe, stylish, athletic torso of Hubert Blair was set a
conventional chubby face, and upon this face was chiseled the
piquant, retroussé nose of a Harrison Fisher girl.

He was confident; he had personality, uninhibited by doubts or
moods.  He did not go to dancing school--his parents had moved to
the city only a year ago--but already he was a legend.  Though most
of the boys disliked him, they did homage to his virtuosic athletic
ability, and for the girls his every movement, his pleasantries,
his very indifference, had a simply immeasurable fascination.  Upon
several previous occasions Basil had discovered this; now the
discouraging comedy began to unfold once more.

Hubert took off his skates, rolled one down his arm and caught it
by the strap before it reached the pavement; he snatched the ribbon
from Imogene's hair and made off with it, dodging from under her
arms as she pursued him, laughing and fascinated, around the yard.
He cocked one foot behind the other and pretended to lean an elbow
against a tree, missed the tree on purpose and gracefully saved
himself from falling.  The boys watched him noncommittally at
first.  Then they, too, broke out into activity, doing stunts and
tricks as fast as they could think of them until those on the porch
craned their necks at the sudden surge of activity in the garden.
But Hubert coolly turned his back on his own success.  He took
Imogene's hat and began setting it in various quaint ways upon his
head.  Imogene and the other girls were filled with delight.

Unable any longer to endure the nauseous spectacle, Basil went up
to the group and said, "Why, hello, Hube," in as negligent a tone
as he could command.

Hubert answered:  "Why, hello, old--old Basil the Boozle," and set
the hat a different way on his head, until Basil himself couldn't
resist an unwilling chortle of laughter.

"Basil the Boozle!  Hello, Basil the Boozle!"  The cry circled the
garden.  Reproachfully he distinguished Riply's voice among the
others.

"Hube the Boob!" Basil countered quickly; but his ill humor
detracted from the effect, though several boys repeated it
appreciatively.

Gloom settled upon Basil, and through the heavy dusk the figure of
Imogene began to take on a new, unattainable charm.  He was a
romantic boy and already he had endowed her heavily from his fancy.
Now he hated her for her indifference, but he must perversely
linger near in the vain hope of recovering the penny of ecstasy so
wantonly expended this afternoon.

He tried to talk to Margaret with decoy animation, but Margaret was
not responsive.  Already a voice had gone up in the darkness
calling in a child.  Panic seized upon him; the blessed hour of
summer evening was almost over.  At a spreading of the group to let
pedestrians through, he maneuvered Imogene unwillingly aside.

"I've got it," he whispered.  "Here it is.  Can I take you home?"

She looked at him distractedly.  Her hand closed automatically on
the ring.

"What?  Oh, I promised Hubert he could take me home."  At the sight
of his face she pulled herself from her trance and forced a note of
indignation.  "I saw you going off with Margaret Torrence just as
soon as I came into the yard."

"I didn't.  I just went to get the ring."

"Yes, you did!  I saw you!"

Her eyes moved back to Hubert Blair.  He had replaced his roller
skates and was making little rhythmic jumps and twirls on his toes,
like a witch doctor throwing a slow hypnosis over an African tribe.
Basil's voice, explaining and arguing, went on, but Imogene moved
away.  Helplessly he followed.  There were other voices calling in
the darkness now and unwilling responses on all sides.

"All right, mother!"

"I'll be there in a second, mother."

"Mother, can't I please stay out five minutes more?"

"I've got to go," Imogene cried.  "It's almost nine."

Waving her hand and smiling absently at Basil, she started off down
the street.  Hubert pranced and stunted at her side, circled around
her and made entrancing little figures ahead.

Only after a minute did Basil realize that another young lady was
addressing him.

"What?" he demanded absently.

"Hubert Blair is the nicest boy in town and you're the most
conceited," repeated Margaret Torrence with deep conviction.

He stared at her in pained surprise.  Margaret wrinkled her nose at
him and yielded up her person to the now-insistent demands coming
from across the street.  As Basil gazed stupidly after her and then
watched the forms of Imogene and Hubert disappear around the
corner, there was a low mutter of thunder along the sultry sky and
a moment later a solitary drop plunged through the lamplit leaves
overhead and splattered on the sidewalk at his feet.  The day was
to close in rain.


III


It came quickly and he was drenched and running before he reached
his house eight blocks away.  But the change of weather had swept
over his heart and he leaped up every few steps, swallowing the
rain and crying "Yo-o-o!" aloud, as if he himself were a part of
the fresh, violent disturbance of the night.  Imogene was gone,
washed out like the day's dust on the sidewalk.  Her beauty would
come back into his mind in brighter weather, but here in the storm
he was alone with himself.  A sense of extraordinary power welled
up in him, until to leave the ground permanently with one of his
wild leaps would not have surprised him.  He was a lone wolf,
secret and untamed; a night prowler, demoniac and free.  Only when
he reached his own house did his emotion begin to turn,
speculatively and almost without passion, against Hubert Blair.

He changed his clothes, and putting on pajamas and dressing-gown
descended to the kitchen, where he happened upon a new chocolate
cake.  He ate a fourth of it and most of a bottle of milk.  His
elation somewhat diminished, he called up Riply Buckner on the
phone.

"I've got a scheme," he said.

'What about?"

"How to do something to H. B. with the S. D."

Riply understood immediately what he meant.  Hubert had been so
indiscreet as to fascinate other girls besides Miss Bissel that
evening.

"We'll have to take in Bill Kampf," Basil said.

"All right."

"See you at recess tomorrow. . . .  Good night!"


IV


Four days later, when Mr. and Mrs. George P. Blair were finishing
dinner, Hubert was called to the telephone.  Mrs. Blair took
advantage of his absence to speak to her husband of what had been
on her mind all day.

"George, those boys, or whatever they are, came again last night."

He frowned.

"Did you see them?"

"Hilda did.  She almost caught one of them.  You see, I told her
about the note they left last Tuesday, the one that said, 'First
warning, S. D.,' so she was ready for them.  They rang the back-
door bell this time and she answered it straight from the dishes.
If her hands hadn't been soapy she could have caught one, because
she grabbed him when he handed her a note, but her hands were soapy
so he slipped away."

"What did he look like?"

"She said he might have been a very little man, but she thought he
was a boy in a false face.  He dodged like a boy, she said, and she
thought he had short pants on.  The note was like the other.  It
said 'Second warning, S. D.'"

"If you've got it, I'd like to see it after dinner."

Hubert came back from the phone.  "It was Imogene Bissel," he said.
"She wants me to come over to her house.  A bunch are going over
there tonight."

"Hubert," asked his father, "do you know any boy with the initials
S. D.?"

"No, sir."

"Have you thought?"

"Yeah, I thought.  I knew a boy named Sam Davis, but I haven't seen
him for a year."

"Who was he?"

"Oh, a sort of tough.  He was at Number 44 School when I went
there."

"Did he have it in for you?"

"I don't think so."

"Who do you think could be doing this?  Has anybody got it in for
you that you know about?"

"I don't know, papa; I don't think so."

"I don't like the looks of this thing," said Mr. Blair
thoughtfully.  "Of course it may be only some boys, but it may be--"

He was silent.  Later, he studied the note.  It was in red ink and
there was a skull and crossbones in the corner, but being printed,
it told him nothing at all.

Meanwhile Hubert kissed his mother, set his cap jauntily on the
side of his head, and passing through the kitchen stepped out on
the back stoop, intending to take the usual short cut along the
alley.  It was a bright moonlit night and he paused for a moment on
the stoop to tie his shoe.  If he had but known that the telephone
call just received had been a decoy, that it had not come from
Imogene Bissel's house, had not indeed been a girl's voice at all,
and that shadowy and grotesque forms were skulking in the alley
just outside the gate, he would not have sprung so gracefully and
lithely down the steps with his hands in his pockets or whistled
the first bar of the Grizzly Bear into the apparently friendly
night.

His whistle aroused varying emotions in the alley.  Basil had given
his daring and successful falsetto imitation over the telephone a
little too soon, and though the Scandal Detectives had hurried,
their preparations were not quite in order.  They had become
separated.  Basil, got up like a Southern planter of the old
persuasion, was just outside the Blairs' gate; Bill Kampf, with a
long Balkan mustache attached by a wire to the lower cartilage of
his nose, was approaching in the shadow of the fence; but Riply
Buckner, in a full rabbinical beard, was impeded by a length of
rope he was trying to coil and was still a hundred feet away.  The
rope was an essential part of their plan; for, after much
cogitation, they had decided what they were going to do to Hubert
Blair.  They were going to tie him up, gag him and put him in his
own garbage can.

The idea at first horrified them--it would ruin his suit, it was
awfully dirty and he might smother.  In fact the garbage can,
symbol of all that was repulsive, won the day only because it made
every other idea seem tame.  They disposed of the objections--his
suit could be cleaned, it was where he ought to be anyhow, and if
they left the lid off he couldn't smother.  To be sure of this they
had paid a visit of inspection to the Buckners' garbage can and
stared into it, fascinated, envisaging Hubert among the rinds and
eggshells.  Then two of them, at last, resolutely put that part out
of their minds and concentrated upon the luring of him into the
alley and the overwhelming of him there.

Hubert's cheerful whistle caught them off guard and each of the
three stood stock-still, unable to communicate with the others.  It
flashed through Basil's mind that if he grabbed Hubert without
Riply at hand to apply the gag as had been arranged, Hubert's cries
might alarm the gigantic cook in the kitchen who had almost taken
him the night before.  The thought threw him into a state of
indecision.  At that precise moment Hubert opened the gate and came
out into the alley.

The two stood five feet apart, staring at each other, and all at
once Basil made a startling discovery.  He discovered he liked
Hubert Blair--liked him well as any boy he knew.  He had absolutely
no wish to lay hands on Hubert Blair and stuff him into a garbage
can, jaunty cap and all.  He would have fought to prevent that
contingency.  As his mind, unstrung by his situation, gave pasture
to this inconvenient thought, he turned and dashed out of the alley
and up the street.

For a moment the apparition had startled Hubert, but when it turned
and made off he was heartened and gave chase.  Out-distanced, he
decided after fifty yards to let well enough alone; and returning
to the alley, started rather precipitously down toward the other
end--and came face to face with another small and hairy stranger.

Bill Kampf, being more simply organized than Basil, had no scruples
of any kind.  It had been decided to put Hubert into a garbage can,
and though he had nothing at all against Hubert, the idea had made
a pattern on his brain which he intended to follow.  He was a
natural man--that is to say, a hunter--and once a creature took on
the aspect of a quarry, he would pursue it without qualms until it
stopped struggling.

But he had been witness to Basil's inexplicable flight, and
supposing that Hubert's father had appeared and was now directly
behind him, he, too, faced about and made off down the alley.
Presently he met Riply Buckner, who, without waiting to inquire the
cause of his flight, enthusiastically joined him.  Again Hubert was
surprised into pursuing a little way.  Then, deciding once and for
all to let well enough alone, he returned on a dead run to his
house.

Meanwhile Basil had discovered that he was not pursued, and keeping
in the shadows, made his way back to the alley.  He was not
frightened--he had simply been incapable of action.  The alley was
empty; neither Bill nor Riply was in sight.  He saw Mr. Blair come
to the back gate, open it, look up and down and go back into the
house.  He came closer.  There was a great chatter in the kitchen--
Hubert's voice, loud and boastful, and Mrs. Blair's, frightened,
and the two Swedish domestics contributing bursts of hilarious
laughter.  Then through an open window he heard Mr. Blair's voice
at the telephone:

"I want to speak to the chief of police. . . .  Chief, this is
George P. Blair. . . .  Chief, there's a gang of toughs around here
who--"

Basil was off like a flash, tearing at his Confederate whiskers as
he ran.


V


Imogene Bissel, having just turned thirteen, was not accustomed to
having callers at night.  She was spending a bored and solitary
evening inspecting the month's bills which were scattered over her
mother's desk, when she heard Hubert Blair and his father admitted
into the front hall.

"I just thought I'd bring him over myself," Mr. Blair was saying to
her mother.  "There seems to be a gang of toughs hanging around our
alley tonight."

Mrs. Bissel had not called upon Mrs. Blair and she was considerably
taken aback by this unexpected visit.  She even entertained the
uncharitable thought that this was a crude overture, undertaken by
Mr. Blair on behalf of his wife.

"Really!" she exclaimed.  "Imogene will be delighted to see Hubert,
I'm sure. . . .  Imogene!"

"These toughs were evidently lying in wait for Hubert," continued
Mr. Blair.  "But he's a pretty spunky boy and he managed to drive
them away.  However, I didn't want him to come down here alone."

"Of course not," she agreed.  But she was unable to imagine why
Hubert should have come at all.  He was a nice enough boy, but
surely Imogene had seen enough of him the last three afternoons.
In fact, Mrs. Bissel was annoyed, and there was a minimum of warmth
in her voice when she asked Mr. Blair to come in.

They were still in the hall, and Mr. Blair was just beginning to
perceive that all was not as it should be, when there was another
ring at the bell.  Upon the door being opened, Basil Lee, red-faced
and breathless, stood on the threshold.

"How do you do, Mrs. Bissel?  Hello, Imogene!" he cried in an
unnecessarily hearty voice.  "Where's the party?"

The salutation might have sounded to a dispassionate observer
somewhat harsh and unnatural, but it fell upon the ears of an
already disconcerted group.

"There isn't any party," said Imogene wonderingly.

"What?"  Basil's mouth dropped open in exaggerated horror, his
voice trembled slightly.  "You mean to say you didn't call me up
and tell me to come over here to a party?"

"Why, of course not, Basil!"

Imogene was excited by Hubert's unexpected arrival and it occurred
to her that Basil had invented this excuse to spoil it.  Alone of
those present, she was close to the truth; but she underestimated
the urgency of Basil's motive, which was not jealousy but mortal
fear.

"You called ME up, didn't you, Imogene?" demanded Hubert
confidently.

"Why, no, Hubert!  I didn't call up anybody."

Amid a chorus of bewildered protestations, there was another ring
at the doorbell and the pregnant night yielded up Riply Buckner,
Jr., and William S. Kampf.  Like Basil, they were somewhat rumpled
and breathless, and they no less rudely and peremptorily demanded
the whereabouts of the party, insisting with curious vehemence that
Imogene had just now invited them over the phone.

Hubert laughed, the others began to laugh and the tensity relaxed.
Imogene, because she believed Hubert, now began to believe them
all.  Unable to restrain himself any longer in the presence of this
unhoped-for audience, Hubert burst out with his amazing adventure.

"I guess there's a gang laying for us all!" he exclaimed.  "There
were some guys laying for me in our alley when I went out.  There
was a big fellow with gray whiskers, but when he saw me he ran
away.  Then I went along the alley and there was a bunch more, sort
of foreigners or something, and I started after'm and they ran.  I
tried to catchem, but I guess they were good and scared, because
they ran too fast for ME."

So interested were Hubert and his father in the story that they
failed to perceive that three of his listeners were growing purple
in the face or to mark the uproarious laughter that greeted Mr.
Bissel's polite proposal that they have a party, after all.

"Tell about the warnings, Hubert," prompted Mr. Blair.  "You see,
Hubert had received these warnings.  Did you boys get any
warnings?"

"I did," said Basil suddenly.  "I got a sort of warning on a piece
of paper about a week ago."

For a moment, as Mr. Blair's worried eye fell upon Basil, a strong
sense not precisely of suspicion but rather of obscure misgiving
passed over him.  Possibly that odd aspect of Basil's eyebrows,
where wisps of crępe hair still lingered, connected itself in his
subconscious mind with what was bizarre in the events of the
evening.  He shook his head somewhat puzzled.  Then his thoughts
glided back restfully to Hubert's courage and presence of mind.

Hubert, meanwhile, having exhausted his facts, was making tentative
leaps into the realms of imagination.

"I said, 'So you're the guy that's been sending these warnings,'
and he swung his left at me, and I dodged and swung my right back
at him.  I guess I must have landed, because he gave a yell and
ran.  Gosh, he could run!  You'd ought to of seen him, Bill--he
could run as fast as you."

"Was he big?" asked Basil, blowing his nose noisily.

"Sure!  About as big as father."

"Were the other ones big too?"

"Sure!  They were pretty big.  I didn't wait to see, I just yelled,
'You get out of here, you bunch of toughs, or I'll show you!'  They
started a sort of fight, but I swung my right at one of them and
they didn't wait for any more."

"Hubert says he thinks they were Italians," interrupted Mr. Blair.
"Didn't you, Hubert?"

"They were sort of funny-looking," Hubert said.  "One fellow looked
like an Italian."

Mrs. Bissel led the way to the dining room, where she had caused a
cake and grape juice supper to be spread.  Imogene took a chair by
Hubert's side.

"Now tell me all about it, Hubert," she said, attentively folding
her hands.

Hubert ran over the adventure once more.  A knife now made its
appearance in the belt of one conspirator; Hubert's parleys with
them lengthened and grew in volume and virulence.  He had told them
just what they might expect if they fooled with him.  They had
started to draw knives, but had thought better of it and taken to
flight.

In the middle of this recital there was a curious snorting sound
from across the table, but when Imogene looked over, Basil was
spreading jelly on a piece of coffee cake and his eyes were
brightly innocent.  A minute later, however, the sound was
repeated, and this time she intercepted a specifically malicious
expression upon his face.

"I wonder what you'd have done, Basil," she said cuttingly.  "I'll
bet you'd be running yet!"

Basil put the piece of coffee cake in his mouth and immediately
choked on it--an accident which Bill Kampf and Riply Buckner found
hilariously amusing.  Their amusement at various casual incidents
at table seemed to increase as Hubert's story continued.  The alley
now swarmed with malefactors, and as Hubert struggled on against
overwhelming odds, Imogene found herself growing restless--without
in the least realizing that the tale was boring her.  On the
contrary, each time Hubert recollected new incidents and began
again, she looked spitefully over at Basil, and her dislike for him
grew.

When they moved into the library, Imogene went to the piano, where
she sat alone while the boys gathered around Hubert on the couch.
To her chagrin, they seemed quite content to listen indefinitely.
Odd little noises squeaked out of them from time to time, but
whenever the narrative slackened they would beg for more.

"Go on, Hubert.  Which one did you say could run as fast as Bill
Kampf?"

She was glad when, after half an hour, they all got up to go.

"It's a strange affair from beginning to end," Mr. Blair was
saying.  "I don't like it.  I'm going to have a detective look into
the matter tomorrow.  What did they want of Hubert?  What were they
going to do to him?"

No one offered a suggestion.  Even Hubert was silent, contemplating
his possible fate with certain respectful awe.  During breaks in
his narration the talk had turned to such collateral matters as
murders and ghosts, and all the boys had talked themselves into a
state of considerable panic.  In fact each had come to believe, in
varying degrees, that a band of kidnappers infested the vicinity.

"I don't like it," repeated Mr. Blair.  "In fact I'm going to see
all of you boys to your own homes."

Basil greeted this offer with relief.  The evening had been a mad
success, but furies once aroused sometimes get out of hand.  He did
not feel like walking the streets alone tonight.

In the hall, Imogene, taking advantage of her mother's somewhat
fatigued farewell to Mr. Blair, beckoned Hubert back into the
library.  Instantly attuned to adversity, Basil listened.  There
was a whisper and a short scuffle, followed by an indiscreet but
unmistakable sound.  With the corners of his mouth falling, Basil
went out the door.  He had stacked the cards dexterously, but Life
had played a trump from its sleeve at the last.

A moment later they all started off, clinging together in a group,
turning corners with cautious glances behind and ahead.  What Basil
and Riply and Bill expected to see as they peered warily into the
sinister mouths of alleys and around great dark trees and behind
concealing fences they did not know--in all probability the same
hairy and grotesque desperadoes who had lain in wait for Hubert
Blair that night.


VI


A week later Basil and Riply heard that Hubert and his mother had
gone to the seashore for the summer.  Basil was sorry.  He had
wanted to learn from Hubert some of the graceful mannerisms that
his contemporaries found so dazzling and that might come in so
handy next fall when he went away to school.  In tribute to
Hubert's passing, he practised leaning against a tree and missing
it and rolling a skate down his arm, and he wore his cap in
Hubert's manner, set jauntily on the side of his head.

This was only for a while.  He perceived eventually that though
boys and girls would always listen to him while he talked, their
mouths literally moving in response to his, they would never look
at him as they had looked at Hubert.  So he abandoned the loud
chuckle that so annoyed his mother and set his cap straight upon
his head once more.

But the change in him went deeper than that.  He was no longer sure
that he wanted to be a gentleman burglar, though he still read of
their exploits with breathless admiration.  Outside of Hubert's
gate, he had for a moment felt morally alone; and he realized that
whatever combinations he might make of the materials of life would
have to be safely within the law.  And after another week he found
that he no longer grieved over losing Imogene.  Meeting her, he saw
only the familiar little girl he had always known.  The ecstatic
moment of that afternoon had been a premature birth, an emotion
left over from an already fleeting spring.

He did not know that he had frightened Mrs. Blair out of town and
that because of him a special policeman walked a placid beat for
many a night.  All he knew was that the vague and restless
yearnings of three long spring months were somehow satisfied.  They
reached combustion in that last week--flared up, exploded and
burned out.  His face was turned without regret toward the
boundless possibilities of summer.





"THE SENSIBLE THING"


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Liberty, 15 July 1924



At the Great American Lunch Hour young George O'Kelly straightened
his desk deliberately and with an assumed air of interest.  No one
in the office must know that he was in a hurry, for success is a
matter of atmosphere, and it is not well to advertise the fact that
your mind is separated from your work by a distance of seven
hundred miles.

But once out of the building he set his teeth and began to run,
glancing now and then at the gay noon of early spring which filled
Times Square and loitered less than twenty feet over the heads of
the crowd.  The crowd all looked slightly upward and took deep
March breaths, and the sun dazzled their eyes so that scarcely any
one saw any one else but only their own reflection on the sky.

George O'Kelly, whose mind was over seven hundred miles away,
thought that all outdoors was horrible.  He rushed into the subway,
and for ninety-five blocks bent a frenzied glance on a car-card
which showed vividly how he had only one chance in five of keeping
his teeth for ten years.  At 137th Street he broke off his study of
commercial art, left the subway, and began to run again, a
tireless, anxious run that brought him this time to his home--one
room in a high, horrible apartment-house in the middle of nowhere.

There it was on the bureau, the letter--in sacred ink, on blessed
paper--all over the city, people, if they listened, could hear the
beating of George O'Kelly's heart.  He read the commas, the blots,
and the thumb-smudge on the margin--then he threw himself
hopelessly upon his bed.

He was in a mess, one of those terrific messes which are ordinary
incidents in the life of the poor, which follow poverty like birds
of prey.  The poor go under or go up or go wrong or even go on,
somehow, in a way the poor have--but George O'Kelly was so new to
poverty that had any one denied the uniqueness of his case he would
have been astounded.

Less than two years ago he had been graduated with honors from The
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and had taken a position with
a firm of construction engineers in southern Tennessee.  All his
life he had thought in terms of tunnels and skyscrapers and great
squat dams and tall, three-towered bridges, that were like dancers
holding hands in a row, with heads as tall as cities and skirts of
cable strand.  It had seemed romantic to George O'Kelly to change
the sweep of rivers and the shape of mountains so that life could
flourish in the old bad lands of the world where it had never taken
root before.  He loved steel, and there was always steel near him
in his dreams, liquid steel, steel in bars, and blocks and beams
and formless plastic masses, waiting for him, as paint and canvas
to his hand.  Steel inexhaustible, to be made lovely and austere in
his imaginative fire . . .

At present he was an insurance clerk at forty dollars a week with
his dream slipping fast behind him.  The dark little girl who had
made this mess, this terrible and intolerable mess, was waiting to
be sent for in a town in Tennessee.

In fifteen minutes the woman from whom he sublet his room knocked
and asked him with maddening kindness if, since he was home, he
would have some lunch.  He shook his head, but the interruption
aroused him, and getting up from the bed he wrote a telegram.

"Letter depressed me have you lost your nerve you are foolish and
just upset to think of breaking off why not marry me immediately
sure we can make it all right--"

He hesitated for a wild minute, and then added in a hand that could
scarcely be recognized as his own:  "In any case I will arrive to-
morrow at six o'clock."

When he finished he ran out of the apartment and down to the
telegraph office near the subway stop.  He possessed in this world
not quite one hundred dollars, but the letter showed that she was
"nervous" and this left him no choice.  He knew what "nervous"
meant--that she was emotionally depressed, that the prospect of
marrying into a life of poverty and struggle was putting too much
strain upon her love.

George O'Kelly reached the insurance company at his usual run, the
run that had become almost second nature to him, that seemed best
to express the tension under which he lived.  He went straight to
the manager's office.

"I want to see you, Mr. Chambers," he announced breathlessly.

"Well?"  Two eyes, eyes like winter windows, glared at him with
ruthless impersonality.

"I want to get four days' vacation."

"Why, you had a vacation just two weeks ago!" said Mr. Chambers in
surprise.

"That's true," admitted the distraught young man, "but now I've got
to have another."

"Where'd you go last time?  To your home?"

"No, I went to--a place in Tennessee."

"Well, where do you want to go this time?"

"Well, this time I want to go to--a place in Tennessee."

"You're consistent, anyhow," said the manager dryly.  "But I didn't
realize you were employed here as a travelling salesman."

"I'm not," cried George desperately, "but I've got to go."

"All right," agreed Mr. Chambers, "but you don't have to come back.
So don't!"

"I won't."  And to his own astonishment as well as Mr. Chambers'
George's face grew pink with pleasure.  He felt happy, exultant--
for the first time in six months he was absolutely free.  Tears of
gratitude stood in his eyes, and he seized Mr. Chambers warmly by
the hand.

"I want to thank you," he said with a rush of emotion.  "I don't
want to come back.  I think I'd have gone crazy if you'd said that
I could come back.  Only I couldn't quit myself, you see, and I
want to thank you for--for quitting for me."

He waved his hand magnanimously, shouted aloud, "You owe me three
days' salary but you can keep it!" and rushed from the office.  Mr.
Chambers rang for his stenographer to ask if O'Kelly had seemed
queer lately.  He had fired many men in the course of his career,
and they had taken it in many different ways, but none of them had
thanked him--ever before.


II


Jonquil Cary was her name, and to George O'Kelly nothing had ever
looked so fresh and pale as her face when she saw him and fled to
him eagerly along the station platform.  Her arms were raised to
him, her mouth was half parted for his kiss, when she held him off
suddenly and lightly and, with a touch of embarrassment, looked
around.  Two boys, somewhat younger than George, were standing in
the background.

"This is Mr. Craddock and Mr. Holt," she announced cheerfully.
"You met them when you were here before."

Disturbed by the transition of a kiss into an introduction and
suspecting some hidden significance, George was more confused when
he found that the automobile which was to carry them to Jonquil's
house belonged to one of the two young men.  It seemed to put him
at a disadvantage.  On the way Jonquil chattered between the front
and back seats, and when he tried to slip his arm around her under
cover of the twilight she compelled him with a quick movement to
take her hand instead.

"Is this street on the way to your house?" he whispered.  "I don't
recognize it."

"It's the new boulevard.  Jerry just got this car to-day, and he
wants to show it to me before he takes us home."

When, after twenty minutes, they were deposited at Jonquil's house,
George felt that the first happiness of the meeting, the joy he had
recognized so surely in her eyes back in the station, had been
dissipated by the intrusion of the ride.  Something that he had
looked forward to had been rather casually lost, and he was
brooding on this as he said good night stiffly to the two young
men.  Then his ill-humor faded as Jonquil drew him into a familiar
embrace under the dim light of the front hall and told him in a
dozen ways, of which the best was without words, how she had missed
him.  Her emotion reassured him, promised his anxious heart that
everything would be all right.

They sat together on the sofa, overcome by each other's presence,
beyond all except fragmentary endearments.  At the supper hour
Jonquil's father and mother appeared and were glad to see George.
They liked him, and had been interested in his engineering career
when he had first come to Tennessee over a year before.  They had
been sorry when he had given it up and gone to New York to look for
something more immediately profitable, but while they deplored the
curtailment of his career they sympathized with him and were ready
to recognize the engagement.  During dinner they asked about his
progress in New York.

"Everything's going fine," he told them with enthusiasm.  "I've
been promoted--better salary."

He was miserable as he said this--but they were all SO glad.

"They must like you," said Mrs. Cary, "that's certain--or they
wouldn't let you off twice in three weeks to come down here."

"I told them they had to," explained George hastily; "I told them
if they didn't I wouldn't work for them any more."

"But you ought to save your money," Mrs. Cary reproached him
gently.  "Not spend it all on this expensive trip."

Dinner was over--he and Jonquil were alone and she came back into
his arms.

"So glad you're here," she sighed.  "Wish you never were going away
again, darling."

"Do you miss me?"

"Oh, so much, so much."

"Do you--do other men come to see you often?  Like those two kids?"

The question surprised her.  The dark velvet eyes stared at him.

"Why, of course they do.  All the time.  Why--I've told you in
letters that they did, dearest."

This was true--when he had first come to the city there had been
already a dozen boys around her, responding to her picturesque
fragility with adolescent worship, and a few of them perceiving
that her beautiful eyes were also sane and kind.

"Do you expect me never to go anywhere"--Jonquil demanded, leaning
back against the sofa-pillows until she seemed to look at him from
many miles away--"and just fold my hands and sit still--forever?"

"What do you mean?" he blurted out in a panic.  "Do you mean you
think I'll never have enough money to marry you?"

"Oh, don't jump at conclusions so, George."

"I'm not jumping at conclusions.  That's what you said."

George decided suddenly that he was on dangerous grounds.  He had
not intended to let anything spoil this night.  He tried to take
her again in his arms, but she resisted unexpectedly, saying:

"It's hot.  I'm going to get the electric fan."

When the fan was adjusted they sat down again, but he was in a
super-sensitive mood and involuntarily he plunged into the specific
world he had intended to avoid.

"When will you marry me?"

"Are you ready for me to marry you?"

All at once his nerves gave way, and he sprang to his feet.

"Let's shut off that damned fan," he cried, "it drives me wild.
It's like a clock ticking away all the time I'll be with you.  I
came here to be happy and forget everything about New York and
time--"

He sank down on the sofa as suddenly as he had risen.  Jonquil
turned off the fan, and drawing his head down into her lap began
stroking his hair.

"Let's sit like this," she said softly, "just sit quiet like this,
and I'll put you to sleep.  You're all tired and nervous and your
sweetheart'll take care of you."

"But I don't want to sit like this," he complained, jerking up
suddenly, "I don't want to sit like this at all.  I want you to
kiss me.  That's the only thing that makes me rest.  And anyways
I'm not nervous--it's you that's nervous.  I'm not nervous at all."

To prove that he wasn't nervous he left the couch and plumped
himself into a rocking-chair across the room.

"Just when I'm ready to marry you you write me the most nervous
letters, as if you're going to back out, and I have to come rushing
down here--"

"You don't have to come if you don't want to."

"But I DO want to!" insisted George.

It seemed to him that he was being very cool and logical and that
she was putting him deliberately in the wrong.  With every word
they were drawing farther and farther apart--and he was unable to
stop himself or to keep worry and pain out of his voice.

But in a minute Jonquil began to cry sorrowfully and he came back
to the sofa and put his arm around her.  He was the comforter now,
drawing her head close to his shoulder, murmuring old familiar
things until she grew calmer and only trembled a little,
spasmodically, in his arms.  For over an hour they sat there, while
the evening pianos thumped their last cadences into the street
outside.  George did not move, or think, or hope, lulled into
numbness by the premonition of disaster.  The clock would tick on,
past eleven, past twelve, and then Mrs. Cary would call down gently
over the banister--beyond that he saw only to-morrow and despair.


III


In the heat of the next day the breaking-point came.  They had each
guessed the truth about the other, but of the two she was the more
ready to admit the situation.

"There's no use going on," she said miserably, "you know you hate
the insurance business, and you'll never do well in it."

"That's not it," he insisted stubbornly; "I hate going on alone.
If you'll marry me and come with me and take a chance with me, I
can make good at anything, but not while I'm worrying about you
down here."

She was silent a long time before she answered, not thinking--for
she had seen the end--but only waiting, because she knew that every
word would seem more cruel than the last.  Finally she spoke:

"George, I love you with all my heart, and I don't see how I can
ever love any one else but you.  If you'd been ready for me two
months ago I'd have married you--now I can't because it doesn't
seem to be the sensible thing."

He made wild accusations--there was some one else--she was keeping
something from him!

"No, there's no one else."

This was true.  But reacting from the strain of this affair she had
found relief in the company of young boys like Jerry Holt, who had
the merit of meaning absolutely nothing in her life.

George didn't take the situation well, at all.  He seized her in
his arms and tried literally to kiss her into marrying him at once.
When this failed, he broke into a long monologue of self-pity, and
ceased only when he saw that he was making himself despicable in
her sight.  He threatened to leave when he had no intention of
leaving, and refused to go when she told him that, after all, it
was best that he should.

For a while she was sorry, then for another while she was merely
kind.

"You'd better go now," she cried at last, so loud that Mrs. Cary
came down-stairs in alarm.

"Is something the matter?"

"I'm going away, Mrs. Cary," said George brokenly.  Jonquil had
left the room.

"Don't feel so badly, George."  Mrs. Cary blinked at him in
helpless sympathy--sorry and, in the same breath, glad that the
little tragedy was almost done.  "If I were you I'd go home to your
mother for a week or so.  Perhaps after all this is the sensible
thing--"

"Please don't talk," he cried.  "Please don't say anything to me
now!"

Jonquil came into the room again, her sorrow and her nervousness
alike tucked under powder and rouge and hat.

"I've ordered a taxicab," she said impersonally.  "We can drive
around until your train leaves."

She walked out on the front porch.  George put on his coat and hat
and stood for a minute exhausted in the hall--he had eaten scarcely
a bite since he had left New York.  Mrs. Cary came over, drew his
head down and kissed him on the cheek, and he felt very ridiculous
and weak in his knowledge that the scene had been ridiculous and
weak at the end.  If he had only gone the night before--left her
for the last time with a decent pride.

The taxi had come, and for an hour these two that had been lovers
rode along the less-frequented streets.  He held her hand and grew
calmer in the sunshine, seeing too late that there had been nothing
all along to do or say.

"I'll come back," he told her.

"I know you will," she answered, trying to put a cheery faith into
her voice.  "And we'll write each other--sometimes."

"No," he said, "we won't write.  I couldn't stand that.  Some day
I'll come back."

"I'll never forget you, George."

They reached the station, and she went with him while he bought his
ticket. . . .

"Why, George O'Kelly and Jonquil Cary!"

It was a man and a girl whom George had known when he had worked in
town, and Jonquil seemed to greet their presence with relief.  For
an interminable five minutes they all stood there talking; then the
train roared into the station, and with ill-concealed agony in his
face George held out his arms toward Jonquil.  She took an
uncertain step toward him, faltered, and then pressed his hand
quickly as if she were taking leave of a chance friend.

"Good-by, George," she was saying, "I hope you have a pleasant
trip.

"Good-by, George.  Come back and see us all again."

Dumb, almost blind with pain, he seized his suitcase, and in some
dazed way got himself aboard the train.

Past clanging street-crossings, gathering speed through wide
suburban spaces toward the sunset.  Perhaps she too would see the
sunset and pause for a moment, turning, remembering, before he
faded with her sleep into the past.  This night's dusk would cover
up forever the sun and the trees and the flowers and laughter of
his young world.


IV


On a damp afternoon in September of the following year a young man
with his face burned to a deep copper glow got off a train at a
city in Tennessee.  He looked around anxiously, and seemed relieved
when he found that there was no one in the station to meet him.  He
taxied to the best hotel in the city where he registered with some
satisfaction as George O'Kelly, Cuzco, Peru.

Up in his room he sat for a few minutes at the window looking down
into the familiar street below.  Then with his hand trembling
faintly he took off the telephone receiver and called a number.

"Is Miss Jonquil in?"

"This is she."

"Oh--"  His voice after overcoming a faint tendency to waver went
on with friendly formality.

"This is George O'Kelly.  Did you get my letter?"

"Yes.  I thought you'd be in to-day."

Her voice, cool and unmoved, disturbed him, but not as he had
expected.  This was the voice of a stranger, unexcited, pleasantly
glad to see him--that was all.  He wanted to put down the telephone
and catch his breath.

"I haven't seen you for--a long time."  He succeeded in making this
sound offhand.  "Over a year."

He knew how long it had been--to the day.

"It'll be awfully nice to talk to you again."

"I'll be there in about an hour."

He hung up.  For four long seasons every minute of his leisure had
been crowded with anticipation of this hour, and now this hour was
here.  He had thought of finding her married, engaged, in love--he
had not thought she would be unstirred at his return.

There would never again in his life, he felt, be another ten months
like these he had just gone through.  He had made an admittedly
remarkable showing for a young engineer--stumbled into two unusual
opportunities, one in Peru, whence he had just returned, and
another, consequent upon it, in New York, whither he was bound.  In
this short time he had risen from poverty into a position of
unlimited opportunity.

He looked at himself in the dressing-table mirror.  He was almost
black with tan, but it was a romantic black, and in the last week,
since he had had time to think about it, it had given him
considerable pleasure.  The hardiness of his frame, too, he
appraised with a sort of fascination.  He had lost part of an
eyebrow somewhere, and he still wore an elastic bandage on his
knee, but he was too young not to realize that on the steamer many
women had looked at him with unusual tributary interest.

His clothes, of course, were frightful.  They had been made for him
by a Greek tailor in Lima--in two days.  He was young enough, too,
to have explained this sartorial deficiency to Jonquil in his
otherwise laconic note.  The only further detail it contained was a
request that he should NOT be met at the station.

George O'Kelly, of Cuzco, Peru, waited an hour and a half in the
hotel, until, to be exact, the sun had reached a midway position in
the sky.  Then, freshly shaven and talcum-powdered toward a
somewhat more Caucasian hue, for vanity at the last minute had
overcome romance, he engaged a taxicab and set out for the house he
knew so well.

He was breathing hard--he noticed this but he told himself that it
was excitement, not emotion.  He was here; she was not married--
that was enough.  He was not even sure what he had to say to her.
But this was the moment of his life that he felt he could least
easily have dispensed with.  There was no triumph, after all,
without a girl concerned, and if he did not lay his spoils at her
feet he could at least hold them for a passing moment before her
eyes.

The house loomed up suddenly beside him, and his first thought was
that it had assumed a strange unreality.  There was nothing changed--
only everything was changed.  It was smaller and it seemed shabbier
than before--there was no cloud of magic hovering over its roof and
issuing from the windows of the upper floor.  He rang the door-bell
and an unfamiliar colored maid appeared.  Miss Jonquil would be down
in a moment.  He wet his lips nervously and walked into the sitting-
room--and the feeling of unreality increased.  After all, he saw,
this was only a room, and not the enchanted chamber where he had
passed those poignant hours.  He sat in a chair, amazed to find it a
chair, realizing that his imagination had distorted and colored all
these simple familiar things.

Then the door opened and Jonquil came into the room--and it was as
though everything in it suddenly blurred before his eyes.  He had
not remembered how beautiful she was, and he felt his face grow
pale and his voice diminish to a poor sigh in his throat.

She was dressed in pale green, and a gold ribbon bound back her
dark, straight hair like a crown.  The familiar velvet eyes caught
his as she came through the door, and a spasm of fright went
through him at her beauty's power of inflicting pain.

He said "Hello," and they each took a few steps forward and shook
hands.  Then they sat in chairs quite far apart and gazed at each
other across the room.

"You've come back," she said, and he answered just as tritely:  "I
wanted to stop in and see you as I came through."

He tried to neutralize the tremor in his voice by looking anywhere
but at her face.  The obligation to speak was on him, but, unless
he immediately began to boast, it seemed that there was nothing to
say.  There had never been anything casual in their previous
relations--it didn't seem possible that people in this position
would talk about the weather.

"This is ridiculous," he broke out in sudden embarrassment.  "I
don't know exactly what to do.  Does my being here bother you?"

"No."  The answer was both reticent and impersonally sad.  It
depressed him.

"Are you engaged?" he demanded.

"No."

"Are you in love with some one?"

She shook her head.

"Oh."  He leaned back in his chair.  Another subject seemed
exhausted--the interview was not taking the course he had intended.

"Jonquil," he began, this time on a softer key, "after all that's
happened between us, I wanted to come back and see you.  Whatever I
do in the future I'll never love another girl as I've loved you."

This was one of the speeches he had rehearsed.  On the steamer it
had seemed to have just the right note--a reference to the
tenderness he would always feel for her combined with a non-
committal attitude toward his present state of mind.  Here with the
past around him, beside him, growing minute by minute more heavy on
the air, it seemed theatrical and stale.

She made no comment, sat without moving, her eyes fixed on him with
an expression that might have meant everything or nothing.

"You don't love me any more, do you?" he asked her in a level
voice.

"No."

When Mrs. Cary came in a minute later, and spoke to him about his
success--there had been a half-column about him in the local paper--
he was a mixture of emotions.  He knew now that he still wanted
this girl, and he knew that the past sometimes comes back--that was
all.  For the rest he must be strong and watchful and he would see.

"And now," Mrs. Cary was saying, "I want you two to go and see the
lady who has the chrysanthemums.  She particularly told me she
wanted to see you because she'd read about you in the paper."

They went to see the lady with the chrysanthemums.  They walked
along the street, and he recognized with a sort of excitement just
how her shorter footsteps always fell in between his own.  The lady
turned out to be nice, and the chrysanthemums were enormous and
extraordinarily beautiful.  The lady's gardens were full of them,
white and pink and yellow, so that to be among them was a trip back
into the heart of summer.  There were two gardens full, and a gate
between them; when they strolled toward the second garden the lady
went first through the gate.

And then a curious thing happened.  George stepped aside to let
Jonquil pass, but instead of going through she stood still and
stared at him for a minute.  It was not so much the look, which was
not a smile, as it was the moment of silence.  They saw each
other's eyes, and both took a short, faintly accelerated breath,
and then they went on into the second garden.  That was all.

The afternoon waned.  They thanked the lady and walked home slowly,
thoughtfully, side by side.  Through dinner too they were silent.
George told Mr. Cary something of what had happened in South
America, and managed to let it be known that everything would be
plain sailing for him in the future.

Then dinner was over, and he and Jonquil were alone in the room
which had seen the beginning of their love affair and the end.  It
seemed to him long ago and inexpressibly sad.  On that sofa he had
felt agony and grief such as he would never feel again.  He would
never be so weak or so tired and miserable and poor.  Yet he knew
that that boy of fifteen months before had had something, a trust,
a warmth that was gone forever.  The sensible thing--they had done
the sensible thing.  He had traded his first youth for strength and
carved success out of despair.  But with his youth, life had
carried away the freshness of his love.

"You won't marry me, will you?" he said quietly.

Jonquil shook her dark head.

"I'm never going to marry," she answered.

He nodded.

"I'm going on to Washington in the morning," he said.

"Oh--"

"I have to go.  I've got to be in New York by the first, and
meanwhile I want to stop off in Washington."

"Business!"

"No-o," he said as if reluctantly.  "There's some one there I must
see who was very kind to me when I was so--down and out."

This was invented.  There was no one in Washington for him to see--
but he was watching Jonquil narrowly, and he was sure that she
winced a little, that her eyes closed and then opened wide again.

"But before I go I want to tell you the things that happened to me
since I saw you, and, as maybe we won't meet again, I wonder if--if
just this once you'd sit in my lap like you used to.  I wouldn't
ask except since there's no one else--yet--perhaps it doesn't
matter."

She nodded, and in a moment was sitting in his lap as she had sat
so often in that vanished spring.  The feel of her head against his
shoulder, of her familiar body, sent a shock of emotion over him.
His arms holding her had a tendency to tighten around her, so he
leaned back and began to talk thoughtfully into the air.

He told her of a despairing two weeks in New York which had
terminated with an attractive if not very profitable job in a
construction plant in Jersey City.  When the Peru business had
first presented itself it had not seemed an extraordinary
opportunity.  He was to be third assistant engineer on the
expedition, but only ten of the American party, including eight
rodmen and surveyors, had ever reached Cuzco.  Ten days later the
chief of the expedition was dead of yellow fever.  That had been
his chance, a chance for anybody but a fool, a marvellous chance--

"A chance for anybody but a fool?" she interrupted innocently.

"Even for a fool," he continued.  "It was wonderful.  Well, I wired
New York--"

"And so," she interrupted again, "they wired that you ought to take
a chance?"

"Ought to!" he exclaimed, still leaning back.  "That I HAD to.
There was no time to lose--"

"Not a minute?"

"Not a minute."

"Not even time for--" she paused.

"For what?"

"Look."

He bent his head forward suddenly, and she drew herself to him in
the same moment, her lips half open like a flower.

"Yes," he whispered into her lips.  "There's all the time in the
world. . . ."

All the time in the world--his life and hers.  But for an instant
as he kissed her he knew that though he search through eternity he
could never recapture those lost April hours.  He might press her
close now till the muscles knotted on his arms--she was something
desirable and rare that he had fought for and made his own--but
never again an intangible whisper in the dusk, or on the breeze of
night. . . .

Well, let it pass, he thought; April is over, April is over.  There
are all kinds of love in the world, but never the same love twice.



THE END






SIX OF ONE--


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Redbook (February 1932)



Barnes stood on the wide stairs looking down through a wide hall
into the living-room of the country place and at the group of
youths.  His friend Schofield was addressing some benevolent
remarks to them, and Barnes did not want to interrupt; as he stood
there, immobile, he seemed to be drawn suddenly into rhythm with
the group below; he perceived them as statuesque beings, set apart,
chiseled out of the Minnesota twilight that was setting on the big
room.

In the first place all five, the two young Schofields and their
friends, were fine-looking boys, very American, dressed in a
careless but not casual way over well-set-up bodies, and with
responsive faces open to all four winds.  Then he saw that they
made a design, the faces profile upon profile, the heads blond and
dark, turning toward Mr. Schofield, the erect yet vaguely lounging
bodies, never tense but ever ready under the flannels and the soft
angora wool sweaters, the hands placed on other shoulders, as if to
bring each one into the solid freemasonry of the group.  Then
suddenly, as though a group of models posing for a sculptor were
being dismissed, the composition broke and they all moved toward
the door.  They left Barnes with a sense of having seen something
more than five young men between sixteen and eighteen going out to
sail or play tennis or golf, but having gained a sharp impression
of a whole style, a whole mode of youth, something different from
his own less assured, less graceful generation, something unified
by standards that he didn't know.  He wondered vaguely what the
standards of 1920 were, and whether they were worth anything--had a
sense of waste, of much effort for a purely esthetic achievement.
Then Schofield saw him and called him down into the living-room.

"Aren't they a fine bunch of boys?" Schofield demanded.  "Tell me,
did you ever see a finer bunch?"

"A fine lot," agreed Barnes, with a certain lack of enthusiasm.  He
felt a sudden premonition that his generation in its years of
effort had made possible a Periclean age, but had evolved no
prospective Pericles.  They had set the scene: was the cast
adequate?

"It isn't just because two of them happen to be mine," went on
Schofield.  "It's self-evident.  You couldn't match that crowd in
any city in the country.  First place, they're such a husky lot.
Those two little Kavenaughs aren't going to be big men--more like
their father; but the oldest one could make any college hockey-team
in the country right now."

"How old are they?" asked Barnes.

"Well, Howard Kavenaugh, the oldest, is nineteen--going to Yale
next year.  Then comes my Wister--he's eighteen, also going to Yale
next year.  You liked Wister, didn't you?  I don't know anybody who
doesn't.  He'd make a great politician, that kid.  Then there's a
boy named Larry Patt who wasn't here today--he's eighteen too, and
he's State golf champion.  Fine voice too; he's trying to get in
Princeton."

"Who's the blond-haired one who looks like a Greek god?"

"That's Beau Lebaume.  He's going to Yale, too, if the girls will
let him leave town.  Then there's the other Kavenaugh, the stocky
one--he's going to be an even better athlete than his brother.  And
finally there's my youngest, Charley; he's sixteen," Schofield
sighed reluctantly.  "But I guess you've heard all the boasting you
can stand."

"No, tell me more about them--I'm interested.  Are they anything
more than athletes?"

"Why, there's not a dumb one in the lot, except maybe Beau Lebaume;
but you can't help liking him anyhow.  And every one of them's a
natural leader.  I remember a few years ago a tough gang tried to
start something with them, calling them 'candies'--well, that gang
must be running yet.  They sort of remind me of young knights.  And
what's the matter with their being athletes?  I seem to remember
you stroking the boat at New London, and that didn't keep you from
consolidating railroad systems and--"

"I took up rowing because I had a sick stomach," said Barnes.  "By
the way, are these boys all rich?"

"Well, the Kavenaughs are, of course; and my boys will have
something."

Barnes' eyes twinkled.

"So I suppose since they won't have to worry about money, they're
brought up to serve the State," he suggested.  "You spoke of one of
your sons having a political talent and their all being like young
knights, so I suppose they'll go out for public life and the army
and navy."

"I don't know about that," Schofield's voice sounded somewhat
alarmed.  "I think their fathers would be pretty disappointed if
they didn't go into business.  That's natural, isn't it?"

"It's natural, but it isn't very romantic," said Barnes good-
humoredly.

"You're trying to get my goat," said Schofield.  "Well, if you can
match that--"

"They're certainly an ornamental bunch," admitted Barnes.  "They've
got what you call glamour.  They certainly look like the cigarette
ads in the magazine; but--"

"But you're an old sour-belly," interrupted Schofield.  "I've
explained that these boys are all well-rounded.  My son Wister led
his class at school this year, but I was a darn' sight prouder that
he got the medal for best all-around boy."

The two men faced each other with the uncut cards of the future on
the table before them.  They had been in college together, and were
friends of many years' standing.  Barnes was childless, and
Schofield was inclined to attribute his lack of enthusiasm to that.

"I somehow can't see them setting the world on fire, doing better
than their fathers," broke out Barnes suddenly.  "The more charming
they are, the harder it's going to be for them.  In the East people
are beginning to realize what wealthy boys are up against.  Match
them?  Maybe not now."  He leaned forward, his eyes lighting up.
"But I could pick six boys from any high-school in Cleveland, give
them an education, and I believe that ten years from this time your
young fellows here would be utterly outclassed.  There's so little
demanded of them, so little expected of them--what could be softer
than just to have to go on being charming and athletic?"

"I know your idea," objected Schofield scoffingly.  "You'd go to a
big municipal high-school and pick out the six most brilliant
scholars--"

"I'll tell you what I'll do--"  Barnes noticed that he had
unconsciously substituted "I will" for "I would," but he didn't
correct himself.  "I'll go to the little town in Ohio, where I was
born--there probably aren't fifty or sixty boys in the high-school
there, and I wouldn't be likely to find six geniuses out of that
number."

"And what?"

"I'll give them a chance.  If they fail, the chance is lost.  That
is a serious responsibility, and they've got to take it seriously.
That's what these boys haven't got--they're only asked to be
serious about trivial things."  He thought for a moment.  "I'm
going to do it."

"Do what?"

"I'm going to see."

A fortnight later he was back in the small town in Ohio where he
had been born, where, he felt, the driving emotions of his own
youth still haunted the quiet streets.  He interviewed the
principal of the high-school, who made suggestions; then by the,
for Barnes, difficult means of making an address and afterward
attending a reception, he got in touch with teachers and pupils.
He made a donation to the school, and under cover of this found
opportunities of watching the boys at work and at play.

It was fun--he felt his youth again.  There were some boys that he
liked immediately, and he began a weeding-out process, inviting
them in groups of five or six to his mother's house, rather like a
fraternity rushing freshman.  When a boy interested him, he looked
up his record and that of his family--and at the end of a fortnight
he had chosen five boys.

In the order in which he chose them, there was first Otto Schlach,
a farmer's son who had already displayed extraordinary mechanical
aptitude and a gift for mathematics.  Schlach was highly
recommended by his teachers, and he welcomed the opportunity
offered him of entering the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

A drunken father left James Matsko as his only legacy to the town
of Barnes' youth.  From the age of twelve, James had supported
himself by keeping a newspaper-and-candy store with a three-foot
frontage; and now at seventeen he was reputed to have saved five
hundred dollars.  Barnes found it difficult to persuade him to
study money and banking at Columbia, for Matsko was already assured
of his ability to make money.  But Barnes had prestige as the
town's most successful son, and he convinced Matsko that otherwise
he would lack frontage, like his own place of business.

Then there was Jack Stubbs, who had lost an arm hunting, but in
spite of this handicap played on the high-school football team.  He
was not among the leaders in studies; he had developed no
particular bent; but the fact that he had overcome that enormous
handicap enough to play football--to tackle and to catch punts--
convinced Barnes that no obstacles would stand in Jack Stubbs' way.

The fourth selection was George Winfield, who was almost twenty.
Because of the death of his father, he had left school at fourteen,
helped to support his family for four years, and then, things being
better, he had come back to finish high-school.  Barnes felt,
therefore, that Winfield would place a serious value on an
education.

Next came a boy whom Barnes found personally antipathetic.  Louis
Ireland was at once the most brilliant scholar and most difficult
boy at school.  Untidy, insubordinate and eccentric, Louis drew
scurrilous caricatures behind his Latin book, but when called upon
inevitably produced a perfect recitation.  There was a big talent
nascent somewhere in him--it was impossible to leave him out.

The last choice was the most difficult.  The remaining boys were
mediocrities, or at any rate they had so far displayed no qualities
that set them apart.  For a time Barnes, thinking patriotically of
his old university, considered the football captain, a virtuosic
halfback who would have been welcome on any Eastern squad; but that
would have destroyed the integrity of the idea.

He finally chose a younger boy, Gordon Vandervere, of a rather
higher standing than the others.  Vandervere was the handsomest and
one of the most popular boys in school.  He had been intended for
college, but his father, a harassed minister, was glad to see the
way made easy.

Barnes was content with himself; he felt godlike in being able to
step in to mold these various destinies.  He felt as if they were
his own sons, and he telegraphed Schofield in Minneapolis:

HAVE CHOSEN HALF A DOZEN OF THE OTHER, AND AM BACKING THEM AGAINST
THE WORLD.

And now, after all this biography, the story begins. . . .

The continuity of the frieze is broken.  Young Charley Schofield
had been expelled from Hotchkiss.  It was a small but painful
tragedy--he and four other boys, nice boys, popular boys, broke the
honor system as to smoking.  Charley's father felt the matter
deeply, varying between disappointment about Charley and anger at
the school.  Charley came home to Minneapolis in a desperate humor
and went to the country day-school while it was decided what he was
to do.

It was still undecided in midsummer.  When school was over, he
spent his time playing golf, or dancing at the Minnekada Club--he
was a handsome boy of eighteen, older than his age, with charming
manners, with no serious vices, but with a tendency to be easily
influenced by his admirations.  His principal admiration at the
time was Gladys Irving, a young married woman scarcely two years
older than himself.  He rushed her at the club dances, and felt
sentimentally about her, though Gladys on her part was in love with
her husband and asked from Charley only the confirmation of her own
youth and charm that a belle often needs after her first baby.

Sitting out with her one night on the veranda of the Lafayette
Club, Charley felt a necessity to boast to her, to pretend to be
more experienced, and so more potentially protective.

"I've seen a lot of life for my age," he said.  "I've done things I
couldn't even tell you about."

Gladys didn't answer.

"In fact last week--" he began, and thought better of it.  "In any
case I don't think I'll go to Yale next year--I'd have to go East
right away, and tutor all summer.  If I don't go, there's a job
open in Father's office; and after Wister goes back to college in
the fall, I'll have the roadster to myself."

"I thought you were going to college," Gladys said coldly.

"I was.  But I've thought things over, and now I don't know.  I've
usually gone with older boys, and I feel older than boys my age.  I
like older girls, for instance."  When Charley looked at her then
suddenly, he seemed unusually attractive to her--it would be very
pleasant to have him here, to cut in on her at dances all summer.
But Gladys said:

"You'd be a fool to stay here."

"Why?"

"You started something--you ought to go through with it.  A few
years running around town, and you won't be good for anything."

"You think so," he said indulgently.

Gladys didn't want to hurt him or to drive him away from her; yet
she wanted to say something stronger.

"Do you think I'm thrilled when you tell me you've had a lot of
dissipated experience?  I don't see how anybody could claim to be
your friend and encourage you in that.  If I were you, I'd at least
pass your examinations for college.  Then they can't say you just
lay down after you were expelled from school."

"You think so?" Charley said, unruffled, and in his grave,
precocious manner, as though he were talking to a child.  But she
had convinced him, because he was in love with her and the moon was
around her.  "Oh me, oh my, oh you," was the last music they had
danced to on the Wednesday before, and so it was one of those
times.

Had Gladys let him brag to her, concealing her curiosity under a
mask of companionship, if she had accepted his own estimate of
himself as a man formed, no urging of his father's would have
mattered.  As it was, Charley passed into college that fall, thanks
to a girl's tender reminiscences and her own memories of the
sweetness of youth's success in young fields.



And it was well for his father that he did.  If he had not, the
catastrophe of his older brother Wister that autumn would have
broken Schofield's heart.  The morning after the Harvard game the
New York papers carried a headline:


               YALE BOYS AND FOLLIES GIRLS IN
                    MOTOR CRASH NEAR RYE
   IRENE DALEY IN GREENWICH HOSPITAL THREATENS BEAUTY SUIT
                 MILLIONAIRE'S SON INVOLVED


The four boys came up before the dean a fortnight later.  Wister
Schofield, who had driven the car, was called first.

"It was not your car, Mr. Schofield," the dean said.  "It was Mr.
Kavenaugh's car, wasn't it?"

"Yes sir."

"How did you happen to be driving?"

"The girls wanted me to.  They didn't feel safe."

"But you'd been drinking too, hadn't you?"

"Yes, but not so much."

"Tell me this," asked the dean:  "Haven't you ever driven a car
when you'd been drinking--perhaps drinking even more than you were
that night?"

"Why--perhaps once or twice, but I never had any accidents.  And
this was so clearly unavoidable--"

"Possibly," the dean agreed; "but we'll have to look at it this
way:  Up to this time you had no accidents even when you deserved
to have them.  Now you've had one when you didn't deserve it.  I
don't want you to go out of here feeling that life or the
University or I myself haven't given you a square deal, Mr.
Schofield.  But the newspapers have given this a great deal of
prominence, and I'm afraid that the University will have to
dispense with your presence."

Moving along the frieze to Howard Kavenaugh, the dean's remarks to
him were substantially the same.

"I am particularly sorry in your case, Mr. Kavenaugh.  Your father
has made substantial gifts to the University, and I took pleasure
in watching you play hockey with your usual brilliance last
winter."

Howard Kavenaugh left the office with uncontrollable tears running
down his cheeks.

Since Irene Daley's suit for her ruined livelihood, her ruined
beauty, was directed against the owner and the driver of the
automobile, there were lighter sentences for the other two
occupants of the car.  Beau Lebaume came into the dean's office
with his arm in a sling and his handsome head swathed in bandages
and was suspended for the remainder of the current year.  He took
it jauntily and said good-by to the dean with as cheerful a smile
as could show through the bandages.  The last case, however, was
the most difficult.  George Winfield, who had entered high-school
late because work in the world had taught him the value of an
education, came in looking at the floor.

"I can't understand your participation in this affair," said the
dean.  "I know your benefactor, Mr. Barnes, personally.  He told me
how you left school to go to work, and how you came back to it four
years later to continue your education, and he felt that your
attitude toward life was essentially serious.  Up to this point you
have a good record here at New Haven, but it struck me several
months ago that you were running with a rather gay crowd, boys with
a great deal of money to spend.  You are old enough to realize that
they couldn't possibly give you as much in material ways as they
took away from you in others.  I've got to give you a year's
suspension.  If you come back, I have every hope you'll justify the
confidence that Mr. Barnes reposed in you."

"I won't come back," said Winfield.  "I couldn't face Mr. Barnes
after this.  I'm not going home."

At the suit brought by Irene Daley, all four of them lied loyally
for Wister Schofield.  They said that before they hit the gasoline
pump they had seen Miss Daley grab the wheel.  But Miss Daley was
in court, with her face, familiar to the tabloids, permanently
scarred; and her counsel exhibited a letter canceling her recent
moving-picture contract.  The students' case looked bad; so in the
intermission, on their lawyer's advice, they settled for forty
thousand dollars.  Wister Schofield and Howard Kavenaugh were
snapped by a dozen photographers leaving the courtroom, and served
up in flaming notoriety next day.

That night, Wister, the three Minneapolis boys, Howard and Beau
Lebaume started for home.  George Winfield said good-by to them in
the Pennsylvania station; and having no home to go to, walked out
into New York to start life over.

Of all Barnes' protégés, Jack Stubbs with his one arm was the
favorite.  He was the first to achieve fame--when he played on the
tennis team at Princeton, the rotogravure section carried pictures
showing how he threw the ball from his racket in serving.  When he
was graduated, Barnes took him into his own office--he was often
spoken of as an adopted son.  Stubbs, together with Schlach, now a
prominent consulting engineer, were the most satisfactory of his
experiments, although James Matsko at twenty-seven had just been
made a partner in a Wall Street brokerage house.  Financially he
was the most successful of the six, yet Barnes found himself
somewhat repelled by his hard egoism.  He wondered, too, if he,
Barnes, had really played any part in Matsko's career--did it after
all matter whether Matsko was a figure in metropolitan finance or a
big merchant in the Middle West, as he would have undoubtedly
become without any assistance at all.

One morning in 1930 he handed Jack Stubbs a letter that led to a
balancing up of the book of boys.

"What do you think of this?"

The letter was from Louis Ireland in Paris.  About Louis they did
not agree, and as Jack read, he prepared once more to intercede in
his behalf.


MY DEAR SIR:

After your last communication, made through your bank here and
enclosing a check which I hereby acknowledge, I do not feel that I
am under any obligation to write you at all.  But because the
concrete fact of an object's commercial worth may be able to move
you, while you remain utterly insensitive to the value of an
abstract idea--because of this I write to tell you that my
exhibition was an unqualified success.  To bring the matter even
nearer to your intellectual level, I may tell you that I sold two
pieces--a head of Lallette, the actress, and a bronze animal group--
for a total of seven thousand francs ($280.00).  Moreover I have
commissions which will take me all summer--I enclose a piece about
me cut from CAHIERS D'ART, which will show you that whatever your
estimate of my abilities and my career, it is by no means
unanimous.

This is not to say that I am ungrateful for your well-intentioned
attempt to "educate" me.  I suppose that Harvard was no worse than
any other polite finishing school--the years that I wasted there
gave me a sharp and well-documented attitude on American life and
institutions.  But your suggestions that I come to America and make
standardized nymphs for profiteers' fountains was a little too much--


Stubbs looked up with a smile.

"Well," Barnes said, "what do you think?  Is he crazy--or now that
he has sold some statues, does it prove that I'm crazy?"

"Neither one," laughed Stubbs.  "What you objected to in Louis
wasn't his talent.  But you never got over that year he tried to
enter a monastery and then got arrested in the Sacco-Vanzetti
demonstrations, and then ran away with the professor's wife."

"He was just forming himself," said Barnes dryly, "just trying his
little wings.  God knows what he's been up to abroad."

"Well, perhaps he's formed now," Stubbs said lightly.  He had
always liked Louis Ireland--privately he resolved to write and see
if he needed money.

"Anyhow, he's graduated from me," announced Barnes.  "I can't do
any more to help him or hurt him.  Suppose we call him a success,
though that's pretty doubtful--let's see how we stand.  I'm going
to see Schofield out in Minneapolis next week, and I'd like to
balance accounts.  To my mind, the successes are you, Otto Schlach,
James Matsko,--whatever you and I may think of him as a man,--and
let's assume that Louis Ireland is going to be a great sculptor.
That's four.  Winfield's disappeared.  I've never had a line from
him."

"Perhaps he's doing well somewhere."

"If he were doing well, I think he'd let me know.  We'll have to
count him as a failure so far as my experiment goes.  Then there's
Gordon Vandervere."

Both were silent for a moment.

"I can't make it out about Gordon," Barnes said.  "He's such a nice
fellow, but since he left college, he doesn't seem to come through.
He was younger than the rest of you, and he had the advantage of
two years at Andover before he went to college, and at Princeton he
knocked them cold, as you say.  But he seems to have worn his wings
out--for four years now he's done nothing at all; he can't hold a
job; he can't get his mind on his work, and he doesn't seem to
care.  I'm about through with Gordon."

At this moment Gordon was announced over the phone.

"He asked for an appointment," explained Barnes.  "I suppose he
wants to try something new."

A personable young man with an easy and attractive manner strolled
in to the office.

"Good afternoon, Uncle Ed.  Hi there, Jack!"  Gordon sat down.
"I'm full of news."

"About what?" asked Barnes.

"About myself."

"I know.  You've just been appointed to arrange a merger between J.
P. Morgan and the Queensborough Bridge."

"It's a merger," agreed Vandervere, "but those are not the parties
to it.  I'm engaged to be married."

Barnes glowered.

"Her name," continued Vandervere, "is Esther Crosby."

"Let me congratulate you," said Barnes ironically.  "A relation of
H. B. Crosby, I presume."

"Exactly," said Vandervere unruffled.  "In fact, his only
daughter."

For a moment there was silence in the office.  Then Barnes
exploded.

"YOU'RE going to marry H. B. Crosby's daughter?  Does he know that
last month you retired by request from one of his banks?"

"I'm afraid he knows everything about me.  He's been looking me
over for four years.  You see, Uncle Ed," he continued cheerfully,
"Esther and I got engaged during my last year at Princeton--my
roommate brought her down to a house-party, but she switched over
to me.  Well, quite naturally Mr. Crosby wouldn't hear of it until
I'd proved myself."

"Proved yourself!" repeated Barnes.  "Do you consider that you've
proved yourself?"

"Well--yes."

"How?"

"By waiting four years.  You see, either Esther or I might have
married anybody else in that time, but we didn't.  Instead we sort
of wore him away.  That's really why I haven't been able to get
down to anything.  Mr. Crosby is a strong personality, and it took
a lot of time and energy wearing him away.  Sometimes Esther and I
didn't see each other for months, so she couldn't eat; so then
thinking of that I couldn't eat, so then I couldn't work--"

"And you mean he's really given his consent?"

"He gave it last night."

"Is he going to let you loaf?"

"No.  Esther and I are going into the diplomatic service.  She
feels that the family has passed through the banking phase."  He
winked at Stubbs.  "I'll look up Louis Ireland when I get to Paris,
and send Uncle Ed a report."

Suddenly Barnes roared with laughter.

"Well, it's all in the lottery-box," he said.  "When I picked out
you six, I was a long way from guessing--"  He turned to Stubbs and
demanded:  "Shall we put him under failure or under success?"

"A howling success," said Stubbs.  "Top of the list."

A fortnight later Barnes was with his old friend Schofield in
Minneapolis.  He thought of the house with the six boys as he had
last seen it--now it seemed to bear scars of them, like the traces
that pictures leave on a wall that they have long protected from
the mark of time.  Since he did not know what had become of
Schofield's sons, he refrained from referring to their conversation
of ten years before until he knew whether it was dangerous ground.
He was glad of his reticence later in the evening when Schofield
spoke of his elder son, Wister.

"Wister never seems to have found himself--and he was such a high-
spirited kid!  He was the leader of every group he went into; he
could always make things go.  When he was young, our houses in town
and at the lake were always packed with young people.  But after he
left Yale, he lost interest in things--got sort of scornful about
everything.  I thought for a while that it was because he drank too
much, but he married a nice girl and she took that in hand.  Still,
he hasn't any ambition--he talked about country life, so I bought
him a silver-fox farm, but that didn't go; and I sent him to
Florida during the boom, but that wasn't any better.  Now he has an
interest in a dude-ranch in Montana; but since the depression--"

Barnes saw his opportunity and asked:

"What became of those friends of your sons' that I met one day?"

"Let's see--I wonder who you mean.  There was Kavenaugh--you know,
the flour people--he was here a lot.  Let's see--he eloped with an
Eastern girl, and for a few years he and his wife were the leaders
of the gay crowd here--they did a lot of drinking and not much
else.  It seems to me I heard the other day that Howard's getting a
divorce.  Then there was the younger brother--he never could get
into college.  Finally he married a manicurist, and they live here
rather quietly.  We don't hear much about them."

They had had a glamour about them, Barnes remembered; they had been
so sure of themselves, individually, as a group; so high-spirited,
a frieze of Greek youths, graceful of body, ready for life.

"Then Larry Patt, you might have met him here.  A great golfer.  He
couldn't stay in college--there didn't seem to be enough fresh air
there for Larry."  And he added defensively:  "But he capitalized
what he could do--he opened a sporting-goods store and made a good
thing of it, I understand.  He has a string of three or four."

"I seem to remember an exceptionally handsome one."

"Oh--Beau Lebaume.  He was in that mess at New Haven too.  After
that he went to pieces--drink and what-not.  His father's tried
everything, and now he won't have anything more to do with him."
Schofield's face warmed suddenly; his eyes glowed.  "But let me
tell you, I've got a boy--my Charley!  I wouldn't trade him for the
lot of them--he's coming over presently, and you'll see.  He had a
bad start, got into trouble at Hotchkiss--but did he quit?  Never.
He went back and made a fine record at New Haven, senior society
and all that.  Then he and some other boys took a trip around the
world, and then he came back here and said:  'All right, Father,
I'm ready--when do I start?'  I don't know what I'd do without
Charley.  He got married a few months back, a young widow he'd
always been in love with; and his mother and I are still missing
him, though they come over often--"

Barnes was glad about this, and suddenly he was reconciled at not
having any sons in the flesh--one out of two made good, and
sometimes better, and sometimes nothing; but just going along
getting old by yourself when you'd counted on so much from sons--

"Charley runs the business," continued Schofield.  "That is, he and
a young man named Winfield that Wister got me to take on five or
six years ago.  Wister felt responsible about him, felt he'd got
him into this trouble at New Haven--and this boy had no family.
He's done well here."

Another one of Barnes' six accounted for!  He felt a surge of
triumph, but he saw he must keep it to himself; a little later when
Schofield asked him if he'd carried out his intention of putting
some boys through college, he avoided answering.  After all, any
given moment has its value; it can be questioned in the light of
after-events, but the moment remains.  The young princes in velvet
gathered in lovely domesticity around the queen amid the hush of
rich draperies may presently grow up to be Pedro the Cruel or
Charles the Mad, but the moment of beauty was there.  Back there
ten years, Schofield had seen his sons and their friends as
samurai, as something shining and glorious and young, perhaps as
something he had missed from his own youth.  There was later a
price to be paid by those boys, all too fulfilled, with the whole
balance of their life pulled forward into their youth so that
everything afterward would inevitably be anticlimax; these boys
brought up as princes with none of the responsibilities of princes!
Barnes didn't know how much their mothers might have had to do with
it, what their mothers may have lacked.

But he was glad that his friend Schofield had one true son.

His own experiment--he didn't regret it, but he wouldn't have done
it again.  Probably it proved something, but he wasn't quite sure
what.  Perhaps that life is constantly renewed, and glamour and
beauty make way for it; and he was glad that he was able to feel
that the republic could survive the mistakes of a whole generation,
pushing the waste aside, sending ahead the vital and the strong.
Only it was too bad and very American that there should be all that
waste at the top; and he felt that he would not live long enough to
see it end, to see great seriousness in the same skin with great
opportunity--to see the race achieve itself at last.







THE SWIMMERS


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (19 October 1929)



In the Place Benoït, a suspended mass of gasoline exhaust cooked
slowly by the June sun.  It was a terrible thing, for, unlike pure
heat, it held no promise of rural escape, but suggested only roads
choked with the same foul asthma.  In the offices of The Promissory
Trust Company, Paris Branch, facing the square, an American man of
thirty-five inhaled it, and it became the odor of the thing he must
presently do.  A black horror suddenly descended upon him, and he
went up to the washroom, where he stood, trembling a little, just
inside the door.

Through the washroom window his eyes fell upon a sign--1000
Chemises.  The shirts in question filled the shop window, piled,
cravated and stuffed, or else draped with shoddy grace on the show-
case floor.  1000 Chemises--Count them!  To the left he read
Papeterie, Pâtisserie, Solde, Réclame, and Constance Talmadge in
Déjeuner de Soleil; and his eye, escaping to the right, met yet
more somber announcements:  Vêtements Ecclésiastiques, Declaration
de Décès, and Pompes Funèbres.  Life and Death.

Henry Marston's trembling became a shaking; it would be pleasant if
this were the end and nothing more need be done, he thought, and
with a certain hope he sat down on a stool.  But it is seldom
really the end, and after a while, as he became too exhausted to
care, the shaking stopped and he was better.  Going downstairs,
looking as alert and self-possessed as any other officer of the
bank, he spoke to two clients he knew, and set his face grimly
toward noon.

"Well, Henry Clay Marston!"  A handsome old man shook hands with
him and took the chair beside his desk.

"Henry, I want to see you in regard to what we talked about the
other night.  How about lunch?  In that green little place with all
the trees."

"Not lunch, Judge Waterbury; I've got an engagement."

"I'll talk now, then; because I'm leaving this afternoon.  What do
these plutocrats give you for looking important around here?"

Henry Marston knew what was coming.

"Ten thousand and certain expense money," he answered.

"How would you like to come back to Richmond at about double that?
You've been over here eight years and you don't know the
opportunities you're missing.  Why both my boys--"

Henry listened appreciatively, but this morning he couldn't
concentrate on the matter.  He spoke vaguely about being able to
live more comfortably in Paris and restrained himself from stating
his frank opinion upon existence at home.

Judge Waterbury beckoned to a tall, pale man who stood at the mail
desk.

"This is Mr. Wiese," he said.  "Mr. Wiese's from downstate; he's a
halfway partner of mine."

"Glad to meet you, suh."  Mr. Wiese's voice was rather too
deliberately Southern.  "Understand the judge is makin' you a
proposition."

"Yes," Henry answered briefly.  He recognized and detested the type--
the prosperous sweater, presumably evolved from a cross between
carpetbagger and poor white.  When Wiese moved away, the judge said
almost apologetically:

"He's one of the richest men in the South, Henry."  Then, after a
pause:   "Come home, boy."

"I'll think it over, judge."  For a moment the gray and ruddy head
seemed so kind; then it faded back into something one-dimensional,
machine-finished, blandly and bleakly un-European.  Henry Marston
respected that open kindness--in the bank he touched it with daily
appreciation, as a curator in a museum might touch a precious
object removed in time and space; but there was no help in it for
him; the questions which Henry Marston's life propounded could be
answered only in France.  His seven generations of Virginia
ancestors were definitely behind him every day at noon when he
turned home.

Home was a fine high-ceiling apartment hewn from the palace of a
Renaissance cardinal in the Rue Monsieur--the sort of thing Henry
could not have afforded in America.  Choupette, with something more
than the rigid traditionalism of a French bourgeois taste, had made
it beautiful, and moved through gracefully with their children.
She was a frail Latin blonde with fine large features and vividly
sad French eyes that had first fascinated Henry in a Grenoble
pension in 1918.  The two boys took their looks from Henry, voted
the handsomest man at the University of Virginia a few years before
the war.

Climbing the two broad flights of stairs, Henry stood panting a
moment in the outside hall.  It was quiet and cool here, and yet it
was vaguely like the terrible thing that was going to happen.  He
heard a clock inside his apartment strike one, and inserted his key
in the door.

The maid who had been in Choupette's family for thirty years stood
before him, her mouth open in the utterance of a truncated sigh.

"Bonjour, Louise."

"Monsieur!"  He threw his hat on a chair.  "But, monsieur--but I
thought monsieur said on the phone he was going to Tours for the
children!"

"I changed my mind, Louise."

He had taken a step forward, his last doubt melting away at the
constricted terror in the woman's face.

"Is madame home?"

Simultaneously he perceived a man's hat and stick on the hall table
and for the first time in his life he heard silence--a loud,
singing silence, oppressive as heavy guns or thunder.  Then, as the
endless moment was broken by the maid's terrified little cry, he
pushed through the portières into the next room.

An hour later Doctor Derocco, de la Faculté de Médecine, rang the
apartment bell.  Choupette Marston, her face a little drawn and
rigid, answered the door.  For a moment they went through French
forms; then:

"My husband has been feeling unwell for some weeks," she said
concisely.  "Nevertheless, he did not complain in a way to make me
uneasy.  He has suddenly collapsed; he cannot articulate or move
his limbs.  All this, I must say, might have been precipitated by a
certain indiscretion of mine--in all events, there was a violent
scene, a discussion, and sometimes when he is agitated, my husband
cannot comprehend well in French."

"I will see him," said the doctor; thinking:  "Some things are
comprehended instantly in all languages."

During the next four weeks several people listened to strange
speeches about one thousand chemises, and heard how all the
population of Paris was becoming etherized by cheap gasoline--there
was a consulting psychiatrist, not inclined to believe in any
underlying mental trouble; there was a nurse from the American
Hospital, and there was Choupette, frightened, defiant and, after
her fashion, deeply sorry.  A month later, when Henry awoke to his
familiar room, lit with a dimmed lamp, he found her sitting beside
his bed and reached out for her hand.

"I still love you," he said--"that's the odd thing."

"Sleep, male cabbage."

"At all costs," he continued with a certain feeble irony, "you can
count on me to adopt the Continental attitude."

"Please!  You tear at my heart."

When he was sitting up in bed they were ostensibly close together
again--closer than they had been for months.

"Now you're going to have another holiday," said Henry to the two
boys, back from the country.  "Papa has got to go to the seashore
and get really well."

"Will we swim?"

"And get drowned, my darlings?" Choupette cried.  "But fancy, at
your age.  Not at all!"

So, at St. Jean de Luz they sat on the shore instead, and watched
the English and Americans and a few hardy French pioneers of le
sport voyage between raft and diving tower, motorboat and sand.
There were passing ships, and bright islands to look at, and
mountains reaching into cold zones, and red and yellow villas,
called Fleur des Bois, Mon Nid, or Sans-Souci; and farther back,
tired French villages of baked cement and gray stone.

Choupette sat at Henry's side, holding a parasol to shelter her
peach-bloom skin from the sun.

"Look!" she would say, at the sight of tanned American girls.  "Is
that lovely?  Skin that will be leather at thirty--a sort of brown
veil to hide all blemishes, so that everyone will look alike.  And
women of a hundred kilos in such bathing suits!  Weren't clothes
intended to hide Nature's mistakes?"

Henry Clay Marston was a Virginian of the kind who are prouder of
being Virginians than of being Americans.  That mighty word printed
across a continent was less to him than the memory of his
grandfather, who freed his slaves in '58, fought from Manassas to
Appomattox, knew Huxley and Spencer as light reading, and believed
in caste only when it expressed the best of race.

To Choupette all this was vague.  Her more specific criticisms of
his compatriots were directed against the women.

"How would you place them?" she exclaimed.  "Great ladies,
bourgeoises, adventuresses--they are all the same.  Look!  Where
would I be if I tried to act like your friend, Madame de Richepin?
My father was a professor in a provincial university, and I have
certain things I wouldn't do because they wouldn't please my class,
my family.  Madame de Richepin has other things she wouldn't do
because of her class, her family."  Suddenly she pointed to an
American girl going into the water:  "But that young lady may be a
stenographer and yet be compelled to warp herself, dressing and
acting as if she had all the money in the world."

"Perhaps she will have, some day."

"That's the story they are told; it happens to one, not to the
ninety-nine.  That's why all their faces over thirty are
discontented and unhappy."

Though Henry was in general agreement, he could not help being
amused at Choupette's choice of target this afternoon.  The girl--
she was perhaps eighteen--was obviously acting like nothing but
herself--she was what his father would have called a thoroughbred.
A deep, thoughtful face that was pretty only because of the
irrepressible determination of the perfect features to be
recognized, a face that could have done without them and not
yielded up its poise and distinction.

In her grace, at once exquisite and hardy, she was that perfect
type of American girl that makes one wonder if the male is not
being sacrificed to it, much as, in the last century, the lower
strata in England were sacrificed to produce the governing class.

The two young men, coming out of the water as she went in, had
large shoulders and empty faces.  She had a smile for them that was
no more than they deserved--that must do until she chose one to be
the father of her children and gave herself up to destiny.  Until
then--Henry Marston was glad about her as her arms, like flying
fish, clipped the water in a crawl, as her body spread in a swan
dive or doubled in a jackknife from the springboard and her head
appeared from the depth, jauntily flipping the damp hair away.

The two young men passed near.

"They push water," Choupette said, "then they go elsewhere and push
other water.  They pass months in France and they couldn't tell you
the name of the President.  They are parasites such as Europe has
not known in a hundred years."

But Henry had stood up abruptly, and now all the people on the
beach were suddenly standing up.  Something had happened out there
in the fifty yards between the deserted raft and the shore.  The
bright head showed upon the surface; it did not flip water now, but
called:  "Au secours!  Help!" in a feeble and frightened voice.

"Henry!" Choupette cried.  "Stop!  Henry!"

The beach was almost deserted at noon, but Henry and several others
were sprinting toward the sea; the two young Americans heard,
turned and sprinted after them.  There was a frantic little time
with half a dozen bobbing heads in the water.  Choupette, still
clinging to her parasol, but managing to wring her hands at the
same time, ran up and down the beach crying:  "Henry!  Henry!"

Now there were more helping hands, and then two swelling groups
around prostrate figures on the shore.  The young fellow who pulled
in the girl brought her around in a minute or so, but they had more
trouble getting the water out of Henry, who had never learned to
swim.


II


"This is the man who didn't know whether he could swim, because
he'd never tried."

Henry got up from his sun chair, grinning.  It was next morning,
and the saved girl had just appeared on the beach with her brother.
She smiled back at Henry, brightly casual, appreciative rather than
grateful.

"At the very least, I owe it to you to teach you how," she said.

"I'd like it.  I decided that in the water yesterday, just before I
went down the tenth time."

"You can trust me.  I'll never again eat chocolate ice cream before
going in."

As she went on into the water, Choupette asked:  "How long do you
think we'll stay here?  After all, this life wearies one."

"We'll stay till I can swim.  And the boys too."

"Very well.  I saw a nice bathing suit in two shades of blue for
fifty francs that I will buy you this afternoon."

Feeling a little paunchy and unhealthily white, Henry, holding his
sons by the hand, took his body into the water.  The breakers
leaped at him, staggering him, while the boys yelled with ecstasy;
the returning water curled threateningly around his feet as it
hurried back to sea.  Farther out, he stood waist deep with other
intimidated souls, watching the people dive from the raft tower,
hoping the girl would come to fulfill her promise, and somewhat
embarrassed when she did.

"I'll start with your eldest.  You watch and then try it by
yourself."

He floundered in the water.  It went into his nose and started a
raw stinging; it blinded him; it lingered afterward in his ears,
rattling back and forth like pebbles for hours.  The sun discovered
him, too, peeling long strips of parchment from his shoulders,
blistering his back so that he lay in a feverish agony for several
nights.  After a week he swam, painfully, pantingly, and not very
far.  The girl taught him a sort of crawl, for he saw that the
breast stroke was an obsolete device that lingered on with the
inept and the old.  Choupette caught him regarding his tanned face
in the mirror with a sort of fascination, and the youngest boy
contracted some sort of mild skin infection in the sand that
retired him from competition.  But one day Henry battled his way
desperately to the float and drew himself up on it with his last
breath.

"That being settled," he told the girl, when he could speak, "I can
leave St. Jean tomorrow."

"I'm sorry."

"What will you do now?"

"My brother and I are going to Antibes; there's swimming there all
through October.  Then Florida."

"And swim?" he asked with some amusement.

"Why, yes.  We'll swim."

"Why do you swim?"

"To get clean," she answered surprisingly.

"Clean from what?"

She frowned.  "I don't know why I said that.  But it feels clean in
the sea."

"Americans are too particular about that," he commented.

"How could anyone be?"

"I mean we've got too fastidious even to clean up our messes."

"I don't know."

"But tell me why you--"  He stopped himself in surprise.  He had
been about to ask her to explain a lot of other things--to say what
was clean and unclean, what was worth knowing and what was only
words--to open up a new gate to life.  Looking for a last time into
her eyes, full of cool secrets, he realized how much he was going
to miss these mornings, without knowing whether it was the girl who
interested him or what she represented of his ever-new, ever-
changing country.

"All right," he told Choupette that night.  "We'll leave tomorrow."

"For Paris?"

"For America."

"You mean I'm to go too?  And the children?"

"Yes."

"But that's absurd," she protested.  "Last time it cost more than
we spend in six months here.  And then there were only three of us.
Now that we've managed to get ahead at last--"

"That's just it.  I'm tired of getting ahead on your skimping and
saving and going without dresses.  I've got to make more money.
American men are incomplete without money."

"You mean we'll stay?"

"It's very possible."

They looked at each other, and against her will, Choupette
understood.  For eight years, by a process of ceaseless adaptation,
he had lived her life, substituting for the moral confusion of his
own country, the tradition, the wisdom, the sophistication of
France.  After that matter in Paris, it had seemed the bigger part
to understand and to forgive, to cling to the home as something
apart from the vagaries of love.  Only now, glowing with a good
health that he had not experienced for years, did he discover his
true reaction.  It had released him.  For all his sense of loss, he
possessed again the masculine self he had handed over to the
keeping of a wise little Provençal girl eight years ago.

She struggled on for a moment.

"You've got a good position and we really have plenty of money.
You know we can live cheaper here."

"The boys are growing up now, and I'm not sure I want to educate
them in France."

"But that's all decided," she wailed.  "You admit yourself that
education in America is superficial and full of silly fads.  Do you
want them to be like those two dummies on the beach?"

"Perhaps I was thinking more of myself, Choupette.  Men just out of
college who brought their letters of credit into the bank eight
years ago, travel about with ten-thousand-dollar cars now.  I
didn't use to care.  I used to tell myself that I had a better
place to escape to, just because we knew that lobster armoricaine
was really lobster americaine.  Perhaps I haven't that feeling any
more."

She stiffened.  "If that's it--"

"It's up to you.  We'll make a new start."

Choupette thought for a moment.  "Of course my sister can take over
the apartment."

"Of course."  He waxed enthusiastic.  "And there are sure to be
things that'll tickle you--we'll have a nice car, for instance, and
one of those electric ice boxes, and all sorts of funny machines to
take the place of servants.  It won't be bad.  You'll learn to play
golf and talk about children all day.  Then there are the movies."

Choupette groaned.

"It's going to be pretty awful at first," he admitted, "but there
are still a few good nigger cooks, and we'll probably have two
bathrooms."

"I am unable to use more than one at a time."

"You'll learn."

A month afterward, when the beautiful white island floated toward
them in the Narrows, Henry's throat grew constricted with the rest
and he wanted to cry out to Choupette and all foreigners, "Now, you
see!"


III


Almost three years later, Henry Marston walked out of his office in
the Calumet Tobacco Company and along the hall to Judge Waterbury's
suite.  His face was older, with a suspicion of grimness, and a
slight irrepressible heaviness of body was not concealed by his
white linen suit.

"Busy, judge?"

"Come in, Henry."

"I'm going to the shore tomorrow to swim off this weight.  I wanted
to talk to you before I go."

"Children going too?"

"Oh, sure."

"Choupette'll go abroad, I suppose."

"Not this year.  I think she's coming with me, if she doesn't stay
here in Richmond."

The judge thought:  "There isn't a doubt but what he knows
everything."  He waited.

"I wanted to tell you, judge, that I'm resigning the end of
September."

The judge's chair creaked backward as he brought his feet to the
floor.

"You're quitting, Henry?"

"Not exactly.  Walter Ross wants to come home; let me take his
place in France."

"Boy, do you know what we pay Walter Ross?"

"Seven thousand."

"And you're getting twenty-five."

"You've probably heard I've made something in the market," said
Henry deprecatingly.

"I've heard everything between a hundred thousand and half a
million."

"Somewhere in between."

"Then why a seven-thousand-dollar job?  Is Choupette homesick?"

"No, I think Choupette likes it over here.  She's adapted herself
amazingly."

"He knows," the judge thought.  "He wants to get away."

After Henry had gone, he looked up at the portrait of his
grandfather on the wall.  In those days the matter would have been
simpler.  Dueling pistols in the old Wharton meadow at dawn.  It
would be to Henry's advantage if things were like that today.

Henry's chauffeur dropped him in front of a Georgian house in a new
suburban section.  Leaving his hat in the hall, he went directly
out on the side veranda.

From the swaying canvas swing Choupette looked up with a polite
smile.  Save for a certain alertness of feature and a certain
indefinable knack of putting things on, she might have passed for
an American.  Southernisms overlay her French accent with a quaint
charm; there were still college boys who rushed her like a
débutante at the Christmas dances.

Henry nodded at Mr. Charles Wiese, who occupied a wicker chair,
with a gin fizz at his elbow.

"I want to talk to you," he said, sitting down.

Wiese's glance and Choupette's crossed quickly before coming to
rest on him.

"You're free, Wiese," Henry said.  "Why don't you and Choupette get
married?"

Choupette sat up, her eyes flashing.

"Now wait."  Henry turned back to Wiese.  "I've been letting this
thing drift for about a year now, while I got my financial affairs
in shape.  But this last brilliant idea of yours makes me feel a
little uncomfortable, a little sordid, and I don't want to feel
that way."

"Just what do you mean?" Wiese inquired.

"On my last trip to New York you had me shadowed.  I presume it was
with the intention of getting divorce evidence against me.  It
wasn't a success."

"I don't know where you got such an idea in your head, Marston;
you--"

"Don't lie!"

"Suh--" Wiese began, but Henry interrupted impatiently:

"Now don't 'Suh' me, and don't try to whip yourself up into a
temper.  You're not talking to a scared picker full of hookworm.  I
don't want a scene; my emotions aren't sufficiently involved.  I
want to arrange a divorce."

"Why do you bring it up like this?" Choupette cried, breaking into
French.  "Couldn't we talk of it alone, if you think you have so
much against me?"

"Wait a minute; this might as well be settled now," Wiese said.
"Choupette does want a divorce.  Her life with you is unsatisfactory,
and the only reason she has kept on is because she's an idealist.
You don't seem to appreciate that fact, but it's true; she couldn't
bring herself to break up her home."

"Very touching."  Henry looked at Choupette with bitter amusement.

"But let's come down to facts.  I'd like to close up this matter
before I go back to France."

Again Wiese and Choupette exchanged a look.

"It ought to be simple," Wiese said.  "Choupette doesn't want a
cent of your money."

"I know.  What she wants is the children.  The answer is, You can't
have the children."

"How perfectly outrageous!" Choupette cried.  "Do you imagine for a
minute I'm going to give up my children?"

"What's your idea, Marston?" demanded Wiese.  "To take them back to
France and make them expatriates like yourself?"

"Hardly that.  They're entered for St. Regis School and then for
Yale.  And I haven't any idea of not letting them see their mother
whenever she so desires--judging from the past two years, it won't
be often.  But I intend to have their entire legal custody."

"Why?" they demanded together.

"Because of the home."

"What the devil do you mean?"

"I'd rather apprentice them to a trade than have them brought up in
the sort of home yours and Choupette's is going to be."

There was a moment's silence.  Suddenly Choupette picked up her
glass, dashed the contents at Henry and collapsed on the settee,
passionately sobbing.

Henry dabbed his face with his handkerchief and stood up.

"I was afraid of that," he said, "but I think I've made my position
clear."

He went up to his room and lay down on the bed.  In a thousand
wakeful hours during the past year he had fought over in his mind
the problem of keeping his boys without taking those legal measures
against Choupette that he could not bring himself to take.  He knew
that she wanted the children only because without them she would be
suspect, even déclassée, to her family in France; but with that
quality of detachment peculiar to old stock, Henry recognized this
as a perfectly legitimate motive.  Furthermore, no public scandal
must touch the mother of his sons--it was this that had rendered
his challenge so ineffectual this afternoon.

When difficulties became insurmountable, inevitable, Henry sought
surcease in exercise.  For three years, swimming had been a sort of
refuge, and he turned to it as one man to music or another to
drink.  There was a point when he would resolutely stop thinking
and go to the Virginia coast for a week to wash his mind in the
water.  Far out past the breakers he could survey the green-and-
brown line of the Old Dominion with the pleasant impersonality of a
porpoise.  The burden of his wretched marriage fell away with the
buoyant tumble of his body among the swells, and he would begin to
move in a child's dream of space.  Sometimes remembered playmates
of his youth swam with him; sometimes, with his two sons beside
him, he seemed to be setting off along the bright pathway to the
moon.  Americans, he liked to say, should be born with fins, and
perhaps they were--perhaps money was a form of fin.  In England
property begot a strong place sense, but Americans, restless and
with shallow roots, needed fins and wings.  There was even a
recurrent idea in America about an education that would leave out
history and the past, that should be a sort of equipment for aerial
adventure, weighed down by none of the stowaways of inheritance or
tradition.

Thinking of this in the water the next afternoon brought Henry's
mind to the children; he turned and at a slow trudgen started back
toward shore.  Out of condition, he rested, panting, at the raft,
and glancing up, he saw familiar eyes.  In a moment he was talking
with the girl he had tried to rescue four years ago.

He was overjoyed.  He had not realized how vividly he remembered
her.  She was a Virginian--he might have guessed it abroad--the
laziness, the apparent casualness that masked an unfailing courtesy
and attention; a good form devoid of forms was based on kindness
and consideration.  Hearing her name for the first time, he
recognized it--an Eastern Shore name, "good" as his own.

Lying in the sun, they talked like old friends, not about races and
manners and the things that Henry brooded over Choupette, but
rather as if they naturally agreed about those things; they talked
about what they liked themselves and about what was fun.  She
showed him a sitting-down, standing-up dive from the high
springboard, and he emulated her inexpertly--that was fun.  They
talked about eating soft-shelled crabs, and she told him how,
because of the curious acoustics of the water, one could lie here
and be diverted by conversations on the hotel porch.  They tried it
and heard two ladies over their tea say:

"Now, at the Lido--"

"Now, at Asbury Park--"

"Oh, my dear, he just scratched and scratched all night; he just
scratched and scratched--"

"My dear, at Deauville--"

"--scratched and scratched all night."

After a while the sea got to be that very blue color of four
o'clock, and the girl told him how, at nineteen, she had been
divorced from a Spaniard who locked her in the hotel suite when he
went out at night.

"It was one of those things," she said lightly.  "But speaking more
cheerfully, how's your beautiful wife?  And the boys--did they
learn to float?  Why can't you all dine with me tonight?"

"I'm afraid I won't be able to," he said, after a moment's
hesitation.  He must do nothing, however trivial, to furnish
Choupette weapons, and with a feeling of disgust, it occurred
to him that he was possibly being watched this afternoon.
Nevertheless, he was glad of his caution when she unexpectedly
arrived at the hotel for dinner that night.

After the boys had gone to bed, they faced each other over coffee
on the hotel veranda.

"Will you kindly explain why I'm not entitled to a half share in my
own children?" Choupette began.  "It is not like you to be
vindictive, Henry."

It was hard for Henry to explain.  He told her again that she could
have the children when she wanted them, but that he must exercise
entire control over them because of certain old-fashioned
convictions--watching her face grow harder, minute by minute, he
saw there was no use, and broke off.  She made a scornful sound.

"I wanted to give you a chance to be reasonable before Charles
arrives."

Henry sat up.  "Is he coming here this evening?"

"Happily.  And I think perhaps your selfishness is going to have a
jolt, Henry.  You're not dealing with a woman now."

When Wiese walked out on the porch an hour later, Henry saw that
his pale lips were like chalk; there was a deep flush on his
forehead and hard confidence in his eyes.  He was cleared for
action and he wasted no time.  "We've got something to say to each
other, suh, and since I've got a motorboat here, perhaps that'd be
the quietest place to say it."

Henry nodded coolly; five minutes later the three of them were
headed out into Hampton Roads on the wide fairway of the moonlight.
It was a tranquil evening, and half a mile from shore Wiese cut
down the engine to a mild throbbing, so that they seemed to drift
without will or direction through the bright water.  His voice
broke the stillness abruptly:

"Marston, I'm going to talk to you straight from the shoulder.  I
love Choupette and I'm not apologizing for it.  These things have
happened before in this world.  I guess you understand that.  The
only difficulty is this matter of the custody of Choupette's
children.  You seem determined to try and take them away from the
mother that bore them and raised them"--Wiese's words became more
clearly articulated, as if they came from a wider mouth--"but you
left one thing out of your calculations, and that's me.  Do you
happen to realize that at this moment I'm one of the richest men in
Virginia?"

"I've heard as much."

"Well, money is power, Marston.  I repeat, suh, money is power."

"I've heard that too.  In fact, you're a bore, Wiese."  Even by the
moon Henry could see the crimson deepen on his brow.

"You'll hear it again, suh.  Yesterday you took us by surprise and
I was unprepared for your brutality to Choupette.  But this morning
I received a letter from Paris that puts the matter in a new light.
It is a statement by a specialist in mental diseases, declaring you
to be of unsound mind, and unfit to have the custody of children.
The specialist is the one who attended you in your nervous
breakdown four years ago."

Henry laughed incredulously, and looked at Choupette, half
expecting her to laugh, too, but she had turned her face away,
breathing quickly through parted lips.  Suddenly he realized that
Wiese was telling the truth--that by some extraordinary bribe he
had obtained such a document and fully intended to use it.

For a moment Henry reeled as if from a material blow.  He listened
to his own voice saying, "That's the most ridiculous thing I ever
heard," and to Wiese's answer:  "They don't always tell people when
they have mental troubles."

Suddenly Henry wanted to laugh, and the terrible instant when he
had wondered if there could be some shred of truth in the
allegation passed.  He turned to Choupette, but again she avoided
his eyes.

"How could you, Choupette?"

"I want my children," she began, but Wiese broke in quickly:

"If you'd been halfway fair, Marston, we wouldn't have resorted to
this step."

"Are you trying to pretend you arranged this scurvy trick since
yesterday afternoon?"

"I believe in being prepared, but if you had been reasonable; in
fact, if you will be reasonable, this opinion needn't be used."
His voice became suddenly almost paternal, almost kind:  "Be wise,
Marston.  On your side there's an obstinate prejudice; on mine
there are forty million dollars.  Don't fool yourself.  Let me
repeat, Marston, that money is power.  You were abroad so long that
perhaps you're inclined to forget that fact.  Money made this
country, built its great and glorious cities, created its
industries, covered it with an iron network of railroads.  It's
money that harnesses the forces of Nature, creates the machine and
makes it go when money says go, and stop when money says stop."

As though interpreting this as a command, the engine gave forth a
sudden hoarse sound and came to rest.

"What is it?" demanded Choupette.

"It's nothing."  Wiese pressed the self-starter with his foot.  "I
repeat, Marston, that money--The battery is dry.  One minute while
I spin the wheel."

He spun it for the best part of fifteen minutes while the boat
meandered about in a placid little circle.

"Choupette, open that drawer behind you and see if there isn't a
rocket."

A touch of panic had crept into her voice when she answered that
there was no rocket.  Wiese eyed the shore tentatively.

"There's no use in yelling; we must be half a mile out.  We'll just
have to wait here until someone comes along."

"We won't wait here," Henry remarked.

"Why not?"

"We're moving toward the bay.  Can't you tell?  We're moving out
with the tide."

"That's impossible!" said Choupette sharply.

"Look at those two lights on shore--one passing the other now.  Do
you see?"

"Do something!" she wailed, and then, in a burst of French:  "Ah,
c'est épouvantable!  N'est-ce pas qu'il y a quelque chose qu'on
petit faire?"

The tide was running fast now, and the boat was drifting down the
Roads with it toward the sea.  The vague blots of two ships passed
them, but at a distance, and there was no answer to their hail.
Against the western sky a lighthouse blinked, but it was impossible
to guess how near to it they would pass.

"It looks as if all our difficulties would be solved for us," Henry
said.

"What difficulties?" Choupette demanded.  "Do you mean there's
nothing to be done?  Can you sit there and just float away like
this?"

"It may be easier on the children, after all."  He winced as
Choupette began to sob bitterly, but he said nothing.  A ghostly
idea was taking shape in his mind.

"Look here, Marston.  Can you swim?" demanded Wiese, frowning.

"Yes, but Choupette can't."

"I can't either--I didn't mean that.  If you could swim in and get
to a telephone, the coast-guard people would send for us."

Henry surveyed the dark, receding shore.

"It's too far," he said.

"You can try!" said Choupette.

Henry shook his head.

"Too risky.  Besides, there's an outside chance that we'll be
picked up."

The lighthouse passed them, far to the left and out of earshot.
Another one, the last, loomed up half a mile away.

"We might drift to France like that man Gerbault," Henry remarked.
"But then, of course, we'd be expatriates--and Wiese wouldn't like
that, would you, Wiese?"

Wiese, fussing frantically with the engine, looked up.

"See what you can do with this," he said.

"I don't know anything about mechanics," Henry answered.  "Besides,
this solution of our difficulties grows on me.  Just suppose you
were dirty dog enough to use that statement and got the children
because of it--in that case I wouldn't have much impetus to go on
living.  We're all failures--I as head of my household, Choupette
as a wife and a mother, and you, Wiese, as a human being.  It's
just as well that we go out of life together."

"This is no time for a speech, Marston."

"Oh, yes, it's a fine time.  How about a little more house-organ
oratory about money being power?"

Choupette sat rigid in the bow; Wiese stood over the engine, biting
nervously at his lips.

"We're not going to pass that lighthouse very close."  An idea
suddenly occurred to him.  "Couldn't you swim to that, Marston?"

"Of course he could!" Choupette cried.

Henry looked at it tentatively.

"I might.  But I won't."

"You've got to!"

Again he flinched at Choupette's weeping; simultaneously he saw the
time had come.

"Everything depends on one small point," he said rapidly.  "Wiese,
have you got a fountain pen?"

"Yes.  What for?"

"If you'll write and sign about two hundred words at my dictation,
I'll swim to the lighthouse and get help.  Otherwise, so help me
God, we'll drift out to sea!  And you better decide in about one
minute."

"Oh, anything!" Choupette broke out frantically.  "Do what he says,
Charles; he means it.  He always means what he says.  Oh, please
don't wait!"

"I'll do what you want"--Wiese's voice was shaking--"only, for
God's sake, go on.  What is it you want--an agreement about the
children?  I'll give you my personal word of honor--"

"There's no time for humor," said Henry savagely.  "Take this piece
of paper and write."

The two pages that Wiese wrote at Henry's dictation relinquished
all lien on the children thence and forever for himself and
Choupette.  When they had affixed trembling signatures Wiese cried:

"Now go, for God's sake, before it's too late!"

"Just one thing more:  The certificate from the doctor."

"I haven't it here."

"You lie."

Wiese took it from his pocket.

"Write across the bottom that you paid so much for it, and sign
your name to that."

A minute later, stripped to his underwear, and with the papers in
an oiled-silk tobacco pouch suspended from his neck, Henry dived
from the side of the boat and struck out toward the light.

The waters leaped up at him for an instant, but after the first
shock it was all warm and friendly, and the small murmur of the
waves was an encouragement.  It was the longest swim he had ever
tried, and he was straight from the city, but the happiness in his
heart buoyed him up.  Safe now, and free.  Each stroke was stronger
for knowing that his two sons, sleeping back in the hotel, were
safe from what he dreaded.  Divorced from her own country,
Choupette had picked the things out of American life that pandered
best to her own self-indulgence.  That, backed by a court decree,
she should be permitted to hand on this preposterous moral farrago
to his sons was unendurable.  He would have lost them forever.

Turning on his back, he saw that already the motorboat was far
away, the blinding light was nearer.  He was very tired.  If one
let go--and, in the relaxation from strain, he felt an alarming
impulse to let go--one died very quickly and painlessly, and all
these problems of hate and bitterness disappeared.  But he felt the
fate of his sons in the oiled-silk pouch about his neck, and with a
convulsive effort he turned over again and concentrated all his
energies on his goal.

Twenty minutes later he stood shivering and dripping in the signal
room while it was broadcast out to the coast patrol that a launch
was drifting in the bay.

"There's not much danger without a storm," the keeper said.  "By
now they've probably struck a cross current from the river and
drifted into Peyton Harbor."

"Yes," said Henry, who had come to this coast for three summers.
"I knew that too."


IV


In October, Henry left his sons in school and embarked on the
Majestic for Europe.  He had come home as to a generous mother and
had been profusely given more than he asked--money, release from an
intolerable situation, and the fresh strength to fight for his own.
Watching the fading city, the fading shore, from the deck of the
Majestic, he had a sense of overwhelming gratitude and of gladness
that America was there, that under the ugly débris of industry the
rich land still pushed up, incorrigibly lavish and fertile, and
that in the heart of the leaderless people the old generosities and
devotions fought on, breaking out sometimes in fanaticism and
excess, but indomitable and undefeated.  There was a lost
generation in the saddle at the moment, but it seemed to him that
the men coming on, the men of the war, were better; and all his old
feeling that America was a bizarre accident, a sort of historical
sport, had gone forever.  The best of America was the best of the
world.

Going down to the purser's office, he waited until a fellow
passenger was through at the window.  When she turned, they both
started, and he saw it was the girl.

"Oh, hello!" she cried.  "I'm glad you're going!  I was just asking
when the pool opened.  The great thing about this ship is that you
can always get a swim."

"Why do you like to swim?" he demanded.

"You always ask me that."  She laughed.

"Perhaps you'd tell me if we had dinner together tonight."

But when, in a moment, he left her he knew that she could never
tell him--she or another.  France was a land, England was a people,
but America, having about it still that quality of the idea, was
harder to utter--it was the graves at Shiloh and the tired, drawn,
nervous faces of its great men, and the country boys dying in the
Argonne for a phrase that was empty before their bodies withered.
It was a willingness of the heart.






THREE HOURS BETWEEN PLANES


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Esquire (July 1941)



It was a wild chance but Donald was in the mood, healthy and bored,
with a sense of tiresome duty done.  He was now rewarding himself.
Maybe.

When the plane landed he stepped out into a mid-western summer
night and headed for the isolated pueblo airport, conventionalized
as an old red 'railway depot'.  He did not know whether she was
alive, or living in this town, or what was her present name.  With
mounting excitement he looked through the phone book for her father
who might be dead too, somewhere in these twenty years.

No.  Judge Harmon Holmes--Hillside 3194.

A woman's amused voice answered his inquiry for Miss Nancy Holmes.

'Nancy is Mrs Walter Gifford now.  Who is this?'

But Donald hung up without answering.  He had found out what he
wanted to know and had only three hours.  He did not remember any
Walter Gifford and there was another suspended moment while he
scanned the phone book.  She might have married out of town.

No.  Walter Gifford--Hillside 1191.  Blood flowed back into his
fingertips.

'Hello?'

'Hello.  Is Mrs Gifford there--this is an old friend of hers.'

'This is Mrs Gifford.'

He remembered, or thought he remembered, the funny magic in the
voice.

'This is Donald Plant.  I haven't seen you since I was twelve years
old.'

'Oh-h-h!'  The note was utterly surprised, very polite, but he
could distinguish in it neither joy nor certain recognition.

'--Donald!' added the voice.  This time there was something more in
it than struggling memory.

'. . . when did you come back to town?'  Then cordially, 'Where ARE
you?'

'I'm out at the airport--for just a few hours.'

'Well, come up and see me.'

'Sure you're not just going to bed?'

'Heavens, no!' she exclaimed.  'I was sitting here--having a
highball by myself.  Just tell your taxi man . . .'

On his way Donald analysed the conversation.  His words 'at the
airport' established that he had retained his position in the upper
bourgeoisie.  Nancy's aloneness might indicate that she had matured
into an unattractive woman without friends.  Her husband might be
either away or in bed.  And--because she was always ten years old
in his dreams--the highball shocked him.  But he adjusted himself
with a smile--she was very close to thirty.

At the end of a curved drive he saw a dark-haired little beauty
standing against the lighted door, a glass in her hand.  Startled
by her final materialization, Donald got out of the cab, saying:

'Mrs Gifford?'

She turned on the porch light and stared at him, wide-eyed and
tentative.  A smile broke through the puzzled expression.

'Donald--it is you--we all change so.  Oh, this is remarkable!'

As they walked inside, their voices jingled the words 'all these
years', and Donald felt a sinking in his stomach.  This derived in
part from a vision of their last meeting--when she rode past him on
a bicycle, cutting him dead--and in part from fear lest they have
nothing to say.  It was like a college reunion--but there the
failure to find the past was disguised by the hurried boisterous
occasion.  Aghast, he realized that this might be a long and empty
hour.  He plunged in desperately.

'You always were a lovely person.  But I'm a little shocked to find
you as beautiful as you are.'

It worked.  The immediate recognition of their changed state, the
bold compliment, made them interesting strangers instead of
fumbling childhood friends.

'Have a highball?' she asked.  'No?  Please don't think I've become
a secret drinker, but this was a blue night.  I expected my husband
but he wired he'd be two days longer.  He's very nice, Donald, and
very attractive.  Rather your type and colouring.'  She hesitated,
'--and I think he's interested in someone in New York--and I don't
know.'

'After seeing you it sounds impossible,' he assured her.  'I was
married for six years, and there was a time I tortured myself that
way.  Then one day I just put jealousy out of my life forever.
After my wife died I was very glad of that.  It left a very rich
memory--nothing marred or spoiled or hard to think over.'

She looked at him attentively, then sympathetically as he spoke.

'I'm very sorry,' she said.  And after a proper moment,' You've
changed a lot.  Turn your head.  I remember father saying, "That
boy has a brain."'

'You probably argued against it.'

'I was impressed.  Up to then I thought everybody had a brain.
That's why it sticks in my mind.'

'What else sticks in your mind?' he asked smiling.

Suddenly Nancy got up and walked quickly a little away.

'Ah, now,' she reproached him.  'That isn't fair!  I suppose I was
a naughty girl.'

'You were not,' he said stoutly.  'And I WILL have a drink now.'

As she poured it, her face still turned from him, he continued:

'Do you think you were the only little girl who was ever kissed?'

'Do you like the subject?' she demanded.  Her momentary irritation
melted and she said:  'What the hell!  We DID have fun.  Like in
the song.'

'On the sleigh ride.'

'Yes--and somebody's picnic--Trudy James's.  And at Frontenac that--
those summers.'

It was the sleigh ride he remembered most and kissing her cool
cheeks in the straw in one corner while she laughed up at the cold
white stars.  The couple next to them had their backs turned and he
kissed her little neck and her ears and never her lips.

'And the Macks' party where they played post office and I couldn't
go because I had the mumps,' he said.

'I don't remember that.'

'Oh, you were there.  And you were kissed and I was crazy with
jealousy like I never have been since.'

'Funny I don't remember.  Maybe I wanted to forget.'

'But why?' he asked in amusement.  'We were two perfectly innocent
kids.  Nancy, whenever I talked to my wife about the past, I told
her you were the girl I loved almost as much as I loved her.  But I
think I really loved you just as much.  When we moved out of town I
carried you like a cannon ball in my insides.'

'Were you THAT much--stirred up?'

'My God, yes!  I--'  He suddenly realized that they were standing
just two feet from each other, that he was talking as if he loved
her in the present, that she was looking up at him with her lips
half-parted and a clouded look in her eyes.

'Go on,' she said, 'I'm ashamed to say--I like it.  I didn't know
you were so upset THEN.  I thought it was ME who was upset.'

'You!' he exclaimed.  'Don't you remember throwing me over at the
drugstore.'  He laughed.  'You stuck out your tongue at me.'

'I don't remember at all.  It seemed to me you did the throwing
over.'  Her hand fell lightly, almost consolingly on his arm.
'I've got a photograph book upstairs I haven't looked at for years.
I'll dig it out.'

Donald sat for five minutes with two thoughts--first the hopeless
impossibility of reconciling what different people remembered about
the same event--and secondly that in a frightening way Nancy moved
him as a woman as she had moved him as a child.  Half an hour had
developed an emotion that he had not known since the death of his
wife--that he had never hoped to know again.

Side by side on a couch they opened the book between them.  Nancy
looked at him, smiling and very happy.

'Oh, this is SUCH fun,' she said.  'Such fun that you're so nice,
that you remember me so--beautifully.  Let me tell you--I wish I'd
known it then!  After you'd gone I hated you.'

'What a pity,' he said gently.

'But not now,' she reassured him, and then impulsively, 'Kiss and
make up--'

'. . . that isn't being a good wife,' she said after a minute.  'I
really don't think I've kissed two men since I was married.'

He was excited--but most of all confused.  Had he kissed Nancy? or
a memory? or this lovely trembly stranger who looked away from him
quickly and turned a page of the book?

'Wait!' he said.  'I don't think I could SEE a picture for a few
seconds.'

'We won't do it again.  I don't feel so very calm myself.'

Donald said one of those trivial things that cover so much ground.

'Wouldn't it be awful if we fell in love again?'

'Stop it!'  She laughed, but very breathlessly.  'It's all over.
It was a moment.  A moment I'll have to forget.'

'Don't tell your husband.'

'Why not?  Usually I tell him everything.'

'It'll hurt him.  Don't ever tell a man such things.'

'All right I won't.'

'Kiss me once more,' he said inconsistently, but Nancy had turned a
page and was pointing eagerly at a picture.

'Here's you,' she cried.  'Right away!'

He looked.  It was a little boy in shorts standing on a pier with a
sailboat in the background.

'I remember--' she laughed triumphantly, '--the very day it was
taken.  Kitty took it and I stole it from her.'

For a moment Donald failed to recognize himself in the photo--then,
bending closer--he failed utterly to recognize himself.

'That's not me,' he said.

'Oh yes.  It was at Frontenac--the summer we--we used to go to the
cave.'

'What cave?  I was only three days in Frontenac.'  Again he
strained his eyes at the slightly yellowed picture.  'And that
isn't me.  That's Donald Bowers.  We did look rather alike.'

Now she was staring at him--leaning back, seeming to lift away from
him.

'But you're Donald Bowers!' she exclaimed; her voice rose a little.
'No, you're not.  You're Donald PLANT.'

'I told you on the phone.'

She was on her feet--her face faintly horrified.

'Plant!  Bowers!  I must be crazy.  Or it was that drink?  I was
mixed up a little when I first saw you.  Look here!  What have I
told you?'

He tried for a monkish calm as he turned a page of the book.

'Nothing at all,' he said.  Pictures that did not include him
formed and re-formed before his eyes--Frontenac--a cave--Donald
Bowers--'You threw ME over!'

Nancy spoke from the other side of the room.

'You'll never tell this story,' she said.  'Stories have a way of
getting around.'

'There isn't any story,' he hesitated.  But he thought:  So she was
a bad little girl.

And now suddenly he was filled with wild raging jealousy of little
Donald Bowers--he who had banished jealousy from his life forever.
In the five steps he took across the room he crushed out twenty
years and the existence of Walter Gifford with his stride.

'Kiss me again, Nancy,' he said, sinking to one knee beside her
chair, putting his hand upon her shoulder.  But Nancy strained
away.

'You said you had to catch a plane.'

'It's nothing.  I can miss it.  It's of no importance.'

'Please go,' she said in a cool voice.  'And please try to imagine
how I feel.'

'But you act as if you don't remember me,' he cried, '--as if you
don't remember Donald PLANT!'

'I do.  I remember you too . . .  But it was all so long ago.'  Her
voice grew hard again.  'The taxi number is Crestwood 8484.'

On his way to the airport Donald shook his head from side to side.
He was completely himself now but he could not digest the
experience.  Only as the plane roared up into the dark sky and its
passengers became a different entity from the corporate world below
did he draw a parallel from the fact of its flight.  For five
blinding minutes he had lived like a madman in two worlds at once.
He had been a boy of twelve and a man of thirty-two, indissolubly
and helplessly commingled.

Donald had lost a good deal, too, in those hours between the planes--
but since the second half of life is a long process of getting rid
of things, that part of the experience probably didn't matter.





TWO WRONGS


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (18 January 1930)



"Look at those shoes," said Bill--"twenty-eight dollars."

Mr. Brancusi looked.  "Purty."

"Made to order."

"I knew you were a great swell.  You didn't get me up here to show
me those shoes, did you?"

"I am not a great swell.  Who said I was a great swell?" demanded
Bill.  "Just because I've got more education than most people in
show business."

"And then, you know, you're a handsome young fellow," said Brancusi
dryly.

"Sure I am--compared to you anyhow.  The girls think I must be an
actor, till they find out. . . .  Got a cigarette?  What's more, I
look like a man--which is more than most of these pretty boys round
Times Square do."

"Good-looking.  Gentleman.  Good shoes.  Shot with luck."

"You're wrong there," objected Bill.  "Brains.  Three years--nine
shows--four big hits--only one flop.  Where do you see any luck in
that?"

A little bored, Brancusi just gazed.  What he would have seen--had
he not made his eyes opaque and taken to thinking about something
else--was a fresh-faced young Irishman exuding aggressiveness and
self-confidence until the air of his office was thick with it.
Presently, Brancusi knew, Bill would hear the sound of his own
voice and be ashamed and retire into his other humor--the quietly
superior, sensitive one, the patron of the arts, modelled on the
intellectuals of the Theatre Guild.  Bill McChesney had not quite
decided between the two, such blends are seldom complete before
thirty.

"Take Ames, take Hopkins, take Harris--take any of them," Bill
insisted.  "What have they got on me?  What's the matter?  Do you
want a drink?"--seeing Brancusi's glance wander toward the cabinet
on the opposite wall.

"I never drink in the morning.  I just wondered who was it keeps on
knocking.  You ought to make it stop it.  I get a nervous fidgets,
kind of half crazy, with that kind of thing."

Bill went quickly to the door and threw it open.

"Nobody," he said . . .  "Hello!  What do you want?"

"Oh, I'm so sorry," a voice answered; "I'm terribly sorry.  I got
so excited and I didn't realize I had this pencil in my hand."

"What is it you want?"

"I want to see you, and the clerk said you were busy.  I have a
letter for you from Alan Rogers, the playwright--and I wanted to
give it to you personally."

"I'm busy," said Bill.  "See Mr. Cadorna."

"I did, but he wasn't very encouraging, and Mr. Rogers said--"

Brancusi, edging over restlessly, took a quick look at her.  She
was very young, with beautiful red hair, and more character in her
face than her chatter would indicate; it did not occur to Mr.
Brancusi that this was due to her origin in Delaney, South
Carolina.

"What shall I do?" she inquired, quietly laying her future in
Bill's hands.  "I had a letter to Mr. Rogers, and he just gave me
this one to you."

"Well, what do you want me to do--marry you?" exploded Bill.

"I'd like to get a part in one of your plays."

"Then sit down and wait.  I'm busy. . . .  Where's Miss Cohalan?"
He rang a bell, looked once more, crossly, at the girl and closed
the door of his office.  But during the interruption his other mood
had come over him, and he resumed his conversation with Brancusi in
the key of one who was hand in glove with Reinhardt for the
artistic future of the theater.

By 12:30 he had forgotten everything except that he was going to be
the greatest producer in the world and that he had an engagement to
tell Sol Lincoln about it at lunch.  Emerging from his office, he
looked expectantly at Miss Cohalan.

"Mr. Lincoln won't be able to meet you," she said.  "He jus 'is
minute called."

"Just this minute," repeated Bill, shocked.  "All right.  Just
cross him off that list for Thursday night."

Miss Cohalan drew a line on a sheet of paper before her.

"Mr. McChesney, now you haven't forgotten me, have you?"

He turned to the red-headed girl.

"No," he said vaguely, and then to Miss Cohalan:  "That's all
right; ask him for Thursday anyhow.  To hell with him."

He did not want to lunch alone.  He did not like to do anything
alone now, because contacts were too much fun when one had
prominence and power.

"If you would just let me talk to you two minutes--" she began.

"Afraid I can't now."  Suddenly he realized that she was the most
beautiful person he had ever seen in his life.

He stared at her.

"Mr. Rogers told me--"

"Come and have a spot of lunch with me," he said, and then, with an
air of great hurry, he gave Miss Cohalan some quick and
contradictory instructions and held open the door.

They stood on Forty-second Street and he breathed his pre-empted
air--there is only enough air there for a few people at a time.  It
was November and the first exhilarating rush of the season was
over, but he could look east and see the electric sign of one of
his plays, and west and see another.  Around the corner was the one
he had put on with Brancusi--the last time he would produce
anything except alone.

They went to the Bedford, where there was a to-do of waiters and
captains as he came in.

"This is ver tractive restaurant," she said, impressed and on
company behavior.

"This is hams' paradise."  He nodded to several people.  "Hello,
Jimmy--Bill. . . .  Hello there, Jack. . . .  That's Jack
Dempsey. . . .  I don't eat here much.  I usually eat up at the
Harvard Club."

"Oh, did you go to Harvard?  I used to know--"

"Yes."  He hesitated; there were two versions about Harvard, and he
decided suddenly on the true one.  "Yes, and they had me down for a
hick there, but not any more.  About a week ago I was out on Long
Island at the Gouverneer Haights--very fashionable people--and a
couple of Gold Coast boys that never knew I was alive up in
Cambridge began pulling this 'Hello, Bill, old boy' on me."

He hesitated and suddenly decided to leave the story there.

"What do you want--a job?" he demanded.  He remembered suddenly
that she had holes in her stockings.  Holes in stockings always
moved him, softened him.

"Yes, or else I've got to go home," she said.  "I want to be a
dancer--you know, Russian ballet.  But the lessons cost so much, so
I've got to get a job.  I thought it'd give me stage presence
anyhow."

"Hoofer, eh?"

"Oh, no, serious."

"Well, Pavlova's a hoofer, isn't she?"

"Oh, no."  She was shocked at this profanity, but after a moment
she continued:  "I took with Miss Campbell--Georgia Berriman
Campbell--back home--maybe you know her.  She took from Ned
Wayburn, and she's really wonderful.  She--"

"Yeah?" he said abstractedly.  "Well, it's a tough business--
casting agencies bursting with people that can all do anything,
till I give them a try.  How old are you?"

"Eighteen."

"I'm twenty-six.  Came here four years ago without a cent."

"My!"

"I could quit now and be comfortable the rest of my life."

"My!"

"Going to take a year off next year--get married. . . .  Ever hear
of Irene Rikker?"

"I should say!  She's about my favorite of all."

"We're engaged."

"My!"

When they went out into Times Square after a while he said
carelessly, "What are you doing now?"

"Why, I'm trying to get a job."

"I mean right this minute."

"Why, nothing."

"Do you want to come up to my apartment on Forty-sixth Street and
have some coffee?"

Their eyes met, and Emmy Pinkard made up her mind she could take
care of herself.

It was a great bright studio apartment with a ten-foot divan, and
after she had coffee and he a highball, his arm dropped round her
shoulder.

"Why should I kiss you?" she demanded.  "I hardly know you, and
besides, you're engaged to somebody else."

"Oh, that!  She doesn't care."

"No, really!"

"You're a good girl."

"Well, I'm certainly not an idiot."

"All right, go on being a good girl."

She stood up, but lingered a minute, very fresh and cool, and not
upset at all.

"I suppose this means you won't give me a job?" she asked
pleasantly.

He was already thinking about something else--about an interview
and a rehearsal--but now he looked at her again and saw that she
still had holes in her stockings.  He telephoned:

"Joe, this is the Fresh Boy. . . .  You didn't think I knew you
called me that, did you? . . .  It's all right. . . .  Say, have
you got those three girls for the party scene?  Well, listen; save
one for a Southern kid I'm sending around today."

He looked at her jauntily, conscious of being such a good fellow.

"Well, I don't know how to thank you.  And Mr. Rogers," she added
audaciously.  "Good-by, Mr. McChesney."

He disdained to answer.


II


During rehearsal he used to come around a great deal and stand
watching with a wise expression, as if he knew everything in
people's minds; but actually he was in a haze about his own good
fortune and didn't see much and didn't for the moment care.  He
spent most of his week-ends on Long Island with the fashionable
people who had "taken him up."  When Brancusi referred to him as
the "big social butterfly," he would answer, "Well, what about it?
Didn't I go to Harvard?  You think they found me in a Grand Street
apple cart, like you?"  He was well liked among his new friends for
his good looks and good nature, as well as his success.

His engagement to Irene Rikker was the most unsatisfactory thing in
his life; they were tired of each other but unwilling to put an end
to it.  Just as, often, the two richest young people in a town are
drawn together by the fact, so Bill McChesney and Irene Rikker,
borne side by side on waves of triumph, could not spare each
other's nice appreciation of what was due such success.
Nevertheless, they indulged in fiercer and more frequent quarrels,
and the end was approaching.  It was embodied in one Frank
Llewellen, a big, fine-looking actor playing opposite Irene.
Seeing the situation at once, Bill became bitterly humorous about
it; from the second week of rehearsals there was tension in the
air.

Meanwhile Emmy Pinkard, with enough money for crackers and milk,
and a friend who took her out to dinner, was being happy.  Her
friend, Easton Hughes from Delaney, was studying at Columbia to be
a dentist.  He sometimes brought along other lonesome young men
studying to be dentists, and at the price, if it can be called
that, of a few casual kisses in taxicabs, Emmy dined when hungry.
One afternoon she introduced Easton to Bill McChesney at the stage
door, and afterward Bill made his facetious jealousy the basis of
their relationship.

"I see that dental number has been slipping it over on me again.
Well, don't let him give you any laughing gas is my advice."

Though their encounters were few, they always looked at each other.
When Bill looked at her he stared for an instant as if he had not
seen her before, and then remembered suddenly that she was to be
teased.  When she looked at him she saw many things--a bright day
outside, with great crowds of people hurrying through the streets;
a very good new limousine that waited at the curb for two people
with very good new clothes, who got in and went somewhere that was
just like New York, only away, and more fun there.  Many times she
had wished she had kissed him, but just as many times she was glad
she hadn't; since, as the weeks passed, he grew less romantic, tied
up, like the rest of them, to the play's laborious evolution.

They were opening in Atlantic City.  A sudden moodiness apparent to
everyone, came over Bill.  He was short with the director and
sarcastic with the actors.  This, it was rumored, was because Irene
Rikker had come down with Frank Llewellen on a different train.
Sitting beside the author on the night of the dress rehearsal, he
was an almost sinister figure in the twilight of the auditorium;
but he said nothing until the end of the second act, when, with
Llewellen and Irene Rikker on the stage alone, he suddenly called:

"We'll go over that again--and cut out the mush!"

Llewellen came down to the footlights.

"What do you mean--cut out the mush?" he inquired.  "Those are the
lines, aren't they?"

"You know what I mean--stick to business."

"I don't know what you mean."

Bill stood up.  "I mean all that damn whispering."

"There wasn't any whispering.  I simply asked--"

"That'll do--take it over."

Llewellen turned away furiously and was about to proceed, when Bill
added audibly:  "Even a ham has got to do his stuff."

Llewellen whipped about.  "I don't have to stand that kind of talk,
Mr. McChesney."

"Why not?  You're a ham, aren't you?  When did you get ashamed of
being a ham?  I'm putting on this play and I want you to stick to
your stuff."  Bill got up and walked down the aisle.  "And when you
don't do it, I'm going to call you just like anybody else."

"Well, you watch out for your tone of voice--"

"What'll you do about it?"

Llewellen jumped down into the orchestra pit.

"I'm not taking anything from you!" he shouted.

Irene Rikker called to them from the stage, "For heaven's sake, are
you two crazy?"  And then Llewellen swung at him, one short, mighty
blow.  Bill pitched back across a row of seats, fell through one,
splintering it, and lay wedged there.  There was a moment's wild
confusion, then people holding Llewellen, then the author, with a
white face, pulling Bill up, and the stage manager crying:  "Shall
I kill him, chief?  Shall I break his fat face?" and Llewellen
panting and Irene Rikker frightened.

"Get back there!" Bill cried, holding a handkerchief to his face
and teetering in the author's supporting arms.  "Everybody get
back!  Take that scene again, and no talk!  Get back, Llewellen!"

Before they realized it they were all back on the stage, Irene
pulling Llewellen's arm and talking to him fast.  Someone put on
the auditorium lights full and then dimmed them again hurriedly.
When Emmy came out presently for her scene, she saw in a quick
glance that Bill was sitting with a whole mask of handkerchiefs
over his bleeding face.  She hated Llewellen and was afraid that
presently they would break up and go back to New York.  But Bill
had saved the show from his own folly, since for Llewellen to take
the further initiative of quitting would hurt his professional
standing.  The act ended and the next one began without an
interval.  When it was over, Bill was gone.

Next night, during the performance, he sat on a chair in the wings
in view of everyone coming on or off.  His face was swollen and
bruised, but he neglected to seem conscious of the fact and there
were no comments.  Once he went around in front, and when he
returned, word leaked out that two of the New York agencies were
making big buys.  He had a hit--they all had a hit.

At the sight of him to whom Emmy felt they all owed so much, a
great wave of gratitude swept over her.  She went up and thanked
him.

"I'm a good picker, red-head," he agreed grimly.

"Thank you for picking me."

And suddenly Emmy was moved to a rash remark.

"You've hurt your face so badly!" she exclaimed.  "Oh, I think it
was so brave of you not to let everything go to pieces last night."

He looked at her hard for a moment and then an ironic smile tried
unsuccessfully to settle on his swollen face.

"Do you admire me, baby?"

"Yes."

"Even when I fell in the seats, did you admire me?"

"You got control of everything so quick."

"That's loyalty for you.  You found something to admire in that
fool mess."

And her happiness bubbled up into, "Anyhow, you behaved just
wonderfully."  She looked so fresh and young that Bill, who had had
a wretched day, wanted to rest his swollen cheek against her cheek.

He took both the bruise and the desire with him to New York next
morning; the bruise faded, but the desire remained.  And when they
opened in the city, no sooner did he see other men begin to crowd
around her beauty than she became this play for him, this success,
the thing that he came to see when he came to the theater.  After a
good run it closed just as he was drinking too much and needed
someone on the gray days of reaction.  They were married suddenly
in Connecticut, early in June.


III


Two men sat in the Savoy Grill in London, waiting for the Fourth of
July.  It was already late in May.

"Is he a nice guy?" asked Hubbel.

"Very nice," answered Brancusi; "very nice, very handsome, very
popular."  After a moment, he added:  "I want to get him to come
home."

"That's what I don't get about him," said Hubbel.  "Show business
over here is nothing compared to home.  What does he want to stay
here for?"

"He goes around with a lot of dukes and ladies."

"Oh?"

"Last week when I met him he was with three ladies--Lady this, Lady
that, Lady the other thing."

"I thought he was married."

"Married three years," said Brancusi, "got a fine child, going to
have another."

He broke off as McChesney came in, his very American face staring
about boldly over the collar of a box-shouldered topcoat.

"Hello, Mac; meet my friend Mr. Hubbel."

"J'doo," said Bill.  He sat down, continuing to stare around the
bar to see who was present.  After a few minutes Hubbel left, and
Bill asked:

"Who's that bird?"

"He's only been here a month.  He ain't got a title yet.  You been
here six months, remember."

Bill grinned.

"You think I'm high-hat, don't you?  Well, I'm not kidding myself
anyhow.  I like it; it gets me.  I'd like to be the Marquis of
McChesney."

"Maybe you can drink yourself into it," suggested Brancusi.

"Shut your trap.  Who said I was drinking?  Is that what they say
now?  Look here; if you can tell me any American manager in the
history of the theater who's had the success that I've had in
London in less than eight months, I'll go back to America with you
tomorrow.  If you'll just tell me--"

"It was with your old shows.  You had two flops in New York."

Bill stood up, his face hardening.

"Who do you think you are?" he demanded.  "Did you come over here
to talk to me like that?"

"Don't get sore now, Bill.  I just want you to come back.  I'd say
anything for that.  Put over three seasons like you had in '22 and
'23, and you're fixed for life."

"New York makes me sick," said Bill moodily.  "One minute you're a
king; then you have two flops, they go around saying you're on the
toboggan."

Brancusi shook his head.

"That wasn't why they said it.  It was because you had that quarrel
with Aronstael, your best friend."

"Friend hell!"

"Your best friend in business anyhow.  Then--"

"I don't want to talk about it."  He looked at his watch.  "Look
here; Emmy's feeling bad so I'm afraid I can't have dinner with you
tonight.  Come around to the office before you sail."

Five minutes later, standing by the cigar counter, Brancusi saw
Bill enter the Savoy again and descend the steps that led to the
tea room.

"Grown to be a great diplomat," thought Brancusi; "he used to just
say when he had a date.  Going with these dukes and ladies is
polishing him up even more."

Perhaps he was a little hurt, though it was not typical of him to
be hurt.  At any rate he made a decision, then and there, that
McChesney was on the down grade; it was quite typical of him that
at that point he erased him from his mind forever.

There was no outward indication that Bill was on the down grade; a
hit at the New Strand, a hit at the Prince of Wales, and the weekly
grosses pouring in almost as well as they had two or three years
before in New York.  Certainly a man of action was justified in
changing his base.  And the man who, an hour later, turned into his
Hyde Park house for dinner had all the vitality of the late
twenties.  Emmy, very tired and clumsy, lay on a couch in the
upstairs sitting room.  He held her for a moment in his arms.

"Almost over now," he said.  "You're beautiful."

"Don't be ridiculous."

"It's true.  You're always beautiful.  I don't know why.  Perhaps
because you've got character, and that's always in your face, even
when you're like this."

She was pleased; she ran her hand through his hair.

"Character is the greatest thing in the world," he declared, "and
you've got more than anybody I know."

"Did you see Brancusi?"

"I did, the little louse!  I decided not to bring him home to
dinner."

"What was the matter?"

"Oh, just snooty--talking about my row with Aronstael, as if it was
my fault."

She hesitated, closed her mouth tight, and then said quietly, "You
got into that fight with Aronstael because you were drinking."

He rose impatiently.

"Are you going to start--"

"No, Bill, but you're drinking too much now.  You know you are."

Aware that she was right, he evaded the matter and they went in to
dinner.  On the glow of a bottle of claret he decided he would go
on the wagon tomorrow till after the baby was born.

"I always stop when I want, don't I?  I always do what I say.  You
never saw me quit yet."

"Never yet."

They had coffee together, and afterward he got up.

"Come back early," said Emmy.

"Oh, sure. . . .  What's the matter, baby?"

"I'm just crying.  Don't mind me.  Oh, go on; don't just stand
there like a big idiot."

"But I'm worried, naturally.  I don't like to see you cry."

"Oh, I don't know where you go in the evenings; I don't know who
you're with.  And that Lady Sybil Combrinck who kept phoning.  It's
all right, I suppose, but I wake up in the night and I feel so
alone, Bill.  Because we've always been together, haven't we, until
recently?"

"But we're together still. . . .  What's happened to you, Emmy?"

"I know--I'm just crazy.  We'd never let each other down, would we?
We never have--"

"Of course not."

"Come back early, or when you can."

He looked in for a minute at the Prince of Wales Theatre; then he
went into the hotel next door and called a number.

"I'd like to speak to her Ladyship.  Mr. McChesney calling."

It was some time before Lady Sybil answered:

"This is rather a surprise.  It's been several weeks since I've
been lucky enough to hear from you."

Her voice was flip as a whip and cold as automatic refrigeration,
in the mode grown familiar since British ladies took to piecing
themselves together out of literature.  It had fascinated Bill for
a while, but just for a while.  He had kept his head.

"I haven't had a minute," he explained easily.  "You're not sore,
are you?"

"I should scarcely say 'sore.'"

"I was afraid you might be; you didn't send me an invitation to
your party tonight.  My idea was that after we talked it all over
we agreed--"

"You talked a great deal," she said; "possibly a little too much."

Suddenly, to Bill's astonishment, she hung up.

"Going British on me," he thought.  "A little skit entitled The
Daughter of a Thousand Earls."

The snub roused him, the indifference revived his waning interest.
Usually women forgave his changes of heart because of his obvious
devotion to Emmy, and he was remembered by various ladies with a
not unpleasant sigh.  But he had detected no such sigh upon the
phone.

"I'd like to clear up this mess," he thought.  Had he been wearing
evening clothes, he might have dropped in at the dance and talked
it over with her, still he didn't want to go home.  Upon
consideration it seemed important that the misunderstanding should
be fixed up at once, and presently he began to entertain the idea
of going as he was; Americans were excused unconventionalities of
dress.  In any case, it was not nearly time, and, in the company of
several highballs, he considered the matter for an hour.

At midnight he walked up the steps of her Mayfair house.  The coat-
room attendants scrutinized his tweeds disapprovingly and a footman
peered in vain for his name on the list of guests.  Fortunately his
friend Sir Humphrey Dunn arrived at the same time and convinced the
footman it must be a mistake.

Inside, Bill immediately looked about for his hostess.

She was a very tall young woman, half American and all the more
intensely English.  In a sense, she had discovered Bill McChesney,
vouched for his savage charms; his retirement was one of her most
humiliating experiences since she had begun being bad.

She stood with her husband at the head of the receiving line--Bill
had never seen them together before.  He decided to choose a less
formal moment for presenting himself.

As the receiving went on interminably, he became increasingly
uncomfortable.  He saw a few people he knew, but not many, and he
was conscious that his clothes were attracting a certain attention;
he was aware also that Lady Sybil saw him and could have relieved
his embarrassment with a wave of her hand, but she made no sign.
He was sorry he had come, but to withdraw now would be absurd, and
going to a buffet table, he took a glass of champagne.

When he turned around she was alone at last, and he was about to
approach her when the butler spoke to him:

"Pardon me, sir.  Have you a card?"

"I'm a friend of Lady Sybil's," said Bill impatiently.  He turned
away, but the butler followed.

"I'm sorry, sir, but I'll have to ask you to step aside with me and
straighten this up."

"There's no need.  I'm just about to speak to Lady Sybil now."

"My orders are different, sir," said the butler firmly.

Then, before Bill realized what was happening, his arms were
pressed quietly to his sides and he was propelled into a little
anteroom back of the buffet.

There he faced a man in a pince-nez in whom he recognized the
Combrincks' private secretary.

The secretary nodded to the butler, saying, "This is the man";
whereupon Bill was released.

"Mr. McChesney," said the secretary, "you have seen fit to force
your way here without a card, and His Lordship requests that you
leave his house at once.  Will you kindly give me the check for
your coat?"

Then Bill understood, and the single word that he found applicable
to Lady Sybil sprang to his lips; whereupon the secretary gave a
sign to two footmen, and in a furious struggle Bill was carried
through a pantry where busy bus boys stared at the scene, down a
long hall, and pushed out a door into the night.  The door closed;
a moment later it was opened again to let his coat billow forth and
his cane clatter down the steps.

As he stood there, overwhelmed, stricken aghast, a taxicab stopped
beside him and the driver called:

"Feeling ill, gov'nor?"

"What?"

"I know where you can get a good pick-me-up, gov'nor.  Never too
late."  The door of the taxi opened on a nightmare.  There was a
cabaret that broke the closing hours; there was being with
strangers he had picked up somewhere; then there were arguments,
and trying to cash a check, and suddenly proclaiming over and over
that he was William McChesney, the producer, and convincing no one
of the fact, not even himself.  It seemed important to see Lady
Sybil right away and call her to account; but presently nothing was
important at all.  He was in a taxicab whose driver had just shaken
him awake in front of his own home.

The telephone was ringing as he went in, but he walked stonily past
the maid and only heard her voice when his foot was on the stair.

"Mr. McChesney, it's the hospital calling again.  Mrs. McChesney's
there and they've been phoning every hour."

Still in a daze, he held the receiver up to his ear.

"We're calling from the Midland Hospital, for your wife.  She was
delivered of a still-born child at nine this morning."

"Wait a minute."  His voice was dry and cracking.  "I don't
understand."

After a while he understood that Emmy's child was dead and she
wanted him.  His knees sagged groggily as he walked down the
street, looking for a taxi.

The room was dark; Emmy looked up and saw him from a rumpled bed.

"It's you!" she cried.  "I thought you were dead!  Where did you
go?"

He threw himself down on his knees beside the bed, but she turned
away.

"Oh, you smell awful," she said.  "It makes me sick."

But she kept her hand in his hair, and he knelt there motionless
for a long time.

"I'm done with you," she muttered, "but it was awful when I thought
you were dead.  Everybody's dead.  I wish I was dead."

A curtain parted with the wind, and as he rose to arrange it, she
saw him in the full morning light, pale and terrible, with rumpled
clothes and bruises on his face.  This time she hated him instead
of those who had hurt him.  She could feel him slipping out of her
heart, feel the space he left, and all at once he was gone, and she
could even forgive him and be sorry for him.  All this in a minute.

She had fallen down at the door of the hospital, trying to get out
of the taxicab alone.


IV


When Emmy was well, physically and mentally, her incessant idea was
to learn to dance; the old dream inculcated by Miss Georgia
Berriman Campbell of South Carolina persisted as a bright avenue
leading back to first youth and days of hope in New York.  To her,
dancing meant that elaborate blend of tortuous attitudes and formal
pirouettes that evolved out of Italy several hundred years ago and
reached its apogee in Russia at the beginning of this century.  She
wanted to use herself on something she could believe in, and it
seemed to her that the dance was woman's interpretation of music;
instead of strong fingers, one had limbs with which to render
Tschaikowsky and Stravinksi; and feet could be as eloquent in
Chopiniana as voices in "The Ring."  At the bottom, it was
something sandwiched in between the acrobats and the trained seals;
at the top it was Pavlova and art.

Once they were settled in an apartment back in New York, she
plunged into her work like a girl of sixteen--four hours a day at
bar exercises, attitudes, sauts, arabesques and pirouettes.  It
became the realest part of her life, and her only worry was whether
or not she was too old.  At twenty-six she had ten years to make
up, but she was a natural dancer with a fine body--and that lovely
face.

Bill encouraged it; when she was ready he was going to build the
first real American ballet around her.  There were even times when
he envied her her absorption; for affairs in his own line were more
difficult since they had come home.  For one thing, he had made
many enemies in those early days of self-confidence; there were
exaggerated stories of his drinking and of his being hard on actors
and difficult to work with.

It was against him that he had always been unable to save money and
must beg a backing for each play.  Then, too, in a curious way, he
was intelligent, as he was brave enough to prove in several
uncommercial ventures, but he had no Theatre Guild behind him, and
what money he lost was charged against him.

There were successes, too, but he worked harder for them, or it
seemed so, for he had begun to pay a price for his irregular life.
He always intended to take a rest or give up his incessant
cigarettes, but there was so much competition now--new men coming
up, with new reputations for infallibility--and besides, he wasn't
used to regularity.  He liked to do his work in those great spurts,
inspired by black coffee, that seem so inevitable in show business,
but which took so much out of a man after thirty.  He had come to
lean, in a way, on Emmy's fine health and vitality.  They were
always together, and if he felt a vague dissatisfaction that he had
grown to need her more than she needed him, there was always the
hope that things would break better for him next month, next
season.

Coming home from ballet school one November evening, Emmy swung her
little gray bag, pulled her hat far down over her still damp hair,
and gave herself up to pleasant speculation.  For a month she had
been aware of people who had come to the studio especially to watch
her--she was ready to dance.  Once she had worked just as hard and
for as long a time on something else--her relations with Bill--only
to reach a climax of misery and despair, but here there was nothing
to fail her except herself.  Yet even now she felt a little rash in
thinking:  "Now it's come.  I'm going to be happy."

She hurried, for something had come up today that she must talk
over with Bill.

Finding him in the living room, she called him to come back while
she dressed.  She began to talk without looking around:

"Listen what happened!"  Her voice was loud, to compete with the
water running in the tub.  "Paul Makova wants me to dance with him
at the Metropolitan this season; only it's not sure, so it's a
secret--even I'm not supposed to know."

"That's great."

"The only thing is whether it wouldn't be better for me to make a
début abroad?  Anyhow Donilof says I'm ready to appear.  What do
you think?"

"I don't know."

"You don't sound very enthusiastic."

"I've got something on my mind.  I'll tell you about it later.  Go
on."

"That's all, dear.  If you still feel like going to Germany for a
month, like you said, Donilof would arrange a début for me in
Berlin, but I'd rather open here and dance with Paul Makova.  Just
imagine--"  She broke off, feeling suddenly through the thick skin
of her elation how abstracted he was.  "Tell me what you've got on
your mind."

"I went to Doctor Kearns this afternoon."

"What did he say?"  Her mind was still singing with her own
happiness.  Bill's intermittent attacks of hypochondria had long
ceased to worry her.

"I told him about that blood this morning, and he said what he said
last year--it was probably a little broken vein in my throat.  But
since I'd been coughing and was worried, perhaps it was safer to
take an X-ray and clear the matter up.  Well, we cleared it up all
right.  My left lung is practically gone."

"Bill!"

"Luckily there are no spots on the other."

She waited, horribly afraid.

"It's come at a bad time for me," he went on steadily, "but it's
got to be faced.  He thinks I ought to go to the Adirondacks or to
Denver for the winter, and his idea is Denver.  That way it'll
probably clear up in five or six months."

"Of course we'll have to--" she stopped suddenly.

"I wouldn't expect you to go--especially if you have this
opportunity."

"Of course I'll go," she said quickly.  "Your health comes first.
We've always gone everywhere together."

"Oh, no."

"Why, of course."  She made her voice strong and decisive.  "We've
always been together.  I couldn't stay here without you.  When do
you have to go?"

"As soon as possible.  I went in to see Brancusi to find out if he
wanted to take over the Richmond piece, but he didn't seem
enthusiastic."  His face hardened.  "Of course there won't be
anything else for the present, but I'll have enough, with what's
owing--"

"Oh, if I was only making some money!" Emmy cried.  "You work so
hard, and here I've been spending two hundred dollars a week for
just my dancing lessons alone--more than I'll be able to earn for
years."

"Of course in six months I'll be as well as ever--he says."

"Sure, dearest; we'll get you well.  We'll start as soon as we
can."

She put an arm around him and kissed his cheek.

"I'm just an old parasite," she said.  "I should have known my
darling wasn't well."

He reached automatically for a cigarette, and then stopped.

"I forgot--I've got to start cutting down smoking."  He rose to the
occasion suddenly:  "No, baby, I've decided to go alone.  You'd go
crazy with boredom out there, and I'd just be thinking I was
keeping you away from your dancing."

"Don't think about that.  The thing is to get you well."

They discussed the matter hour after hour for the next week, each
of them saying everything except the truth--that he wanted her to
go with him and that she wanted passionately to stay in New York.
She talked it over guardedly with Donilof, her ballet master, and
found that he thought any postponement would be a terrible mistake.
Seeing other girls in the ballet school making plans for the
winter, she wanted to die rather than go, and Bill saw all the
involuntary indications of her misery.  For a while they talked of
compromising on the Adirondacks, whither she would commute by
aeroplane for the week-ends, but he was running a little fever now
and he was definitely ordered West.

Bill settled it all one gloomy Sunday night, with that rough,
generous justice that had first made her admire him, that made him
rather tragic in his adversity, as he had always been bearable in
his overweening success:

"It's just up to me, baby.  I got into this mess because I didn't
have any self-control--you seem to have all of that in this family--
and now it's only me that can get me out.  You've worked hard at
your stuff for three years and you deserve your chance--and if you
came out there now you'd have it on me the rest of my life."  He
grinned.  "And I couldn't stand that.  Besides, it wouldn't be good
for the kid."

Eventually she gave in, ashamed of herself, miserable--and glad.
For the world of her work, where she existed without Bill, was
bigger to her now than the world in which they existed together.
There was more room to be glad in one than to be sorry in the
other.

Two days later, with his ticket bought for that afternoon at five,
they passed the last hours together, talking of everything hopeful.
She protested still, and sincerely; had he weakened for a moment
she would have gone.  But the shock had done something to him, and
he showed more character under it than he had for years.  Perhaps
it would be good for him to work it out alone.

"In the spring!" they said.

Then in the station with little Billy, and Bill saying:  "I hate
these graveside partings.  You leave me here.  I've got to make a
phone call from the train before it goes."

They had never spent more than a night apart in six years, save
when Emmy was in the hospital; save for the time in England they
had a good record of faithfulness and of tenderness toward each
other, even though she had been alarmed and often unhappy at this
insecure bravado from the first.  After he went through the gate
alone, Emmy was glad he had a phone call to make and tried to
picture him making it.

She was a good woman; she had loved him with all her heart.  When
she went out into Thirty-third Street, it was just as dead as dead
for a while, and the apartment he paid for would be empty of him,
and she was here, about to do something that would make her happy.

She stopped after a few blocks, thinking:  "Why, this is terrible--
what I'm doing!  I'm letting him down like the worst person I ever
heard of.  I'm leaving him flat and going off to dinner with
Donilof and Paul Makova, whom I like for being beautiful and for
having the same color eyes and hair.  Bill's on the train alone."

She swung little Billy around suddenly as if to go back to the
station.  She could see him sitting in the train, with his face so
pale and tired, and no Emmy.

"I can't let him down," she cried to herself as wave after wave of
sentiment washed over her.  But only sentiment--hadn't he let her
down--hadn't he done what he wanted in London?

"Oh, poor Bill!"

She stood irresolute, realizing for one last honest moment how
quickly she would forget this and find excuses for what she was
doing.  She had to think hard of London, and her conscience
cleared.  But with Bill all alone in the train it seemed terrible
to think that way.  Even now she could turn and go back to the
station and tell him that she was coming, but still she waited,
with life very strong in her, fighting for her.  The sidewalk was
narrow where she stood; presently a great wave of people, pouring
out of the theater, came flooding along it, and she and little
Billy were swept along with the crowd.

In the train, Bill telephoned up to the last minute, postponed
going back to his stateroom, because he knew it was almost certain
that he would not find her there.  After the train started he went
back and, of course, there was nothing but his bags in the rack and
some magazines on the seat.

He knew then that he had lost her.  He saw the set-up without any
illusions--this Paul Makova, and months of proximity, and
loneliness--afterward nothing would ever be the same.  When he had
thought about it all a long time, reading Variety and Zit's in
between, it began to seem, each time he came back to it, as if Emmy
somehow were dead.

"She was a fine girl--one of the best.  She had character."  He
realized perfectly that he had brought all this on himself and that
there was some law of compensation involved.  He saw, too, that by
going away he had again become as good as she was; it was all
evened up at last.

He felt beyond everything, even beyond his grief, an almost
comfortable sensation of being in the hands of something bigger
than himself; and grown a little tired and unconfident--two
qualities he could never for a moment tolerate--it did not seem so
terrible if he were going West for a definite finish.  He was sure
that Emmy would come at the end, no matter what she was doing or
how good an engagement she had.







WHAT A HANDSOME PAIR!


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Saturday Evening Post (27 August 1932)



At four o'clock on a November afternoon in 1902, Teddy Van Beck got
out of a hansom cab in front of a brownstone house on Murray Hill.
He was a tall, round-shouldered young man with a beaked nose and
soft brown eyes in a sensitive face.  In his veins quarreled the
blood of colonial governors and celebrated robber barons; in him
the synthesis had produced, for that time and place, something
different and something new.

His cousin, Helen Van Beck, waited in the drawing-room.  Her eyes
were red from weeping, but she was young enough for it not to
detract from her glossy beauty--a beauty that had reached the point
where it seemed to contain in itself the secret of its own growth,
as if it would go on increasing forever.  She was nineteen and,
contrary to the evidence, she was extremely happy.

Teddy put his arm around her and kissed her cheek, and found it
changing into her ear as she turned her face away.  He held her for
a moment, his own enthusiasm chilling; then he said:

"You don't seem very glad to see me."

Helen had a premonition that this was going to be one of the
memorable scenes of her life, and with unconscious cruelty she set
about extracting from it its full dramatic value.  She sat in a
corner of the couch, facing an easy-chair.

"Sit there," she commanded, in what was then admired as a "regal
manner," and then, as Teddy straddled the piano stool:  "No, don't
sit there.  I can't talk to you if you're going to revolve around."

"Sit on my lap," he suggested.

"No."

Playing a one-handed flourish on the piano, he said, "I can listen
better here."

Helen gave up hopes of beginning on the sad and quiet note.

"This is a serious matter, Teddy.  Don't think I've decided it
without a lot of consideration.  I've got to ask you--to ask you to
release me from our understanding."

"What?"  Teddy's face paled with shock and dismay.

"I'll have to tell you from the beginning.  I've realized for a
long time that we have nothing in common.  You're interested in
your music, and I can't even play chopsticks."  Her voice was weary
as if with suffering; her small teeth tugged at her lower lip.

"What of it?" he demanded, relieved.  "I'm musician enough for
both.  You wouldn't have to understand banking to marry a banker,
would you?"

"This is different," Helen answered.  "What would we do together?
One important thing is that you don't like riding; you told me you
were afraid of horses."

"Of course I'm afraid of horses," he said, and added reminiscently:
"They try to bite me."

"It makes it so--"

"I've never met a horse--socially, that is--who didn't try to bite
me.  They used to do it when I put the bridle on; then, when I gave
up putting the bridle on, they began reaching their heads around
trying to get at my calves."

The eyes of her father, who had given her a Shetland at three,
glistened, cold and hard, from her own.

"You don't even like the people I like, let alone the horses," she
said.

"I can stand them.  I've stood them all my life."

"Well, it would be a silly way to start a marriage.  I don't see
any grounds for mutual--mutual--"

"Riding?"

"Oh, not that."  Helen hesitated, and then said in an unconvinced
tone, "Probably I'm not clever enough for you."

"Don't talk such stuff!"  He demanded some truth:  "Who's the man?"

It took her a moment to collect herself.  She had always resented
Teddy's tendency to treat women with less ceremony than was the
custom of the day.  Often he was an unfamiliar, almost frightening
young man.

"There is someone," she admitted.  "It's someone I've always known
slightly, but about a month ago, when I went to Southampton, I was--
thrown with him."

"Thrown from a horse?"

"Please, Teddy," she protested gravely.  "I'd been getting more
unhappy about you and me, and whenever I was with him everything
seemed all right."  A note of exaltation that she would not conceal
came into Helen's voice.  She rose and crossed the room, her
straight, slim legs outlined by the shadows of her dress.  "We rode
and swam and played tennis together--did the things we both liked
to do."

He stared into the vacant space she had created for him.  "Is that
all that drew you to this fellow?"

"No, it was more than that.  He was thrilling to me like nobody
ever has been."  She laughed.  "I think what really started me
thinking about it was one day we came in from riding and everybody
said aloud what a nice pair we made."

"Did you kiss him?"

She hesitated.  "Yes, once."

He got up from the piano stool.  "I feel as if I had a cannon ball
in my stomach," he exclaimed.

The butler announced Mr. Stuart Oldhorne.

"Is he the man?" Teddy demanded tensely.

She was suddenly upset and confused.  "He should have come later.
Would you rather go without meeting him?"

But Stuart Oldhorne, made confident by his new sense of
proprietorship, had followed the butler.

The two men regarded each other with a curious impotence of
expression; there can be no communication between men in that
position, for their relation is indirect and consists in how much
each of them has possessed or will possess of the woman in
question, so that their emotions pass through her divided self as
through a bad telephone connection.

Stuart Oldhorne sat beside Helen, his polite eyes never leaving
Teddy.  He had the same glowing physical power as she.  He had been
a star athlete at Yale and a Rough Rider in Cuba, and was the best
young horseman on Long Island.  Women loved him not only for his
points but for a real sweetness of temper.

"You've lived so much in Europe that I don't often see you," he
said to Teddy.  Teddy didn't answer and Stuart Oldhorne turned to
Helen:  "I'm early; I didn't realize--"

"You came at the right time," said Teddy rather harshly.  "I stayed
to play you my congratulations."

To Helen's alarm, he turned and ran his fingers over the keyboard.
Then he began.

What he was playing, neither Helen nor Stuart knew, but Teddy
always remembered.  He put his mind in order with a short résumé of
the history of music, beginning with some chords from The Messiah
and ending with Debussy's La Plus Que Lent, which had an evocative
quality for him, because he had first heard it the day his brother
died.  Then, pausing for an instant, he began to play more
thoughtfully, and the lovers on the sofa could feel that they were
alone--that he had left them and had no more traffic with them--and
Helen's discomfort lessened.  But the flight, the elusiveness of
the music, piqued her, gave her a feeling of annoyance.  If Teddy
had played the current sentimental song from Erminie, and had
played it with feeling, she would have understood and been moved,
but he was plunging her suddenly into a world of mature emotions,
whither her nature neither could nor wished to follow.

She shook herself slightly and said to Stuart:  "Did you buy the
horse?"

"Yes, and at a bargain. . . .  Do you know I love you?"

"I'm glad," she whispered.

The piano stopped suddenly.  Teddy closed it and swung slowly
around:  "Did you like my congratulations?"

"Very much," they said together.

"It was pretty good," he admitted.  "That last was only based on a
little counterpoint.  You see, the idea of it was that you make
such a handsome pair."

He laughed unnaturally; Helen followed him out into the hall.

"Good-by, Teddy," she said.  "We're going to be good friends,
aren't we?"

"Aren't we?" he repeated.  He winked without smiling, and with a
clicking, despairing sound of his mouth, went out quickly.

For a moment Helen tried vainly to apply a measure to the
situation, wondering how she had come off with him, realizing
reluctantly that she had never for an instant held the situation in
her hands.  She had a dim realization that Teddy was larger in
scale; then the very largeness frightened her and, with relief and
a warm tide of emotion, she hurried into the drawing-room and the
shelter of her lover's arms.

Their engagement ran through a halcyon summer.  Stuart visited
Helen's family at Tuxedo, and Helen visited his family in Wheatley
Hills.  Before breakfast, their horses' hoofs sedately scattered
the dew in sentimental glades, or curtained them with dust as they
raced on dirt roads.  They bought a tandem bicycle and pedaled all
over Long Island--which Mrs. Cassius Ruthven, a contemporary Cato,
considered "rather fast" for a couple not yet married.  They were
seldom at rest, but when they were, they reminded people of His
Move on a Gibson pillow.

Helen's taste for sport was advanced for her generation.  She rode
nearly as well as Stuart and gave him a decent game in tennis.  He
taught her some polo, and they were golf crazy when it was still
considered a comic game.  They liked to feel fit and cool together.
They thought of themselves as a team, and it was often remarked how
well mated they were.  A chorus of pleasant envy followed in the
wake of their effortless glamour.

They talked.

"It seems a pity you've got to go to the office," she would say.
"I wish you did something we could do together, like taming lions."

"I've always thought that in a pinch I could make a living breeding
and racing horses," said Stuart.

"I know you could, you darling."

In August he brought a Thomas automobile and toured all the way to
Chicago with three other men.  It was an event of national interest
and their pictures were in all the papers.  Helen wanted to go, but
it wouldn't have been proper, so they compromised by driving down
Fifth Avenue on a sunny September morning, one with the fine day
and the fashionable crowd, but distinguished by their unity, which
made them each as strong as two.

"What do you suppose?" Helen demanded.  "Teddy sent me the oddest
present--a cup rack."

Stuart laughed.  "Obviously, he means that all we'll ever do is win
cups."

"I thought it was rather a slam," Helen ruminated.  "I saw that he
was invited to everything, but he didn't answer a single
invitation.  Would you mind very much stopping by his apartment
now?  I haven't seen him for months and I don't like to leave
anything unpleasant in the past."

He wouldn't go in with her.  "I'll sit and answer questions about
the auto from passers-by."

The door was opened by a woman in a cleaning cap, and Helen heard
the sound of Teddy's piano from the room beyond.  The woman seemed
reluctant to admit her.

"He said don't interrupt him, but I suppose if you're his cousin--"

Teddy welcomed her, obviously startled and somewhat upset, but in a
minute he was himself again.

"I won't marry you," he assured her.  "You've had your chance."

"All right," she laughed.

"How are you?"  He threw a pillow at her.  "You're beautiful!  Are
you happy with this--this centaur?  Does he beat you with his
riding crop?"  He peered at her closely.  "You look a little duller
than when I knew you.  I used to whip you up to a nervous
excitement that bore a resemblance to intelligence."

"I'm happy, Teddy.  I hope you are."

"Sure, I'm happy; I'm working.  I've got MacDowell on the run and
I'm going to have a shebang at Carnegie Hall next September."  His
eyes became malicious.  "What did you think of my girl?"

"Your girl?"

"The girl who opened the door for you."

"Oh, I thought it was a maid."  She flushed and was silent.

He laughed.  "Hey, Betty!" he called.  "You were mistaken for the
maid!"

"And that's the fault of my cleaning on Sunday," answered a voice
from the next room.

Teddy lowered his voice.  "Do you like her?" he demanded.

"Teddy!"  She teetered on the arm of the sofa, wondering whether
she should leave at once.

"What would you think if I married her?" he asked confidentially.

"Teddy!"  She was outraged; it had needed but a glance to place the
woman as common.  "You're joking.  She's older than you. . . .  You
wouldn't be such a fool as to throw away your future that way."

He didn't answer.

"Is she musical?" Helen demanded.  "Does she help you with your
work?"

"She doesn't know a note.  Neither did you, but I've got enough
music in me for twenty wives."

Visualizing herself as one of them, Helen rose stiffly.

"All I can ask you is to think how your mother would have felt--and
those who care for you. . . .  Good-by, Teddy."

He walked out the door with her and down the stairs.

"As a matter of fact, we've been married for two months," he said
casually.  "She was a waitress in a place where I used to eat."

Helen felt that she should be angry and aloof, but tears of hurt
vanity were springing to her eyes.

"And do you love her?"

"I like her; she's a good person and good for me.  Love is
something else.  I loved you, Helen, and that's all dead in me for
the present.  Maybe it's coming out in my music.  Some day I'll
probably love other women--or maybe there'll never be anything but
you.  Good-by, Helen."

The declaration touched her.  "I hope you'll be happy, Teddy.
Bring your wife to the wedding."

He bowed noncommittally.  When she had gone, he returned
thoughtfully to his apartment.

"That was the cousin that I was in love with," he said.

"And was it?"  Betty's face, Irish and placid, brightened with
interest.  "She's a pretty thing."

"She wouldn't have been as good for me as a nice peasant like you."

"Always thinking of yourself, Teddy Van Beck."

He laughed.  "Sure I am, but you love me, anyhow?"

"That's a big wur-red."

"All right.  I'll remember that when you come begging around for a
kiss.  If my grandfather knew I married a bog trotter, he'd turn
over in his grave.  Now get out and let me finish my work."

He sat at the piano, a pencil behind his ear.  Already his face was
resolved, composed, but his eyes grew more intense minute by
minute, until there was a glaze in them, behind which they seemed
to have joined his ears in counting and hearing.  Presently there
was no more indication in his face that anything had occurred to
disturb the tranquillity of his Sunday morning.


II


Mrs. Cassius Ruthven and a friend, veils flung back across their
hats, sat in their auto on the edge of the field.

"A young woman playing polo in breeches."  Mrs. Ruthven sighed.
"Amy Van Beck's daughter.  I thought when Helen organized the
Amazons she'd stop at divided skirts.  But her husband apparently
has no objections, for there he stands, egging her on.  Of course,
they always have liked the same things."

"A pair of thoroughbreds, those two," said the other woman
complacently, meaning that she admitted them to be her equals.
"You'd never look at them and think that anything had gone wrong."

She was referring to Stuart's mistake in the panic of 1907.  His
father had bequeathed him a precarious situation and Stuart had
made an error of judgment.  His honor was not questioned and his
crowd stood by him loyally, but his usefulness in Wall Street was
over and his small fortune was gone.

He stood in a group of men with whom he would presently play,
noting things to tell Helen after the game--she wasn't turning with
the play soon enough and several times she was unnecessarily ridden
off at important moments.  Her ponies were sluggish--the penalty
for playing with borrowed mounts--but she was, nevertheless, the
best player on the field, and in the last minute she made a save
that brought applause.

"Good girl!  Good girl!"

Stuart had been delegated with the unpleasant duty of chasing the
women from the field.  They had started an hour late and now a team
from New Jersey was waiting to play; he sensed trouble as he cut
across to join Helen and walked beside her toward the stables.  She
was splendid, with her flushed cheeks, her shining, triumphant
eyes, her short, excited breath.  He temporized for a minute.

"That was good--that last," he said.

"Thanks.  It almost broke my arm.  Wasn't I pretty good all
through?"

"You were the best out there."

"I know it."

He waited while she dismounted and handed the pony to a groom.

"Helen, I believe I've got a job."

"What is it?"

"Don't jump on the idea till you think it over.  Gus Myers wants me
to manage his racing stables.  Eight thousand a year."

Helen considered.  "It's a nice salary; and I bet you could make
yourself up a nice string from his ponies."

"The principal thing is that I need the money; I'd have as much as
you and things would be easier."

"You'd have as much as me," Helen repeated.  She almost regretted
that he would need no more help from her.  "But with Gus Myers,
isn't there a string attached?  Wouldn't he expect a boost up?"

"He probably would," answered Stuart bluntly, "and if I can help
him socially, I will.  As a matter of fact, he wants me at a stag
dinner tonight."

"All right, then," Helen said absently.  Still hesitating to tell
her her game was over, Stuart followed her glance toward the field,
where a runabout had driven up and parked by the ropes.

"There's your old friend, Teddy," he remarked dryly--"or rather,
your new friend, Teddy.  He's taking a sudden interest in polo.
Perhaps he thinks the horses aren't biting this summer."

"You're not in a very good humor," protested Helen.  "You know, if
you say the word, I'll never see him again.  All I want in the
world is for you and I to be together."

"I know," he admitted regretfully.  "Selling horses and giving up
clubs put a crimp in that.  I know the women all fall for Teddy,
now he's getting famous, but if he tries to fool around with you
I'll break his piano over his head. . . .  Oh, another thing," he
began, seeing the men already riding on the field.  "About your
last chukker--"

As best he could, he put the situation up to her.  He was not
prepared for the fury that swept over her.

"But it's an outrage!  I got up the game and it's been posted on
the bulletin board for three days."

"You started an hour late."

"And do you know why?" she demanded.  "Because your friend Joe
Morgan insisted that Celie ride sidesaddle.  He tore her habit off
her three times, and she only got here by climbing out the kitchen
window."

"I can't do anything about it."

"Why can't you?  Weren't you once a governor of this club?  How can
women ever expect to be any good if they have to quit every time
the men want the field?  All the men want is for the women to come
up to them in the evening and tell them what a beautiful game they
played!"

Still raging and blaming Stuart, she crossed the field to Teddy's
car.  He got out and greeted her with concentrated intensity:

"I've reached the point where I can neither sleep nor eat from
thinking of you.  What point is that?"

There was something thrilling about him that she had never been
conscious of in the old days; perhaps the stories of his
philanderings had made him more romantic to her.

"Well, don't think of me as I am now," she said.  "My face is
getting rougher every day and my muscles lean out of an evening
dress like a female impersonator.  People are beginning to refer to
me as handsome instead of pretty.  Besides, I'm in a vile humor.
It seems to me women are always just edged out of everything."

Stuart's game was brutal that afternoon.  In the first five
minutes, he realized that Teddy's runabout was no longer there, and
his long slugs began to tally from all angles.  Afterward, he
bumped home across country at a gallop; his mood was not assuaged
by a note handed him by the children's nurse:


DEAR:  Since your friends made it possible for us to play, I wasn't
going to sit there just dripping; so I had Teddy bring me home.
And since you'll be out to dinner, I'm going into New York with him
to the theater.  I'll either be out on the theater train or spend
the night at mother's.

                                                       HELEN.


Stuart went upstairs and changed into his dinner coat.  He had no
defense against the unfamiliar claws of jealousy that began a slow
dissection of his insides.  Often Helen had gone to plays or dances
with other men, but this was different.  He felt toward Teddy the
faint contempt of the physical man for the artist, but the last six
months had bruised his pride.  He perceived the possibility that
Helen might be seriously interested in someone else.

He was in a bad humor at Gus Myers' dinner--annoyed with his host
for talking so freely about their business arrangement.  When at
last they rose from the table, he decided that it was no go and
called Myers aside.

"Look here.  I'm afraid this isn't a good idea, after all."

"Why not?"  His host looked at him in alarm.  "Are you going back
on me?  My dear fellow--"

"I think we'd better call it off."

"And why, may I ask?  Certainly I have the right to ask why."

Stuart considered.  "All right, I'll tell you.  When you made that
little speech, you mentioned me as if you had somehow bought me, as
if I was a sort of employee in your office.  Now, in the sporting
world that doesn't go; things are more--more democratic.  I grew up
with all these men here tonight, and they didn't like it any better
than I did."

"I see," Mr. Myers reflected carefully--"I see."  Suddenly he
clapped Stuart on the back.  "That is exactly the sort of thing I
like to be told; it helps me.  From now on I won't mention you as
if you were in my--as if we had a business arrangement.  Is that
all right?"

After all, the salary was eight thousand dollars.

"Very well, then," Stuart agreed.  "But you'll have to excuse me
tonight.  I'm catching a train to the city."

"I'll put an automobile at your disposal."

At ten o'clock he rang the bell of Teddy's apartment on Forty-
eighth Street.

"I'm looking for Mr. Van Beck," he said to the woman who answered
the door.  "I know he's gone to the theater, but I wonder if you
can tell me--"  Suddenly he guessed who the woman was.  "I'm Stuart
Oldhorne," he explained.  "I married Mr. Van Beck's cousin."

"Oh, come in," said Betty pleasantly.  "I know all about who you
are."

She was just this side of forty, stoutish and plain of face, but
full of a keen, brisk vitality.  In the living room they sat down.

"You want to see Teddy?"

"He's with my wife and I want to join them after the theater.  I
wonder if you know where they went?"

"Oh, so Teddy's with your wife."  There was a faint, pleasant
brogue in her voice.  "Well, now, he didn't say exactly where he'd
be tonight."

"Then you don't know?"

"I don't--not for the life of me," she admitted cheerfully.  "I'm
sorry."

He stood up, and Betty saw the thinly hidden anguish in his face.
Suddenly she was really sorry.

"I did hear him say something about the theater," she said
ruminatively.  "Now sit down and let me think what it was.  He goes
out so much and a play once a week is enough for me, so that one
night mixes up with the others in my head.  Didn't your wife say
where to meet them?"

"No.  I only decided to come in after they'd started.  She said
she'd catch the theater train back to Long Island or go to her
mother's."

"That's it," Betty said triumphantly, striking her hands together
like cymbals.  "That's what he said when he called up--that he was
putting a lady on the theater train for Long Island, and would be
home himself right afterward.  We've had a child sick and it's
driven things from my mind."

"I'm very sorry I bothered you under those conditions."

"It's no bother.  Sit down.  It's only just after ten."

Feeling easier, Stuart relaxed a little and accepted a cigar.

"No, if I tried to keep up with Teddy, I'd have white hair by now,"
Betty said.  "Of course, I go to his concerts, but often I fall
asleep--not that he ever knows it.  So long as he doesn't take too
much to drink and knows where his home is, I don't bother about
where he wanders."  As Stuart's face grew serious again, she
changed her tone:  "All and all, he's a good husband to me and we
have a happy life together, without interfering with each other.
How would he do working next to the nursery and groaning at every
sound?  And how would I do going to Mrs. Ruthven's with him, and
all of them talking about high society and high art?"

A phrase of Helen's came back to Stuart:  "Always together--I like
for us to do everything together."

"You have children, haven't you, Mr. Oldhorne?"

"Yes.  My boy's almost big enough to sit a horse."

"Ah, yes; you're both great for horses."

"My wife says that as soon as their legs are long enough to reach
stirrups, she'll be interested in them again."  This didn't sound
right to Stuart and he modified it:  "I mean she always has been
interested in them, but she never let them monopolize her or come
between us.  We've always believed that marriage ought to be
founded on companionship, on having the same interests.  I mean,
you're musical and you help your husband."

Betty laughed.  "I wish Teddy could hear that.  I can't read a note
or carry a tune."

"No?"  He was confused.  "I'd somehow got the impression that you
were musical."

"You can't see why else he'd have married me?"

"Not at all.  On the contrary."

After a few minutes, he said good night, somehow liking her.  When
he had gone, Betty's expression changed slowly to one of
exasperation; she went to the telephone and called her husband's
studio:

"There you are, Teddy.  Now listen to me carefully.  I know your
cousin is with you and I want to talk with her. . . .  Now, don't
lie.  You put her on the phone.  Her husband has been here, and if
you don't let me talk to her, it might be a serious matter."

She could hear an unintelligible colloquy, and then Helen's voice:

"Hello."

"Good evening, Mrs. Oldhorne.  Your husband came here, looking for
you and Teddy.  I told him I didn't know which play you were at, so
you'd better be thinking which one.  And I told him Teddy was
leaving you at the station in time for the theater train."

"Oh, thank you very much.  We--"

"Now, you meet your husband or there's trouble for you, or I'm no
judge of men.  And--wait a minute.  Tell Teddy, if he's going to be
up late, that Josie's sleeping light, and he's not to touch the
piano when he gets home."

Betty heard Teddy come in at eleven, and she came into the drawing-
room smelling of camomile vapor.  He greeted her absently; there
was a look of suffering in his face and his eyes were bright and
far away.

"You call yourself a great musician, Teddy Van Beck," she said,
"but it seems to me you're much more interested in women."

"Let me alone, Betty."

"I do let you alone, but when the husbands start coming here, it's
another matter."

"This was different, Betty.  This goes way back into the past."

"It sounds like the present to me."

"Don't make any mistake about Helen," he said.  "She's a good
woman."

"Not through any fault of yours, I know."

He sank his head wearily in his hands.  "I've tried to forget her.
I've avoided her for six years.  And then, when I met her a month
ago, it all rushed over me.  Try and understand, Bet.  You're my
best friend; you're the only person that ever loved me."

"When you're good I love you," she said.

"Don't worry.  It's over.  She loves her husband; she just came to
New York with me because she's got some spite against him.  She
follows me a certain distance just like she always has, and then--
Anyhow, I'm not going to see her any more.  Now go to bed, Bet.  I
want to play for a while."

He was on his feet when she stopped him.

"You're not to touch the piano tonight."

"Oh, I forgot about Josie," he said remorsefully.  "Well, I'll
drink a bottle of beer and then I'll come to bed."

He came close and put his arm around her.

"Dear Bet, nothing could ever interfere with us."

"You're a bad boy, Teddy," she said.  "I wouldn't ever be so bad to
you."

"How do you know, Bet?  How do you know what you'd do?"

He smoothed down her plain brown hair, knowing for the thousandth
time that she had none of the world's dark magic for him, and that
he couldn't live without her for six consecutive hours.  "Dear
Bet," he whispered.  "Dear Bet."


III


The Oldhornes were visiting.  In the last four years, since Stuart
had terminated his bondage to Gus Myers, they had become visiting
people.  The children visited Grandmother Van Beck during the
winter and attended school in New York.  Stuart and Helen visited
friends in Asheville, Aiken and Palm Beach, and in the summer
usually occupied a small cottage on someone's Long Island estate.
"My dear, it's just standing there empty.  I wouldn't dream of
accepting any rent.  You'll be doing us a favor by occupying it."

Usually, they were; they gave out a great deal of themselves in
that eternal willingness and enthusiasm which makes a successful
guest--it became their profession.  Moving through a world that was
growing rich with the war in Europe, Stuart had somewhere lost his
way.  Twice playing brilliant golf in the national amateur, he
accepted a job as professional at a club which his father had
helped to found.  He was restless and unhappy.

This week-end they were visiting a pupil of his.  As a consequence
of a mixed foursome, the Oldhornes went upstairs to dress for
dinner surcharged with the unpleasant accumulation of many
unsatisfactory months.  In the afternoon, Stuart had played with
their hostess and Helen with another man--a situation which Stuart
always dreaded, because it forced him into competition with Helen.
He had actually tried to miss that putt on the eighteenth--to just
miss it.  But the ball dropped in the cup.  Helen went through the
superficial motions of a good loser, but she devoted herself
pointedly to her partner for the rest of the afternoon.

Their expressions still counterfeited amusement as they entered
their room.

When the door closed, Helen's pleasant expression faded and she
walked toward the dressing table as though her own reflection was
the only decent company with which to forgather.  Stuart watched
her, frowning.

"I know why you're in a rotten humor," he said; "though I don't
believe you know yourself."

"I'm not in a rotten humor," Helen responded in a clipped voice.

"You are; and I know the real reason--the one you don't know.  It's
because I holed that putt this afternoon."

She turned slowly, incredulously, from the mirror.

"Oh, so I have a new fault!  I've suddenly become, of all things, a
poor sport!"

"It's not like you to be a poor sport," he admitted, "but otherwise
why all this interest in other men, and why do you look at me as if
I'm--well, slightly gamy?"

"I'm not aware of it."

"I am."  He was aware, too, that there was always some man in their
life now--some man of power and money who paid court to Helen and
gave her the sense of solidity which he failed to provide.  He had
no cause to be jealous of any particular man, but the pressure of
many was irritating.  It annoyed him that on so slight a grievance,
Helen should remind him by her actions that he no longer filled her
entire life.

"If Anne can get any satisfaction out of winning, she's welcome to
it," said Helen suddenly.

"Isn't that rather petty?  She isn't in your class; she won't
qualify for the third flight in Boston."

Feeling herself in the wrong, she changed her tone.

"Oh, that isn't it," she broke out.  "I just keep wishing you and I
could play together like we used to.  And now you have to play with
dubs, and get their wretched shots out of traps.  Especially"--she
hesitated--"especially when you're so unnecessarily gallant."

The faint contempt in her voice, the mock jealousy that covered a
growing indifference was apparent to him.  There had been a time
when, if he danced with another woman, Helen's stricken eyes
followed him around the room.

"My gallantry is simply a matter of business," he answered.
"Lessons have brought in three hundred a month all summer.  How
could I go to see you play at Boston next week, except that I'm
going to coach other women?"

"And you're going to see me win," announced Helen.  "Do you know
that?"

"Naturally, I want nothing more," Stuart said automatically.  But
the unnecessary defiance in her voice repelled him, and he suddenly
wondered if he really cared whether she won or not.

At the same moment, Helen's mood changed and for a moment she saw
the true situation--that she could play in amateur tournaments and
Stuart could not, that the new cups in the rack were all hers now,
that he had given up the fiercely competitive sportsmanship that
had been the breath of life to him in order to provide necessary
money.

"Oh, I'm so sorry for you, Stuart!"  There were tears in her eyes.
"It seems such a shame that you can't do the things you love, and I
can.  Perhaps I oughtn't to play this summer."

"Nonsense," he said.  "You can't sit home and twirl your thumbs."

She caught at this:  "You wouldn't want me to.  I can't help being
good at sports; you taught me nearly all I know.  But I wish I
could help you."

"Just try to remember I'm your best friend.  Sometimes you act as
if we were rivals."

She hesitated, annoyed by the truth of his words and unwilling to
concede an inch; but a wave of memories rushed over her, and she
thought how brave he was in his eked-out, pieced-together life; she
came and threw her arms around him.

"Darling, darling, things are going to be better.  You'll see."

Helen won the finals in the tournament at Boston the following
week.  Following around with the crowd, Stuart was very proud of
her.  He hoped that instead of feeding her egotism, the actual
achievement would make things easier between them.  He hated the
conflict that had grown out of their wanting the same excellences,
the same prizes from life.

Afterward he pursued her progress toward the clubhouse, amused and
a little jealous of the pack that fawned around her.  He reached
the club among the last, and a steward accosted him.  "Professionals
are served in the lower grill, please," the man said.

"That's all right.  My name's Oldhorne."

He started to walk by, but the man barred his way.

"Sorry, sir.  I realize that Mrs. Oldhorne's playing in the match,
but my orders are to direct the professionals to the lower grill,
and I understand you are a professional."

"Why, look here--" Stuart began, wildly angry, and stopped.  A
group of people were listening.  "All right; never mind," he said
gruffly, and turned away.

The memory of the experience rankled; it was the determining factor
that drove him, some weeks later, to a momentous decision.  For a
long time he had been playing with the idea of joining the Canadian
Air Force, for service in France.  He knew that his absence would
have little practical bearing on the lives of Helen and the
children; happening on some friends who were also full of the
restlessness of 1915, the matter was suddenly decided.  But he had
not counted on the effect upon Helen; her reaction was not so much
one of grief or alarm, but as if she had been somehow outwitted.

"But you might have told me!" she wailed.  "You leave me dangling;
you simply take yourself away without any warning."

Once again Helen saw him as the bright and intolerably blinding
hero, and her soul winced before him as it had when they first met.
He was a warrior; for him, peace was only the interval between
wars, and peace was destroying him.  Here was the game of games
beckoning him--Without throwing over the whole logic of their
lives, there was nothing she could say.

"This is my sort of thing," he said confidently, younger with his
excitement.  "A few more years of this life and I'd go to pieces,
take to drink.  I've somehow lost your respect, and I've got to
have that, even if I'm far away."

She was proud of him again; she talked to everyone of his impending
departure.  Then, one September afternoon, she came home from the
city, full of the old feeling of comradeship and bursting with
news, to find him buried in an utter depression.

"Stuart," she cried, "I've got the--"  She broke off.  "What's the
matter, darling?  Is something the matter?"

He looked at her dully.  "They turned me down," he said.

"What?"

"My left eye."  He laughed bitterly.  "Where that dub cracked me
with the brassie.  I'm nearly blind in it."

"Isn't there anything you can do?"

"Nothing."

"Stuart!"  She stared at him aghast.  "Stuart, and I was going to
tell you!  I was saving it for a surprise.  Elsa Prentice has
organized a Red Cross unit to serve with the French, and I joined
it because I thought it would be wonderful if we both went.  We've
been measured for uniforms and bought our outfits, and we're
sailing the end of next week."


IV


Helen was a blurred figure among other blurred figures on a boat
deck, dark against the threat of submarines.  When the ship had
slid out into the obscure future, Stuart walked eastward along
Fifty-seventh Street.  His grief at the severance of many ties was
a weight he carried in his body, and he walked slowly, as if
adjusting himself to it.  To balance this there was a curious
sensation of lightness in his mind.  For the first time in twelve
years he was alone, and the feeling came over him that he was alone
for good; knowing Helen and knowing war, he could guess at the
experiences she would go through, and he could not form any picture
of a renewed life together afterward.  He was discarded; she had
proved the stronger at last.  It seemed very strange and sad that
his marriage should have such an ending.

He came to Carnegie Hall, dark after a concert, and his eye caught
the name of Theodore Van Beck, large on the posted bills.  As he
stared at it, a green door opened in the side of the building and a
group of people in evening dress came out.  Stuart and Teddy were
face to face before they recognized each other.

"Hello, there!" Teddy cried cordially.  "Did Helen sail?"

"Just now."

"I met her on the street yesterday and she told me.  I wanted you
both to come to my concert.  Well, she's quite a heroine, going off
like that. . . .  Have you met my wife?"

Stuart and Betty smiled at each other.

"We've met."

"And I didn't know it," protested Teddy.  "Women need watching when
they get toward their dotage. . . .  Look here, Stuart; we're
having a few people up to the apartment.  No heavy music or
anything.  Just supper and a few débutantes to tell me I was
divine.  It will do you good to come.  I imagine you're missing
Helen like the devil."

"I don't think I--"

"Come along.  They'll tell you you're divine too."

Realizing that the invitation was inspired by kindliness, Stuart
accepted.  It was the sort of gathering he had seldom attended, and
he was surprised to meet so many people he knew.  Teddy played the
lion in a manner at once assertive and skeptical.  Stuart listened
as he enlarged to Mrs. Cassius Ruthven on one of his favorite
themes:

"People tried to make marriages coöperative and they've ended by
becoming competitive.  Impossible situation.  Smart men will get to
fight shy of ornamental women.  A man ought to marry somebody
who'll be grateful, like Betty here."

"Now don't talk so much, Theodore Van Beck," Betty interrupted.
"Since you're such a fine musician, you'd do well to express
yourself with music instead of rash words."

"I don't agree with your husband," said Mrs. Ruthven.  "English
girls hunt with their men and play politics with them on absolutely
equal terms, and it tends to draw them together."

"It does not," insisted Teddy.  "That's why English society is the
most disorganized in the world.  Betty and I are happy because we
haven't any qualities in common at all."

His exuberance grated on Stuart, and the success that flowed from
him swung his mind back to the failure of his own life.  He could
not know that his life was not destined to be a failure.  He could
not read the fine story that three years later would be carved
proud above his soldier's grave, or know that his restless body,
which never spared itself in sport or danger, was destined to give
him one last proud gallop at the end.

"They turned me down," he was saying to Mrs. Ruthven.  "I'll have
to stick to Squadron A, unless we get drawn in."

"So Helen's gone."  Mrs. Ruthven looked at him, reminiscing.  "I'll
never forget your wedding.  You were both so handsome, so ideally
suited to each other.  Everybody spoke of it."

Stuart remembered; for the moment it seemed that he had little else
that it was fun to remember.

"Yes," he agreed, nodding his head thoughtfully, "I suppose we were
a handsome pair."







WINTER DREAMS


by


F. Scott Fitzgerald (1896-1940)


Metropolitan Magazine (December 1922)



Some of the caddies were poor as sin and lived in one-room houses
with a neurasthenic cow in the front yard, but Dexter Green's
father owned the second best grocery-store in Black Bear--the best
one was "The Hub," patronized by the wealthy people from Sherry
Island--and Dexter caddied only for pocket-money.

In the fall when the days became crisp and gray, and the long
Minnesota winter shut down like the white lid of a box, Dexter's
skis moved over the snow that hid the fairways of the golf course.
At these times the country gave him a feeling of profound
melancholy--it offended him that the links should lie in enforced
fallowness, haunted by ragged sparrows for the long season.  It was
dreary, too, that on the tees where the gay colors fluttered in
summer there were now only the desolate sand-boxes knee-deep in
crusted ice.  When he crossed the hills the wind blew cold as
misery, and if the sun was out he tramped with his eyes squinted up
against the hard dimensionless glare.

In April the winter ceased abruptly.  The snow ran down into Black
Bear Lake scarcely tarrying for the early golfers to brave the
season with red and black balls.  Without elation, without an
interval of moist glory, the cold was gone.

Dexter knew that there was something dismal about this Northern
spring, just as he knew there was something gorgeous about the
fall.  Fall made him clinch his hands and tremble and repeat
idiotic sentences to himself, and make brisk abrupt gestures of
command to imaginary audiences and armies.  October filled him with
hope which November raised to a sort of ecstatic triumph, and in
this mood the fleeting brilliant impressions of the summer at
Sherry Island were ready grist to his mill.  He became a golf
champion and defeated Mr. T. A. Hedrick in a marvellous match
played a hundred times over the fairways of his imagination, a
match each detail of which he changed about untiringly--sometimes
he won with almost laughable ease, sometimes he came up
magnificently from behind.  Again, stepping from a Pierce-Arrow
automobile, like Mr. Mortimer Jones, he strolled frigidly into the
lounge of the Sherry Island Golf Club--or perhaps, surrounded by an
admiring crowd, he gave an exhibition of fancy diving from the
spring-board of the club raft. . . .  Among those who watched him
in open-mouthed wonder was Mr. Mortimer Jones.

And one day it came to pass that Mr. Jones--himself and not his
ghost--came up to Dexter with tears in his eyes and said that
Dexter was the ---- best caddy in the club, and wouldn't he decide
not to quit if Mr. Jones made it worth his while, because every
other ---- caddy in the club lost one ball a hole for him--
regularly--

"No, sir," said Dexter decisively, "I don't want to caddy any
more."  Then, after a pause:  "I'm too old."

"You're not more than fourteen.  Why the devil did you decide just
this morning that you wanted to quit?  You promised that next week
you'd go over to the State tournament with me."

"I decided I was too old."

Dexter handed in his "A Class" badge, collected what money was due
him from the caddy master, and walked home to Black Bear Village.

"The best ---- caddy I ever saw," shouted Mr. Mortimer Jones over a
drink that afternoon.  "Never lost a ball!  Willing!  Intelligent!
Quiet!  Honest!  Grateful!"

The little girl who had done this was eleven--beautifully ugly as
little girls are apt to be who are destined after a few years to be
inexpressibly lovely and bring no end of misery to a great number
of men.  The spark, however, was perceptible.  There was a general
ungodliness in the way her lips twisted down at the corners when
she smiled, and in the--Heaven help us!--in the almost passionate
quality of her eyes.  Vitality is born early in such women.  It was
utterly in evidence now, shining through her thin frame in a sort
of glow.

She had come eagerly out on to the course at nine o'clock with a
white linen nurse and five small new golf-clubs in a white canvas
bag which the nurse was carrying.  When Dexter first saw her she
was standing by the caddy house, rather ill at ease and trying to
conceal the fact by engaging her nurse in an obviously unnatural
conversation graced by startling and irrelevant grimaces from
herself.

"Well, it's certainly a nice day, Hilda," Dexter heard her say.
She drew down the corners of her mouth, smiled, and glanced
furtively around, her eyes in transit falling for an instant on
Dexter.

Then to the nurse:

"Well, I guess there aren't very many people out here this morning,
are there?"

The smile again--radiant, blatantly artificial--convincing.

"I don't know what we're supposed to do now," said the nurse,
looking nowhere in particular.

"Oh, that's all right.  I'll fix it up."

Dexter stood perfectly still, his mouth slightly ajar.  He knew
that if he moved forward a step his stare would be in her line of
vision--if he moved backward he would lose his full view of her
face.  For a moment he had not realized how young she was.  Now he
remembered having seen her several times the year before--in
bloomers.

Suddenly, involuntarily, he laughed, a short abrupt laugh--then,
startled by himself, he turned and began to walk quickly away.

"Boy!"

Dexter stopped.

"Boy--"

Beyond question he was addressed.  Not only that, but he was
treated to that absurd smile, that preposterous smile--the memory
of which at least a dozen men were to carry into middle age.

"Boy, do you know where the golf teacher is?"

"He's giving a lesson."

"Well, do you know where the caddy-master is?"

"He isn't here yet this morning."

"Oh."  For a moment this baffled her.  She stood alternately on her
right and left foot.

"We'd like to get a caddy," said the nurse.  "Mrs. Mortimer Jones
sent us out to play golf, and we don't know how without we get a
caddy."

Here she was stopped by an ominous glance from Miss Jones, followed
immediately by the smile.

"There aren't any caddies here except me," said Dexter to the
nurse, "and I got to stay here in charge until the caddy-master
gets here."

"Oh."

Miss Jones and her retinue now withdrew, and at a proper distance
from Dexter became involved in a heated conversation, which was
concluded by Miss Jones taking one of the clubs and hitting it on
the ground with violence.  For further emphasis she raised it again
and was about to bring it down smartly upon the nurse's bosom, when
the nurse seized the club and twisted it from her hands.

"You damn little mean old THING!" cried Miss Jones wildly.

Another argument ensued.  Realizing that the elements of the comedy
were implied in the scene, Dexter several times began to laugh, but
each time restrained the laugh before it reached audibility.  He
could not resist the monstrous conviction that the little girl was
justified in beating the nurse.

The situation was resolved by the fortuitous appearance of the
caddy-master, who was appealed to immediately by the nurse.

"Miss Jones is to have a little caddy, and this one says he can't
go."

"Mr. McKenna said I was to wait here till you came," said Dexter
quickly.

"Well, he's here now."  Miss Jones smiled cheerfully at the caddy-
master.  Then she dropped her bag and set off at a haughty mince
toward the first tee.

"Well?"  The caddy-master turned to Dexter.  "What you standing
there like a dummy for?  Go pick up the young lady's clubs."

"I don't think I'll go out to-day," said Dexter.

"You don't--"

"I think I'll quit."

The enormity of his decision frightened him.  He was a favorite
caddy, and the thirty dollars a month he earned through the summer
were not to be made elsewhere around the lake.  But he had received
a strong emotional shock, and his perturbation required a violent
and immediate outlet.

It is not so simple as that, either.  As so frequently would be the
case in the future, Dexter was unconsciously dictated to by his
winter dreams.


II


Now, of course, the quality and the seasonability of these winter
dreams varied, but the stuff of them remained.  They persuaded
Dexter several years later to pass up a business course at the
State university--his father, prospering now, would have paid his
way--for the precarious advantage of attending an older and more
famous university in the East, where he was bothered by his scanty
funds.  But do not get the impression, because his winter dreams
happened to be concerned at first with musings on the rich, that
there was anything merely snobbish in the boy.  He wanted not
association with glittering things and glittering people--he wanted
the glittering things themselves.  Often he reached out for the
best without knowing why he wanted it--and sometimes he ran up
against the mysterious denials and prohibitions in which life
indulges.  It is with one of those denials and not with his career
as a whole that this story deals.

He made money.  It was rather amazing.  After college he went to
the city from which Black Bear Lake draws its wealthy patrons.
When he was only twenty-three and had been there not quite two
years, there were already people who liked to say:  "Now THERE'S a
boy--"  All about him rich men's sons were peddling bonds
precariously, or investing patrimonies precariously, or plodding
through the two dozen volumes of the "George Washington Commercial
Course," but Dexter borrowed a thousand dollars on his college
degree and his confident mouth, and bought a partnership in a
laundry.

It was a small laundry when he went into it but Dexter made a
specialty of learning how the English washed fine woollen golf-
stockings without shrinking them, and within a year he was catering
to the trade that wore knickerbockers.  Men were insisting that
their Shetland hose and sweaters go to his laundry just as they had
insisted on a caddy who could find golf-balls.  A little later he
was doing their wives' lingerie as well--and running five branches
in different parts of the city.  Before he was twenty-seven he
owned the largest string of laundries in his section of the
country.  It was then that he sold out and went to New York.  But
the part of his story that concerns us goes back to the days when
he was making his first big success.

When he was twenty-three Mr. Hart--one of the gray-haired men who
like to say "Now there's a boy"--gave him a guest card to the
Sherry Island Golf Club for a week-end.  So he signed his name one
day on the register, and that afternoon played golf in a foursome
with Mr. Hart and Mr. Sandwood and Mr. T. A. Hedrick.  He did not
consider it necessary to remark that he had once carried Mr. Hart's
bag over this same links, and that he knew every trap and gully
with his eyes shut--but he found himself glancing at the four
caddies who trailed them, trying to catch a gleam or gesture that
would remind him of himself, that would lessen the gap which lay
between his present and his past.

It was a curious day, slashed abruptly with fleeting, familiar
impressions.  One minute he had the sense of being a trespasser--in
the next he was impressed by the tremendous superiority he felt
toward Mr. T. A. Hedrick, who was a bore and not even a good golfer
any more.

Then, because of a ball Mr. Hart lost near the fifteenth green, an
enormous thing happened.  While they were searching the stiff
grasses of the rough there was a clear call of "Fore!" from behind
a hill in their rear.  And as they all turned abruptly from their
search a bright new ball sliced abruptly over the hill and caught
Mr. T. A. Hedrick in the abdomen.

"By Gad!" cried Mr. T. A. Hedrick, "they ought to put some of these
crazy women off the course.  It's getting to be outrageous."

A head and a voice came up together over the hill:

"Do you mind if we go through?"

"You hit me in the stomach!" declared Mr. Hedrick wildly.

"Did I?"  The girl approached the group of men.  "I'm sorry.  I
yelled 'Fore!'"

Her glance fell casually on each of the men--then scanned the
fairway for her ball.

"Did I bounce into the rough?"

It was impossible to determine whether this question was ingenuous
or malicious.  In a moment, however, she left no doubt, for as her
partner came up over the hill she called cheerfully:

"Here I am!  I'd have gone on the green except that I hit
something."

As she took her stance for a short mashie shot, Dexter looked at
her closely.  She wore a blue gingham dress, rimmed at throat and
shoulders with a white edging that accentuated her tan.  The
quality of exaggeration, of thinness, which had made her passionate
eyes and down-turning mouth absurd at eleven, was gone now.  She
was arrestingly beautiful.  The color in her cheeks was centered
like the color in a picture--it was not a "high" color, but a son
of fluctuating and feverish warmth, so shaded that it seemed at any
moment it would recede and disappear.  This color and the mobility
of her mouth gave a continual impression of flux, of intense life,
of passionate vitality--balanced only partially by the sad luxury
of her eyes.

She swung her mashie impatiently and without interest, pitching the
ball into a sand-pit on the other side of the green.  With a quick,
insincere smile and a careless "Thank you!" she went on after it.

"That Judy Jones!" remarked Mr. Hedrick on the next tee, as they
waited--some moments--for her to play on ahead.  "All she needs is
to be turned up and spanked for six months and then to be married
off to an old-fashioned cavalry captain."

"My God, she's good-looking!" said Mr. Sandwood, who was just over
thirty.

"Good-looking!" cried Mr. Hedrick contemptuously, "she always looks
as if she wanted to be kissed!  Turning those big cow-eyes on every
calf in town!"

It was doubtful if Mr. Hedrick intended a reference to the maternal
instinct.

"She'd play pretty good golf if she'd try," said Mr. Sandwood.

"She has no form," said Mr. Hedrick solemnly.

"She has a nice figure," said Mr. Sandwood.

"Better thank the Lord she doesn't drive a swifter ball," said Mr.
Hart, winking at Dexter.

Later in the afternoon the sun went down with a riotous swirl of
gold and varying blues and scarlets, and left the dry, rustling
night of Western summer.  Dexter watched from the veranda of the
Golf Club, watched the even overlap of the waters in the little
wind, silver molasses under the harvest-moon.  Then the moon held a
finger to her lips and the lake became a clear pool, pale and
quiet.  Dexter put on his bathing-suit and swam out to the farthest
raft, where he stretched dripping on the wet canvas of the
springboard.

There was a fish jumping and a star shining and the lights around
the lake were gleaming.  Over on a dark peninsula a piano was
playing the songs of last summer and of summers before that--songs
from "Chin-Chin" and "The Count of Luxemburg" and "The Chocolate
Soldier"--and because the sound of a piano over a stretch of water
had always seemed beautiful to Dexter he lay perfectly quiet and
listened.

The tune the piano was playing at that moment had been gay and new
five years before when Dexter was a sophomore at college.  They had
played it at a prom once when he could not afford the luxury of
proms, and he had stood outside the gymnasium and listened.  The
sound of the tune precipitated in him a sort of ecstasy and it was
with that ecstasy he viewed what happened to him now.  It was a
mood of intense appreciation, a sense that, for once, he was
magnificently attune to life and that everything about him was
radiating a brightness and a glamour he might never know again.

A low, pale oblong detached itself suddenly from the darkness of
the Island, spitting forth the reverberate sound of a racing motor-
boat.  Two white streamers of cleft water rolled themselves out
behind it and almost immediately the boat was beside him, drowning
out the hot tinkle of the piano in the drone of its spray.  Dexter
raising himself on his arms was aware of a figure standing at the
wheel, of two dark eyes regarding him over the lengthening space of
water--then the boat had gone by and was sweeping in an immense and
purposeless circle of spray round and round in the middle of the
lake.  With equal eccentricity one of the circles flattened out and
headed back toward the raft.

"Who's that?" she called, shutting off her motor.  She was so near
now that Dexter could see her bathing-suit, which consisted
apparently of pink rompers.

The nose of the boat bumped the raft, and as the latter tilted
rakishly he was precipitated toward her.  With different degrees of
interest they recognized each other.

"Aren't you one of those men we played through this afternoon?" she
demanded.

He was.

"Well, do you know how to drive a motor-boat?  Because if you do I
wish you'd drive this one so I can ride on the surf-board behind.
My name is Judy Jones"--she favored him with an absurd smirk--
rather, what tried to be a smirk, for, twist her mouth as she
might, it was not grotesque, it was merely beautiful--"and I live
in a house over there on the Island, and in that house there is a
man waiting for me.  When he drove up at the door I drove out of
the dock because he says I'm his ideal."

There was a fish jumping and a star shining and the lights around
the lake were gleaming.  Dexter sat beside Judy Jones and she
explained how her boat was driven.  Then she was in the water,
swimming to the floating surfboard with a sinuous crawl.  Watching
her was without effort to the eye, watching a branch waving or a
sea-gull flying.  Her arms, burned to butternut, moved sinuously
among the dull platinum ripples, elbow appearing first, casting the
forearm back with a cadence of falling water, then reaching out and
down, stabbing a path ahead.

They moved out into the lake; turning, Dexter saw that she was
kneeling on the low rear of the now uptilted surf-board.

"Go faster," she called, "fast as it'll go."

Obediently he jammed the lever forward and the white spray mounted
at the bow.  When he looked around again the girl was standing up
on the rushing board, her arms spread wide, her eyes lifted toward
the moon.

"It's awful cold," she shouted.  "What's your name?"

He told her.

"Well, why don't you come to dinner to-morrow night?"

His heart turned over like the fly-wheel of the boat, and, for the
second time, her casual whim gave a new direction to his life.


III


Next evening while he waited for her to come down-stairs, Dexter
peopled the soft deep summer room and the sun-porch that opened
from it with the men who had already loved Judy Jones.  He knew the
sort of men they were--the men who when he first went to college
had entered from the great prep schools with graceful clothes and
the deep tan of healthy summers.  He had seen that, in one sense,
he was better than these men.  He was newer and stronger.  Yet in
acknowledging to himself that he wished his children to be like
them he was admitting that he was but the rough, strong stuff from
which they eternally sprang.

When the time had come for him to wear good clothes, he had known
who were the best tailors in America, and the best tailors in
America had made him the suit he wore this evening.  He had
acquired that particular reserve peculiar to his university, that
set it off from other universities.  He recognized the value to him
of such a mannerism and he had adopted it; he knew that to be
careless in dress and manner required more confidence than to be
careful.  But carelessness was for his children.  His mother's name
had been Krimslich.  She was a Bohemian of the peasant class and
she had talked broken English to the end of her days.  Her son must
keep to the set patterns.

At a little after seven Judy Jones came down-stairs.  She wore a
blue silk afternoon dress, and he was disappointed at first that
she had not put on something more elaborate.  This feeling was
accentuated when, after a brief greeting, she went to the door of a
butler's pantry and pushing it open called:  "You can serve dinner,
Martha."  He had rather expected that a butler would announce
dinner, that there would be a cocktail.  Then he put these thoughts
behind him as they sat down side by side on a lounge and looked at
each other.

"Father and mother won't be here," she said thoughtfully.

He remembered the last time he had seen her father, and he was glad
the parents were not to be here to-night--they might wonder who he
was.  He had been born in Keeble, a Minnesota village fifty miles
farther north, and he always gave Keeble as his home instead of
Black Bear Village.  Country towns were well enough to come from if
they weren't inconveniently in sight and used as footstools by
fashionable lakes.

They talked of his university, which she had visited frequently
during the past two years, and of the near-by city which supplied
Sherry Island with its patrons, and whither Dexter would return
next day to his prospering laundries.

During dinner she slipped into a moody depression which gave Dexter
a feeling of uneasiness.  Whatever petulance she uttered in her
throaty voice worried him.  Whatever she smiled at--at him, at a
chicken liver, at nothing--it disturbed him that her smile could
have no root in mirth, or even in amusement.  When the scarlet
corners of her lips curved down, it was less a smile than an
invitation to a kiss.

Then, after dinner, she led him out on the dark sun-porch and
deliberately changed the atmosphere.

"Do you mind if I weep a little?" she said.

"I'm afraid I'm boring you," he responded quickly.

"You're not.  I like you.  But I've just had a terrible afternoon.
There was a man I cared about, and this afternoon he told me out of
a clear sky that he was poor as a church-mouse.  He'd never even
hinted it before.  Does this sound horribly mundane?"

"Perhaps he was afraid to tell you."

"Suppose he was," she answered.  "He didn't start right.  You see,
if I'd thought of him as poor--well, I've been mad about loads of
poor men, and fully intended to marry them all.  But in this case,
I hadn't thought of him that way, and my interest in him wasn't
strong enough to survive the shock.  As if a girl calmly informed
her fiancé that she was a widow.  He might not object to widows,
but--

"Let's start right," she interrupted herself suddenly.  "Who are
you, anyhow?"

For a moment Dexter hesitated.  Then:

"I'm nobody," he announced.  "My career is largely a matter of
futures."

"Are you poor?"

"No," he said frankly, "I'm probably making more money than any man
my age in the Northwest.  I know that's an obnoxious remark, but
you advised me to start right."

There was a pause.  Then she smiled and the corners of her mouth
drooped and an almost imperceptible sway brought her closer to him,
looking up into his eyes.  A lump rose in Dexter's throat, and he
waited breathless for the experiment, facing the unpredictable
compound that would form mysteriously from the elements of their
lips.  Then he saw--she communicated her excitement to him,
lavishly, deeply, with kisses that were not a promise but a
fulfillment.  They aroused in him not hunger demanding renewal but
surfeit that would demand more surfeit . . . kisses that were like
charity, creating want by holding back nothing at all.

It did not take him many hours to decide that he had wanted Judy
Jones ever since he was a proud, desirous little boy.


IV


It began like that--and continued, with varying shades of
intensity, on such a note right up to the dénouement.  Dexter
surrendered a part of himself to the most direct and unprincipled
personality with which he had ever come in contact.  Whatever Judy
wanted, she went after with the full pressure of her charm.  There
was no divergence of method, no jockeying for position or
premeditation of effects--there was a very little mental side to
any of her affairs.  She simply made men conscious to the highest
degree of her physical loveliness.  Dexter had no desire to change
her.  Her deficiencies were knit up with a passionate energy that
transcended and justified them.

When, as Judy's head lay against his shoulder that first night, she
whispered, "I don't know what's the matter with me.  Last night I
thought I was in love with a man and to-night I think I'm in love
with you--"--it seemed to him a beautiful and romantic thing to
say.  It was the exquisite excitability that for the moment he
controlled and owned.  But a week later he was compelled to view
this same quality in a different light.  She took him in her
roadster to a picnic supper, and after supper she disappeared,
likewise in her roadster, with another man.  Dexter became
enormously upset and was scarcely able to be decently civil to the
other people present.  When she assured him that she had not kissed
the other man, he knew she was lying--yet he was glad that she had
taken the trouble to lie to him.

He was, as he found before the summer ended, one of a varying dozen
who circulated about her.  Each of them had at one time been
favored above all others--about half of them still basked in the
solace of occasional sentimental revivals.  Whenever one showed
signs of dropping out through long neglect, she granted him a brief
honeyed hour, which encouraged him to tag along for a year or so
longer.  Judy made these forays upon the helpless and defeated
without malice, indeed half unconscious that there was anything
mischievous in what she did.

When a new man came to town every one dropped out--dates were
automatically cancelled.

The helpless part of trying to do anything about it was that she
did it all herself.  She was not a girl who could be "won" in the
kinetic sense--she was proof against cleverness, she was proof
against charm; if any of these assailed her too strongly she would
immediately resolve the affair to a physical basis, and under the
magic of her physical splendor the strong as well as the brilliant
played her game and not their own.  She was entertained only by the
gratification of her desires and by the direct exercise of her own
charm.  Perhaps from so much youthful love, so many youthful
lovers, she had come, in self-defense, to nourish herself wholly
from within.

Succeeding Dexter's first exhilaration came restlessness and
dissatisfaction.  The helpless ecstasy of losing himself in her was
opiate rather than tonic.  It was fortunate for his work during the
winter that those moments of ecstasy came infrequently.  Early in
their acquaintance it had seemed for a while that there was a deep
and spontaneous mutual attraction--that first August, for example--
three days of long evenings on her dusky veranda, of strange wan
kisses through the late afternoon, in shadowy alcoves or behind the
protecting trellises of the garden arbors, of mornings when she was
fresh as a dream and almost shy at meeting him in the clarity of
the rising day.  There was all the ecstasy of an engagement about
it, sharpened by his realization that there was no engagement.  It
was during those three days that, for the first time, he had asked
her to marry him.  She said "maybe some day," she said "kiss me,"
she said "I'd like to marry you," she said "I love you"--she said--
nothing.

The three days were interrupted by the arrival of a New York man
who visited at her house for half September.  To Dexter's agony,
rumor engaged them.  The man was the son of the president of a
great trust company.  But at the end of a month it was reported
that Judy was yawning.  At a dance one night she sat all evening in
a motor-boat with a local beau, while the New Yorker searched the
club for her frantically.  She told the local beau that she was
bored with her visitor, and two days later he left.  She was seen
with him at the station, and it was reported that he looked very
mournful indeed.

On this note the summer ended.  Dexter was twenty-four, and he
found himself increasingly in a position to do as he wished.  He
joined two clubs in the city and lived at one of them.  Though he
was by no means an integral part of the stag-lines at these clubs,
he managed to be on hand at dances where Judy Jones was likely to
appear.  He could have gone out socially as much as he liked--he
was an eligible young man, now, and popular with down-town fathers.
His confessed devotion to Judy Jones had rather solidified his
position.  But he had no social aspirations and rather despised the
dancing men who were always on tap for the Thursday or Saturday
parties and who filled in at dinners with the younger married set.
Already he was playing with the idea of going East to New York.  He
wanted to take Judy Jones with him.  No disillusion as to the world
in which she had grown up could cure his illusion as to her
desirability.

Remember that--for only in the light of it can what he did for her
be understood.

Eighteen months after he first met Judy Jones he became engaged to
another girl.  Her name was Irene Scheerer, and her father was one
of the men who had always believed in Dexter.  Irene was light-
haired and sweet and honorable, and a little stout, and she had two
suitors whom she pleasantly relinquished when Dexter formally asked
her to marry him.

Summer, fall, winter, spring, another summer, another fall--so much
he had given of his active life to the incorrigible lips of Judy
Jones.  She had treated him with interest, with encouragement, with
malice, with indifference, with contempt.  She had inflicted on him
the innumerable little slights and indignities possible in such a
case--as if in revenge for having ever cared for him at all.  She
had beckoned him and yawned at him and beckoned him again and he
had responded often with bitterness and narrowed eyes.  She had
brought him ecstatic happiness and intolerable agony of spirit.
She had caused him untold inconvenience and not a little trouble.
She had insulted him, and she had ridden over him, and she had
played his interest in her against his interest in his work--for
fun.  She had done everything to him except to criticise him--this
she had not done--it seemed to him only because it might have
sullied the utter indifference she manifested and sincerely felt
toward him.

When autumn had come and gone again it occurred to him that he
could not have Judy Jones.  He had to beat this into his mind but
he convinced himself at last.  He lay awake at night for a while
and argued it over.  He told himself the trouble and the pain she
had caused him, he enumerated her glaring deficiencies as a wife.
Then he said to himself that he loved her, and after a while he
fell asleep.  For a week, lest he imagined her husky voice over the
telephone or her eyes opposite him at lunch, he worked hard and
late, and at night he went to his office and plotted out his years.

At the end of a week he went to a dance and cut in on her once.
For almost the first time since they had met he did not ask her to
sit out with him or tell her that she was lovely.  It hurt him that
she did not miss these things--that was all.  He was not jealous
when he saw that there was a new man to-night.  He had been
hardened against jealousy long before.

He stayed late at the dance.  He sat for an hour with Irene
Scheerer and talked about books and about music.  He knew very
little about either.  But he was beginning to be master of his own
time now, and he had a rather priggish notion that he--the young
and already fabulously successful Dexter Green--should know more
about such things.

That was in October, when he was twenty-five.  In January, Dexter
and Irene became engaged.  It was to be announced in June, and they
were to be married three months later.

The Minnesota winter prolonged itself interminably, and it was
almost May when the winds came soft and the snow ran down into
Black Bear Lake at last.  For the first time in over a year Dexter
was enjoying a certain tranquility of spirit.  Judy Jones had been
in Florida, and afterward in Hot Springs, and somewhere she had
been engaged, and somewhere she had broken it off.  At first, when
Dexter had definitely given her up, it had made him sad that people
still linked them together and asked for news of her, but when he
began to be placed at dinner next to Irene Scheerer people didn't
ask him about her any more--they told him about her.  He ceased to
be an authority on her.

May at last.  Dexter walked the streets at night when the darkness
was damp as rain, wondering that so soon, with so little done, so
much of ecstasy had gone from him.  May one year back had been
marked by Judy's poignant, unforgivable, yet forgiven turbulence--
it had been one of those rare times when he fancied she had grown
to care for him.  That old penny's worth of happiness he had spent
for this bushel of content.  He knew that Irene would be no more
than a curtain spread behind him, a hand moving among gleaming tea-
cups, a voice calling to children . . . fire and loveliness were
gone, the magic of nights and the wonder of the varying hours and
seasons . . . slender lips, down-turning, dropping to his lips and
bearing him up into a heaven of eyes. . . .  The thing was deep in
him.  He was too strong and alive for it to die lightly.

In the middle of May when the weather balanced for a few days on
the thin bridge that led to deep summer he turned in one night at
Irene's house.  Their engagement was to be announced in a week
now--no one would be surprised at it.  And to-night they would sit
together on the lounge at the University Club and look on for an
hour at the dancers.  It gave him a sense of solidity to go with
her--she was so sturdily popular, so intensely "great."

He mounted the steps of the brownstone house and stepped inside.

"Irene," he called.

Mrs. Scheerer came out of the living-room to meet him.

"Dexter," she said, "Irene's gone up-stairs with a splitting
headache.  She wanted to go with you but I made her go to bed."

"Nothing serious, I--"

"Oh, no.  She's going to play golf with you in the morning.  You
can spare her for just one night, can't you, Dexter?"

Her smile was kind.  She and Dexter liked each other.  In the
living-room he talked for a moment before he said good-night.

Returning to the University Club, where he had rooms, he stood in
the doorway for a moment and watched the dancers.  He leaned
against the door-post, nodded at a man or two--yawned.

"Hello, darling."

The familiar voice at his elbow startled him.  Judy Jones had left
a man and crossed the room to him--Judy Jones, a slender enamelled
doll in cloth of gold: gold in a band at her head, gold in two
slipper points at her dress's hem.  The fragile glow of her face
seemed to blossom as she smiled at him.  A breeze of warmth and
light blew through the room.  His hands in the pockets of his
dinner-jacket tightened spasmodically.  He was filled with a sudden
excitement.

"When did you get back?" he asked casually.

"Come here and I'll tell you about it."

She turned and he followed her.  She had been away--he could have
wept at the wonder of her return.  She had passed through enchanted
streets, doing things that were like provocative music.  All
mysterious happenings, all fresh and quickening hopes, had gone
away with her, come back with her now.

She turned in the doorway.

"Have you a car here?  If you haven't, I have."

"I have a coupé."

In then, with a rustle of golden cloth.  He slammed the door.  Into
so many cars she had stepped--like this--like that--her back
against the leather, so--her elbow resting on the door--waiting.
She would have been soiled long since had there been anything to
soil her--except herself--but this was her own self outpouring.

With an effort he forced himself to start the car and back into the
street.  This was nothing, he must remember.  She had done this
before, and he had put her behind him, as he would have crossed a
bad account from his books.

He drove slowly down-town and, affecting abstraction, traversed the
deserted streets of the business section, peopled here and there
where a movie was giving out its crowd or where consumptive or
pugilistic youth lounged in front of pool halls.  The clink of
glasses and the slap of hands on the bars issued from saloons,
cloisters of glazed glass and dirty yellow light.

She was watching him closely and the silence was embarrassing, yet
in this crisis he could find no casual word with which to profane
the hour.  At a convenient turning he began to zigzag back toward
the University Club.

"Have you missed me?" she asked suddenly.

"Everybody missed you."

He wondered if she knew of Irene Scheerer.  She had been back only
a day--her absence had been almost contemporaneous with his
engagement.

"What a remark!"  Judy laughed sadly--without sadness.  She looked
at him searchingly.  He became absorbed in the dashboard.

"You're handsomer than you used to be," she said thoughtfully.
"Dexter, you have the most rememberable eyes."

He could have laughed at this, but he did not laugh.  It was the
sort of thing that was said to sophomores.  Yet it stabbed at him.

"I'm awfully tired of everything, darling."  She called every one
darling, endowing the endearment with careless, individual
comraderie.  "I wish you'd marry me."

The directness of this confused him.  He should have told her now
that he was going to marry another girl, but he could not tell her.
He could as easily have sworn that he had never loved her.

"I think we'd get along," she continued, on the same note, "unless
probably you've forgotten me and fallen in love with another girl."

Her confidence was obviously enormous.  She had said, in effect,
that she found such a thing impossible to believe, that if it were
true he had merely committed a childish indiscretion--and probably
to show off.  She would forgive him, because it was not a matter of
any moment but rather something to be brushed aside lightly.

"Of course you could never love anybody but me," she continued.  "I
like the way you love me.  Oh, Dexter, have you forgotten last
year?"

"No, I haven't forgotten."

"Neither have I!"

Was she sincerely moved--or was she carried along by the wave of
her own acting?

"I wish we could be like that again," she said, and he forced
himself to answer:

"I don't think we can."

"I suppose not. . . .  I hear you're giving Irene Scheerer a
violent rush."

There was not the faintest emphasis on the name, yet Dexter was
suddenly ashamed.

"Oh, take me home," cried Judy suddenly; "I don't want to go back
to that idiotic dance--with those children."

Then, as he turned up the street that led to the residence
district, Judy began to cry quietly to herself.  He had never seen
her cry before.

The dark street lightened, the dwellings of the rich loomed up
around them, he stopped his coupé in front of the great white bulk
of the Mortimer Joneses house, somnolent, gorgeous, drenched with
the splendor of the damp moonlight.  Its solidity startled him.
The strong walls, the steel of the girders, the breadth and beam
and pomp of it were there only to bring out the contrast with the
young beauty beside him.  It was sturdy to accentuate her
slightness--as if to show what a breeze could be generated by a
butterfly's wing.

He sat perfectly quiet, his nerves in wild clamor, afraid that if
he moved he would find her irresistibly in his arms.  Two tears had
rolled down her wet face and trembled on her upper lip.

"I'm more beautiful than anybody else," she said brokenly, "why
can't I be happy?"  Her moist eyes tore at his stability--her mouth
turned slowly downward with an exquisite sadness:  "I'd like to
marry you if you'll have me, Dexter.  I suppose you think I'm not
worth having, but I'll be so beautiful for you, Dexter."

A million phrases of anger, pride, passion, hatred, tenderness
fought on his lips.  Then a perfect wave of emotion washed over
him, carrying off with it a sediment of wisdom, of convention, of
doubt, of honor.  This was his girl who was speaking, his own, his
beautiful, his pride.

"Won't you come in?"  He heard her draw in her breath sharply.

Waiting.

"All right," his voice was trembling, "I'll come in."


V


It was strange that neither when it was over nor a long time
afterward did he regret that night.  Looking at it from the
perspective of ten years, the fact that Judy's flare for him
endured just one month seemed of little importance.  Nor did it
matter that by his yielding he subjected himself to a deeper agony
in the end and gave serious hurt to Irene Scheerer and to Irene's
parents, who had befriended him.  There was nothing sufficiently
pictorial about Irene's grief to stamp itself on his mind.

Dexter was at bottom hard-minded.  The attitude of the city on his
action was of no importance to him, not because he was going to
leave the city, but because any outside attitude on the situation
seemed superficial.  He was completely indifferent to popular
opinion.  Nor, when he had seen that it was no use, that he did not
possess in himself the power to move fundamentally or to hold Judy
Jones, did he bear any malice toward her.  He loved her, and he
would love her until the day he was too old for loving--but he
could not have her.  So he tasted the deep pain that is reserved
only for the strong, just as he had tasted for a little while the
deep happiness.

Even the ultimate falsity of the grounds upon which Judy terminated
the engagement that she did not want to "take him away" from Irene--
Judy, who had wanted nothing else--did not revolt him.  He was
beyond any revulsion or any amusement.

He went East in February with the intention of selling out his
laundries and settling in New York--but the war came to America in
March and changed his plans.  He returned to the West, handed over
the management of the business to his partner, and went into the
first officers' training-camp in late April.  He was one of those
young thousands who greeted the war with a certain amount of
relief, welcoming the liberation from webs of tangled emotion.


VI


This story is not his biography, remember, although things creep
into it which have nothing to do with those dreams he had when he
was young.  We are almost done with them and with him now.  There
is only one more incident to be related here, and it happens seven
years farther on.

It took place in New York, where he had done well--so well that
there were no barriers too high for him.  He was thirty-two years
old, and, except for one flying trip immediately after the war, he
had not been West in seven years.  A man named Devlin from Detroit
came into his office to see him in a business way, and then and
there this incident occurred, and closed out, so to speak, this
particular side of his life.

"So you're from the Middle West," said the man Devlin with careless
curiosity.  "That's funny--I thought men like you were probably
born and raised on Wall Street.  You know--wife of one of my best
friends in Detroit came from your city.  I was an usher at the
wedding."

Dexter waited with no apprehension of what was coming.

"Judy Simms," said Devlin with no particular interest; "Judy Jones
she was once."

"Yes, I knew her."  A dull impatience spread over him.  He had
heard, of course, that she was married--perhaps deliberately he had
heard no more.

"Awfully nice girl," brooded Devlin meaninglessly, "I'm sort of
sorry for her."

"Why?"  Something in Dexter was alert, receptive, at once.

"Oh, Lud Simms has gone to pieces in a way.  I don't mean he ill-
uses her, but he drinks and runs around--"

"Doesn't she run around?"

"No.  Stays at home with her kids."

"Oh."

"She's a little too old for him," said Devlin.

"Too old!" cried Dexter.  "Why, man, she's only twenty-seven."

He was possessed with a wild notion of rushing out into the streets
and taking a train to Detroit.  He rose to his feet spasmodically.

"I guess you're busy," Devlin apologized quickly.  "I didn't
realize--"

"No, I'm not busy," said Dexter, steadying his voice.  "I'm not
busy at all.  Not busy at all.  Did you say she was--twenty-seven?
No, I said she was twenty-seven."

"Yes, you did," agreed Devlin dryly.

"Go on, then.  Go on."

"What do you mean?"

"About Judy Jones."

Devlin looked at him helplessly.

"Well, that's--I told you all there is to it.  He treats her like
the devil.  Oh, they're not going to get divorced or anything.
When he's particularly outrageous she forgives him.  In fact, I'm
inclined to think she loves him.  She was a pretty girl when she
first came to Detroit."

A pretty girl!  The phrase struck Dexter as ludicrous.

"Isn't she--a pretty girl, any more?"

"Oh, she's all right."

"Look here," said Dexter, sitting down suddenly, "I don't
understand.  You say she was a 'pretty girl' and now you say she's
'all right.'  I don't understand what you mean--Judy Jones wasn't a
pretty girl, at all.  She was a great beauty.  Why, I knew her, I
knew her.  She was--"

Devlin laughed pleasantly.

"I'm not trying to start a row," he said.  "I think Judy's a nice
girl and I like her.  I can't understand how a man like Lud Simms
could fall madly in love with her, but he did."  Then he added:
"Most of the women like her."

Dexter looked closely at Devlin, thinking wildly that there must be
a reason for this, some insensitivity in the man or some private
malice.

"Lots of women fade just like THAT," Devlin snapped his fingers.
"You must have seen it happen.  Perhaps I've forgotten how pretty
she was at her wedding.  I've seen her so much since then, you see.
She has nice eyes."

A sort of dulness settled down upon Dexter.  For the first time in
his life he felt like getting very drunk.  He knew that he was
laughing loudly at something Devlin had said, but he did not know
what it was or why it was funny.  When, in a few minutes, Devlin
went he lay down on his lounge and looked out the window at the New
York sky-line into which the sun was sinking in dull lovely shades
of pink and gold.

He had thought that having nothing else to lose he was invulnerable
at last--but he knew that he had just lost something more, as
surely as if he had married Judy Jones and seen her fade away
before his eyes.

The dream was gone.  Something had been taken from him.  In a sort
of panic he pushed the palms of his hands into his eyes and tried
to bring up a picture of the waters lapping on Sherry Island and
the moonlit veranda, and gingham on the golf-links and the dry sun
and the gold color of her neck's soft down.  And her mouth damp to
his kisses and her eyes plaintive with melancholy and her freshness
like new fine linen in the morning.  Why, these things were no
longer in the world!  They had existed and they existed no longer.

For the first time in years the tears were streaming down his face.
But they were for himself now.  He did not care about mouth and
eyes and moving hands.  He wanted to care, and he could not care.
For he had gone away and he could never go back any more.  The
gates were closed, the sun was gone down, and there was no beauty
but the gray beauty of steel that withstands all time.  Even the
grief he could have borne was left behind in the country of
illusion, of youth, of the richness of life, where his winter
dreams had flourished.

"Long ago," he said, "long ago, there was something in me, but now
that thing is gone.  Now that thing is gone, that thing is gone.  I
cannot cry.  I cannot care.  That thing will come back no more."



THE END








Then wear the gold hat, if that will move her;
  If you can bounce high, bounce for her too,
Till she cry "Lover, gold-hatted, high-bouncing lover,
  I must have you!"

                    --THOMAS PARKE D'INVILLIERS





Chapter 1



In my younger and more vulnerable years my father gave me some advice
that I've been turning over in my mind ever since.

"Whenever you feel like criticizing any one," he told me, "just
remember that all the people in this world haven't had the advantages
that you've had."

He didn't say any more but we've always been unusually communicative
in a reserved way, and I understood that he meant a great deal more
than that. In consequence I'm inclined to reserve all judgments,
a habit that has opened up many curious natures to me and also
made me the victim of not a few veteran bores. The abnormal mind
is quick to detect and attach itself to this quality when it
appears in a normal person, and so it came about that in college I
was unjustly accused of being a politician, because I was privy to the
secret griefs of wild, unknown men. Most of the confidences were
unsought--frequently I have feigned sleep, preoccupation, or a hostile
levity when I realized by some unmistakable sign that an intimate
revelation was quivering on the horizon--for the intimate revelations
of young men or at least the terms in which they express them are
usually plagiaristic and marred by obvious suppressions. Reserving
judgments is a matter of infinite hope. I am still a little afraid of
missing something if I forget that, as my father snobbishly suggested,
and I snobbishly repeat, a sense of the fundamental decencies is
parcelled out unequally at birth.

And, after boasting this way of my tolerance, I come to the admission
that it has a limit. Conduct may be founded on the hard rock or the wet
marshes but after a certain point I don't care what it's founded on.
When I came back from the East last autumn I felt that I wanted the
world to be in uniform and at a sort of moral attention forever; I
wanted no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses into the
human heart. Only Gatsby, the man who gives his name to this book, was
exempt from my reaction--Gatsby who represented everything for which I
have an unaffected scorn. If personality is an unbroken series of
successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him, some
heightened sensitivity to the promises of life, as if he were related
to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten
thousand miles away. This responsiveness had nothing to do with that
flabby impressionability which is dignified under the name of the
"creative temperament"--it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a romantic
readiness such as I have never found in any other person and which it
is not likely I shall ever find again. No--Gatsby turned out all right
at the end; it is what preyed on Gatsby, what foul dust floated in the
wake of his dreams that temporarily closed out my interest in the
abortive sorrows and short-winded elations of men.


My family have been prominent, well-to-do people in this middle-western
city for three generations. The Carraways are something of a clan and we
have a tradition that we're descended from the Dukes of Buccleuch, but the
actual founder of my line was my grandfather's brother who came here in
fifty-one, sent a substitute to the Civil War and started the wholesale
hardware business that my father carries on today.

I never saw this great-uncle but I'm supposed to look like him--with
special reference to the rather hard-boiled painting that hangs in
Father's office. I graduated from New Haven in 1915, just a quarter of a
century after my father, and a little later I participated in that
delayed Teutonic migration known as the Great War. I enjoyed the
counter-raid so thoroughly that I came back restless. Instead of being
the warm center of the world the middle-west now seemed like the
ragged edge of the universe--so I decided to go east and learn the bond
business. Everybody I knew was in the bond business so I supposed it
could support one more single man. All my aunts and uncles talked it
over as if they were choosing a prep-school for me and finally said,
"Why--ye-es" with very grave, hesitant faces. Father agreed to finance
me for a year and after various delays I came east, permanently, I
thought, in the spring of twenty-two.

The practical thing was to find rooms in the city but it was a warm
season and I had just left a country of wide lawns and friendly trees,
so when a young man at the office suggested that we take a house
together in a commuting town it sounded like a great idea. He found
the house, a weather beaten cardboard bungalow at eighty a month, but
at the last minute the firm ordered him to Washington and I went out
to the country alone. I had a dog, at least I had him for a few days
until he ran away, and an old Dodge and a Finnish woman who made my bed
and cooked breakfast and muttered Finnish wisdom to herself over the
electric stove.

It was lonely for a day or so until one morning some man, more recently
arrived than I, stopped me on the road.

"How do you get to West Egg village?" he asked helplessly.

I told him. And as I walked on I was lonely no longer. I was a guide, a
pathfinder, an original settler. He had casually conferred on me the
freedom of the neighborhood.

And so with the sunshine and the great bursts of leaves growing on the
trees--just as things grow in fast movies--I had that familiar
conviction that life was beginning over again with the summer.

There was so much to read for one thing and so much fine health to be
pulled down out of the young breath-giving air. I bought a dozen
volumes on banking and credit and investment securities and they stood
on my shelf in red and gold like new money from the mint, promising to
unfold the shining secrets that only Midas and Morgan and Maecenas
knew. And I had the high intention of reading many other books besides.
I was rather literary in college--one year I wrote a series of very
solemn and obvious editorials for the "Yale News"--and now I was going
to bring back all such things into my life and become again that most
limited of all specialists, the "well-rounded man." This isn't just an
epigram--life is much more successfully looked at from a single window,
after all.

It was a matter of chance that I should have rented a house in one of
the strangest communities in North America. It was on that slender
riotous island which extends itself due east of New York and where
there are, among other natural curiosities, two unusual formations of
land. Twenty miles from the city a pair of enormous eggs, identical in
contour and separated only by a courtesy bay, jut out into the most
domesticated body of salt water in the Western Hemisphere, the great
wet barnyard of Long Island Sound. They are not perfect ovals--like the
egg in the Columbus story they are both crushed flat at the contact
end--but their physical resemblance must be a source of perpetual
confusion to the gulls that fly overhead. To the wingless a more
arresting phenomenon is their dissimilarity in every particular except
shape and size.

I lived at West Egg, the--well, the less fashionable of the two, though
this is a most superficial tag to express the bizarre and not a little
sinister contrast between them. My house was at the very tip of the
egg, only fifty yards from the Sound, and squeezed between two huge
places that rented for twelve or fifteen thousand a season. The one on
my right was a colossal affair by any standard--it was a factual
imitation of some Hôtel de Ville in Normandy, with a tower on one side,
spanking new under a thin beard of raw ivy, and a marble swimming pool
and more than forty acres of lawn and garden. It was Gatsby's mansion.
Or rather, as I didn't know Mr. Gatsby it was a mansion inhabited by
a gentleman of that name. My own house was an eye-sore, but it was a
small eye-sore, and it had been overlooked, so I had a view of the
water, a partial view of my neighbor's lawn, and the consoling
proximity of millionaires--all for eighty dollars a month.

Across the courtesy bay the white palaces of fashionable East Egg
glittered along the water, and the history of the summer really begins
on the evening I drove over there to have dinner with the Tom
Buchanans. Daisy was my second cousin once removed and I'd known Tom
in college. And just after the war I spent two days with them in
Chicago.

Her husband, among various physical accomplishments, had been one of
the most powerful ends that ever played football at New Haven--a
national figure in a way, one of those men who reach such an acute
limited excellence at twenty-one that everything afterward savors of
anti-climax. His family were enormously wealthy--even in college his
freedom with money was a matter for reproach--but now he'd left Chicago
and come east in a fashion that rather took your breath away: for
instance he'd brought down a string of polo ponies from Lake Forest.
It was hard to realize that a man in my own generation was wealthy
enough to do that.

Why they came east I don't know. They had spent a year in France, for no
particular reason, and then drifted here and there unrestfully wherever
people played polo and were rich together. This was a permanent move,
said Daisy over the telephone, but I didn't believe it--I had no sight
into Daisy's heart but I felt that Tom would drift on forever seeking
a little wistfully for the dramatic turbulence of some irrecoverable
football game.

And so it happened that on a warm windy evening I drove over to East
Egg to see two old friends whom I scarcely knew at all. Their house was
even more elaborate than I expected, a cheerful red and white Georgian
Colonial mansion overlooking the bay. The lawn started at the beach
and ran toward the front door for a quarter of a mile, jumping over
sun-dials and brick walks and burning gardens--finally when it reached
the house drifting up the side in bright vines as though from the
momentum of its run. The front was broken by a line of French windows,
glowing now with reflected gold, and wide open to the warm windy
afternoon, and Tom Buchanan in riding clothes was standing with his
legs apart on the front porch.

He had changed since his New Haven years. Now he was a sturdy, straw haired
man of thirty with a rather hard mouth and a supercilious manner.
Two shining, arrogant eyes had established dominance over his face and
gave him the appearance of always leaning aggressively forward. Not
even the effeminate swank of his riding clothes could hide the enormous
power of that body--he seemed to fill those glistening boots until he
strained the top lacing and you could see a great pack of muscle
shifting when his shoulder moved under his thin coat. It was a body
capable of enormous leverage--a cruel body.

His speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added to the impression of
fractiousness he conveyed. There was a touch of paternal contempt in
it, even toward people he liked--and there were men at New Haven who had
hated his guts.

"Now, don't think my opinion on these matters is final," he seemed to
say, "just because I'm stronger and more of a man than you are." We
were in the same Senior Society, and while we were never intimate I
always had the impression that he approved of me and wanted me to like
him with some harsh, defiant wistfulness of his own.

We talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch.

"I've got a nice place here," he said, his eyes flashing about
restlessly.

Turning me around by one arm he moved a broad flat hand along the
front vista, including in its sweep a sunken Italian garden, a half
acre of deep pungent roses and a snub-nosed motor boat that bumped
the tide off shore.

"It belonged to Demaine the oil man." He turned me around again,
politely and abruptly. "We'll go inside."

We walked through a high hallway into a bright rosy-colored space,
fragilely bound into the house by French windows at either end.
The windows were ajar and gleaming white against the fresh grass
outside that seemed to grow a little way into the house. A breeze
blew through the room, blew curtains in at one end and out the other
like pale flags, twisting them up toward the frosted wedding cake of
the ceiling--and then rippled over the wine-colored rug, making a
shadow on it as wind does on the sea.

The only completely stationary object in the room was an enormous couch
on which two young women were buoyed up as though upon an anchored
balloon. They were both in white and their dresses were rippling and
fluttering as if they had just been blown back in after a short flight
around the house. I must have stood for a few moments listening to the
whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of a picture on the wall.
Then there was a boom as Tom Buchanan shut the rear windows and the caught
wind died out about the room and the curtains and the rugs and the two
young women ballooned slowly to the floor.

The younger of the two was a stranger to me. She was extended full length
at her end of the divan, completely motionless and with her chin raised
a little as if she were balancing something on it which was quite likely
to fall. If she saw me out of the corner of her eyes she gave no hint of
it--indeed, I was almost surprised into murmuring an apology for having
disturbed her by coming in.

The other girl, Daisy, made an attempt to rise--she leaned slightly
forward with a conscientious expression--then she laughed, an absurd,
charming little laugh, and I laughed too and came forward into the
room.

"I'm p-paralyzed with happiness."

She laughed again, as if she said something very witty, and held my hand
for a moment, looking up into my face, promising that there was no one
in the world she so much wanted to see. That was a way she had.
She hinted in a murmur that the surname of the balancing girl was Baker.
(I've heard it said that Daisy's murmur was only to make people
lean toward her; an irrelevant criticism that made it no less charming.)

At any rate Miss Baker's lips fluttered, she nodded at me almost
imperceptibly and then quickly tipped her head back again--the object
she was balancing had obviously tottered a little and given her something
of a fright. Again a sort of apology arose to my lips. Almost any
exhibition of complete self sufficiency draws a stunned tribute from me.

I looked back at my cousin who began to ask me questions in her low,
thrilling voice. It was the kind of voice that the ear follows up and
down as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never be
played again. Her face was sad and lovely with bright things in it,
bright eyes and a bright passionate mouth--but there was an excitement
in her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to forget:
a singing compulsion, a whispered "Listen," a promise that she had done
gay, exciting things just a while since and that there were gay,
exciting things hovering in the next hour.

I told her how I had stopped off in Chicago for a day on my way east
and how a dozen people had sent their love through me.

"Do they miss me?" she cried ecstatically.

"The whole town is desolate. All the cars have the left rear wheel
painted black as a mourning wreath and there's a persistent wail all
night along the North Shore."

"How gorgeous! Let's go back, Tom. Tomorrow!" Then she added
irrelevantly, "You ought to see the baby."

"I'd like to."

"She's asleep. She's two years old. Haven't you ever seen her?"

"Never."

"Well, you ought to see her. She's----"

Tom Buchanan who had been hovering restlessly about the room stopped
and rested his hand on my shoulder.

"What you doing, Nick?"

"I'm a bond man."

"Who with?"

I told him.

"Never heard of them," he remarked decisively.

This annoyed me.

"You will," I answered shortly. "You will if you stay in the East."

"Oh, I'll stay in the East, don't you worry," he said, glancing at
Daisy and then back at me, as if he were alert for something more.
"I'd be a God Damned fool to live anywhere else."

At this point Miss Baker said "Absolutely!" with such suddenness that I
started--it was the first word she uttered since I came into the room.
Evidently it surprised her as much as it did me, for she yawned and
with a series of rapid, deft movements stood up into the room.

"I'm stiff," she complained, "I've been lying on that sofa for as long
as I can remember."

"Don't look at me," Daisy retorted. "I've been trying to get you to New
York all afternoon."

"No, thanks," said Miss Baker to the four cocktails just in from the
pantry, "I'm absolutely in training."

Her host looked at her incredulously.

"You are!" He took down his drink as if it were a drop in the bottom of
a glass. "How you ever get anything done is beyond me."

I looked at Miss Baker wondering what it was she "got done." I enjoyed
looking at her. She was a slender, small-breasted girl, with an erect
carriage which she accentuated by throwing her body backward at the
shoulders like a young cadet. Her grey sun-strained eyes looked back at
me with polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming discontented
face. It occurred to me now that I had seen her, or a picture of her,
somewhere before.

"You live in West Egg," she remarked contemptuously. "I know somebody
there."

"I don't know a single----"

"You must know Gatsby."

"Gatsby?" demanded Daisy. "What Gatsby?"

Before I could reply that he was my neighbor dinner was announced;
wedging his tense arm imperatively under mine Tom Buchanan compelled
me from the room as though he were moving a checker to another square.

Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips the two
young women preceded us out onto a rosy-colored porch open toward the
sunset where four candles flickered on the table in the diminished
wind.

"Why CANDLES?" objected Daisy, frowning. She snapped them out with her
fingers. "In two weeks it'll be the longest day in the year."
She looked at us all radiantly. "Do you always watch for the longest day
of the year and then miss it? I always watch for the longest day in the
year and then miss it."

"We ought to plan something," yawned Miss Baker, sitting down at the
table as if she were getting into bed.

"All right," said Daisy. "What'll we plan?" She turned to me helplessly.
"What do people plan?"

Before I could answer her eyes fastened with an awed expression on her
little finger.

"Look!" she complained. "I hurt it."

We all looked--the knuckle was black and blue.

"You did it, Tom," she said accusingly. "I know you didn't mean to
but you DID do it. That's what I get for marrying a brute of a man,
a great big hulking physical specimen of a----"

"I hate that word hulking," objected Tom crossly, "even in kidding."

"Hulking," insisted Daisy.

Sometimes she and Miss Baker talked at once, unobtrusively and with a
bantering inconsequence that was never quite chatter, that was as cool
as their white dresses and their impersonal eyes in the absence of all
desire. They were here--and they accepted Tom and me, making only a
polite pleasant effort to entertain or to be entertained. They knew
that presently dinner would be over and a little later the evening too
would be over and casually put away. It was sharply different from the
West where an evening was hurried from phase to phase toward its
close in a continually disappointed anticipation or else in sheer
nervous dread of the moment itself.

"You make me feel uncivilized, Daisy," I confessed on my second glass
of corky but rather impressive claret. "Can't you talk about crops or
something?"

I meant nothing in particular by this remark but it was taken up in an
unexpected way.

"Civilization's going to pieces," broke out Tom violently.
"I've gotten to be a terrible pessimist about things. Have you read
'The Rise of the Coloured Empires' by this man Goddard?"

"Why, no," I answered, rather surprised by his tone.

"Well, it's a fine book, and everybody ought to read it. The idea is if
we don't look out the white race will be--will be utterly submerged.
It's all scientific stuff; it's been proved."

"Tom's getting very profound," said Daisy with an expression of
unthoughtful sadness. "He reads deep books with long words in them.
What was that word we----"

"Well, these books are all scientific," insisted Tom, glancing at her
impatiently. "This fellow has worked out the whole thing. It's up to us
who are the dominant race to watch out or these other races will have
control of things."

"We've got to beat them down," whispered Daisy, winking ferociously
toward the fervent sun.

"You ought to live in California--" began Miss Baker but Tom
interrupted her by shifting heavily in his chair.

"This idea is that we're Nordics. I am, and you are and you are
and----" After an infinitesimal hesitation he included Daisy with a
slight nod and she winked at me again. "--and we've produced all the
things that go to make civilization--oh, science and art and all that.
Do you see?"

There was something pathetic in his concentration as if his complacency,
more acute than of old, was not enough to him any more. When, almost
immediately, the telephone rang inside and the butler left the porch Daisy
seized upon the momentary interruption and leaned toward me.

"I'll tell you a family secret," she whispered enthusiastically. "It's
about the butler's nose. Do you want to hear about the butler's nose?"

"That's why I came over tonight."

"Well, he wasn't always a butler; he used to be the silver polisher for
some people in New York that had a silver service for two hundred people.
He had to polish it from morning till night until finally it began to
affect his nose----"

"Things went from bad to worse," suggested Miss Baker.

"Yes. Things went from bad to worse until finally he had to give up
his position."

For a moment the last sunshine fell with romantic affection upon
her glowing face; her voice compelled me forward breathlessly as
I listened--then the glow faded, each light deserting her with
lingering regret like children leaving a pleasant street at dusk.

The butler came back and murmured something close to Tom's ear
whereupon Tom frowned, pushed back his chair and without a word went
inside. As if his absence quickened something within her Daisy leaned
forward again, her voice glowing and singing.

"I love to see you at my table, Nick. You remind me of a--of a rose, an
absolute rose. Doesn't he?" She turned to Miss Baker for confirmation.
"An absolute rose?"

This was untrue. I am not even faintly like a rose. She was only
extemporizing but a stirring warmth flowed from her as if her
heart was trying to come out to you concealed in one of those
breathless, thrilling words. Then suddenly she threw her napkin on the
table and excused herself and went into the house.

Miss Baker and I exchanged a short glance consciously devoid of
meaning. I was about to speak when she sat up alertly and said "Sh!" in
a warning voice. A subdued impassioned murmur was audible in the room
beyond and Miss Baker leaned forward, unashamed, trying to hear. The
murmur trembled on the verge of coherence, sank down, mounted
excitedly, and then ceased altogether.

"This Mr. Gatsby you spoke of is my neighbor----" I said.

"Don't talk. I want to hear what happens."

"Is something happening?" I inquired innocently.

"You mean to say you don't know?" said Miss Baker, honestly surprised.
"I thought everybody knew."

"I don't."

"Why----" she said hesitantly, "Tom's got some woman in New York."

"Got some woman?" I repeated blankly.

Miss Baker nodded.

"She might have the decency not to telephone him at dinner-time. Don't
you think?"

Almost before I had grasped her meaning there was the flutter of
a dress and the crunch of leather boots and Tom and Daisy were back
at the table.

"It couldn't be helped!" cried Daisy with tense gayety.

She sat down, glanced searchingly at Miss Baker and then at me and
continued: "I looked outdoors for a minute and it's very romantic
outdoors. There's a bird on the lawn that I think must be a nightingale
come over on the Cunard or White Star Line. He's singing away----" her
voice sang "----It's romantic, isn't it, Tom?"

"Very romantic," he said, and then miserably to me: "If it's light enough
after dinner I want to take you down to the stables."

The telephone rang inside, startlingly, and as Daisy shook her
head decisively at Tom the subject of the stables, in fact all
subjects, vanished into air. Among the broken fragments of the
last five minutes at table I remember the candles being lit again,
pointlessly, and I was conscious of wanting to look squarely at every
one and yet to avoid all eyes. I couldn't guess what Daisy and Tom
were thinking but I doubt if even Miss Baker who seemed to have
mastered a certain hardy skepticism was able utterly to put this fifth
guest's shrill metallic urgency out of mind. To a certain temperament
the situation might have seemed intriguing--my own instinct was to
telephone immediately for the police.

The horses, needless to say, were not mentioned again. Tom and Miss
Baker, with several feet of twilight between them strolled back into
the library, as if to a vigil beside a perfectly tangible body, while
trying to look pleasantly interested and a little deaf I followed
Daisy around a chain of connecting verandas to the porch in front. In
its deep gloom we sat down side by side on a wicker settee.

Daisy took her face in her hands, as if feeling its lovely shape, and
her eyes moved gradually out into the velvet dusk. I saw that turbulent
emotions possessed her, so I asked what I thought would be some
sedative questions about her little girl.

"We don't know each other very well, Nick," she said suddenly.
"Even if we are cousins. You didn't come to my wedding."

"I wasn't back from the war."

"That's true." She hesitated. "Well, I've had a very bad time, Nick,
and I'm pretty cynical about everything."

Evidently she had reason to be. I waited but she didn't say any more,
and after a moment I returned rather feebly to the subject of her
daughter.

"I suppose she talks, and--eats, and everything."

"Oh, yes." She looked at me absently. "Listen, Nick; let me tell you what
I said when she was born. Would you like to hear?"

"Very much."

"It'll show you how I've gotten to feel about--things. Well, she was less
than an hour old and Tom was God knows where. I woke up out of the ether
with an utterly abandoned feeling and asked the nurse right away if it
was a boy or a girl. She told me it was a girl, and so I turned my head
away and wept. 'All right,' I said, 'I'm glad it's a girl. And I hope
she'll be a fool--that's the best thing a girl can be in this world,
a beautiful little fool."

"You see I think everything's terrible anyhow," she went on in a
convinced way. "Everybody thinks so--the most advanced people. And I KNOW.
I've been everywhere and seen everything and done everything."
Her eyes flashed around her in a defiant way, rather like Tom's, and she
laughed with thrilling scorn. "Sophisticated--God, I'm sophisticated!"

The instant her voice broke off, ceasing to compel my attention,
my belief, I felt the basic insincerity of what she had said.
It made me uneasy, as though the whole evening had been a trick
of some sort to exact a contributory emotion from me. I waited,
and sure enough, in a moment she looked at me with an absolute smirk
on her lovely face as if she had asserted her membership in a rather
distinguished secret society to which she and Tom belonged.


Inside, the crimson room bloomed with light. Tom and Miss Baker
sat at either end of the long couch and she read aloud to him from
the "Saturday Evening Post"--the words, murmurous and
uninflected, running together in a soothing tune. The lamp-light,
bright on his boots and dull on the autumn-leaf yellow of her hair,
glinted along the paper as she turned a page with a flutter of slender
muscles in her arms.

When we came in she held us silent for a moment with a lifted hand.

"To be continued," she said, tossing the magazine on the table, "in our
very next issue."

Her body asserted itself with a restless movement of her knee, and she
stood up.

"Ten o'clock," she remarked, apparently finding the time on the
ceiling. "Time for this good girl to go to bed."

"Jordan's going to play in the tournament tomorrow," explained Daisy,
"over at Westchester."

"Oh,--you're JORdan Baker."

I knew now why her face was familiar--its pleasing contemptuous
expression had looked out at me from many rotogravure pictures of
the sporting life at Asheville and Hot Springs and Palm Beach. I
had heard some story of her too, a critical, unpleasant story,
but what it was I had forgotten long ago.

"Good night," she said softly. "Wake me at eight, won't you."

"If you'll get up."

"I will. Good night, Mr. Carraway. See you anon."

"Of course you will," confirmed Daisy. "In fact I think I'll arrange
a marriage. Come over often, Nick, and I'll sort of--oh--fling you
together. You know--lock you up accidentally in linen closets and push
you out to sea in a boat, and all that sort of thing----"

"Good night," called Miss Baker from the stairs. "I haven't heard a word."

"She's a nice girl," said Tom after a moment. "They oughtn't to let her
run around the country this way."

"Who oughtn't to?" inquired Daisy coldly.

"Her family."

"Her family is one aunt about a thousand years old. Besides, Nick's
going to look after her, aren't you, Nick? She's going to spend lots of
week-ends out here this summer. I think the home influence will be very
good for her."

Daisy and Tom looked at each other for a moment in silence.

"Is she from New York?" I asked quickly.

"From Louisville. Our white girlhood was passed together there. Our
beautiful white----"

"Did you give Nick a little heart to heart talk on the veranda?"
demanded Tom suddenly.

"Did I?" She looked at me. "I can't seem to remember, but I think
we talked about the Nordic race. Yes, I'm sure we did. It sort of
crept up on us and first thing you know----"

"Don't believe everything you hear, Nick," he advised me.

I said lightly that I had heard nothing at all, and a few minutes later
I got up to go home. They came to the door with me and stood side by
side in a cheerful square of light. As I started my motor Daisy
peremptorily called "Wait!

"I forgot to ask you something, and it's important. We heard you were
engaged to a girl out West."

"That's right," corroborated Tom kindly. "We heard that you were
engaged."

"It's libel. I'm too poor."

"But we heard it," insisted Daisy, surprising me by opening up again in
a flower-like way. "We heard it from three people so it must be true."

Of course I knew what they were referring to, but I wasn't even vaguely
engaged. The fact that gossip had published the banns was one of the
reasons I had come east. You can't stop going with an old friend on
account of rumors and on the other hand I had no intention of being
rumored into marriage.

Their interest rather touched me and made them less remotely
rich--nevertheless, I was confused and a little disgusted as I drove
away. It seemed to me that the thing for Daisy to do was to rush out of
the house, child in arms--but apparently there were no such intentions
in her head. As for Tom, the fact that he "had some woman in New York"
was really less surprising than that he had been depressed by a book.
Something was making him nibble at the edge of stale ideas as if his
sturdy physical egotism no longer nourished his peremptory heart.

Already it was deep summer on roadhouse roofs and in front of wayside
garages, where new red gas-pumps sat out in pools of light, and when I
reached my estate at West Egg I ran the car under its shed and sat for
a while on an abandoned grass roller in the yard. The wind had blown
off, leaving a loud bright night with wings beating in the trees and
a persistent organ sound as the full bellows of the earth blew the
frogs full of life. The silhouette of a moving cat wavered across the
moonlight and turning my head to watch it I saw that I was not
alone--fifty feet away a figure had emerged from the shadow of my
neighbor's mansion and was standing with his hands in his pockets
regarding the silver pepper of the stars. Something in his leisurely
movements and the secure position of his feet upon the lawn suggested
that it was Mr. Gatsby himself, come out to determine what share was
his of our local heavens.

I decided to call to him. Miss Baker had mentioned him at dinner, and
that would do for an introduction. But I didn't call to him for he gave
a sudden intimation that he was content to be alone--he stretched out his
arms toward the dark water in a curious way, and far as I was from him
I could have sworn he was trembling. Involuntarily I glanced seaward--and
distinguished nothing except a single green light, minute and far away,
that might have been the end of a dock. When I looked once more for Gatsby
he had vanished, and I was alone again in the unquiet darkness.




Chapter 2



About half way between West Egg and New York the motor-road hastily
joins the railroad and runs beside it for a quarter of a mile, so as to
shrink away from a certain desolate area of land. This is a valley of
ashes--a fantastic farm where ashes grow like wheat into ridges and
hills and grotesque gardens where ashes take the forms of houses and
chimneys and rising smoke and finally, with a transcendent effort, of
men who move dimly and already crumbling through the powdery air.
Occasionally a line of grey cars crawls along an invisible track, gives
out a ghastly creak and comes to rest, and immediately the ash-grey
men swarm up with leaden spades and stir up an impenetrable cloud
which screens their obscure operations from your sight.

But above the grey land and the spasms of bleak dust which drift
endlessly over it, you perceive, after a moment, the eyes of Doctor T.
J. Eckleburg. The eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg are blue and
gigantic--their retinas are one yard high. They look out of no face but,
instead, from a pair of enormous yellow spectacles which pass over a
nonexistent nose. Evidently some wild wag of an oculist set them there to
fatten his practice in the borough of Queens, and then sank down himself
into eternal blindness or forgot them and moved away. But his eyes,
dimmed a little by many paintless days under sun and rain, brood on over
the solemn dumping ground.

The valley of ashes is bounded on one side by a small foul river, and
when the drawbridge is up to let barges through, the passengers on
waiting trains can stare at the dismal scene for as long as half an
hour. There is always a halt there of at least a minute and it was
because of this that I first met Tom Buchanan's mistress.

The fact that he had one was insisted upon wherever he was known. His
acquaintances resented the fact that he turned up in popular
restaurants with her and, leaving her at a table, sauntered about,
chatting with whomsoever he knew. Though I was curious to see her I
had no desire to meet her--but I did. I went up to New York with Tom on
the train one afternoon and when we stopped by the ashheaps he jumped
to his feet and taking hold of my elbow literally forced me from the
car.

"We're getting off!" he insisted. "I want you to meet my girl."

I think he'd tanked up a good deal at luncheon and his determination to
have my company bordered on violence. The supercilious assumption was that
on Sunday afternoon I had nothing better to do.

I followed him over a low white-washed railroad fence and we walked
back a hundred yards along the road under Doctor Eckleburg's persistent
stare. The only building in sight was a small block of yellow brick
sitting on the edge of the waste land, a sort of compact Main Street
ministering to it and contiguous to absolutely nothing. One of the
three shops it contained was for rent and another was an all-night
restaurant approached by a trail of ashes; the third was a
garage--Repairs. GEORGE B. WILSON. Cars Bought and Sold--and I followed
Tom inside.

The interior was unprosperous and bare; the only car visible was the
dust-covered wreck of a Ford which crouched in a dim corner. It had
occurred to me that this shadow of a garage must be a blind and that
sumptuous and romantic apartments were concealed overhead when the
proprietor himself appeared in the door of an office, wiping his hands
on a piece of waste. He was a blonde, spiritless man, anaemic, and
faintly handsome. When he saw us a damp gleam of hope sprang into his
light blue eyes.

"Hello, Wilson, old man," said Tom, slapping him jovially on the
shoulder. "How's business?"

"I can't complain," answered Wilson unconvincingly. "When are you going
to sell me that car?"

"Next week; I've got my man working on it now."

"Works pretty slow, don't he?"

"No, he doesn't," said Tom coldly. "And if you feel that way about it,
maybe I'd better sell it somewhere else after all."

"I don't mean that," explained Wilson quickly. "I just meant----"

His voice faded off and Tom glanced impatiently around the garage. Then
I heard footsteps on a stairs and in a moment the thickish figure of a
woman blocked out the light from the office door. She was in the middle
thirties, and faintly stout, but she carried her surplus flesh sensuously
as some women can. Her face, above a spotted dress of dark blue
crepe-de-chine, contained no facet or gleam of beauty but there was an
immediately perceptible vitality about her as if the nerves of her body
were continually smouldering. She smiled slowly and walking through her
husband as if he were a ghost shook hands with Tom, looking him flush in
the eye. Then she wet her lips and without turning around spoke to her
husband in a soft, coarse voice:

"Get some chairs, why don't you, so somebody can sit down."

"Oh, sure," agreed Wilson hurriedly and went toward the little office,
mingling immediately with the cement color of the walls. A white ashen
dust veiled his dark suit and his pale hair as it veiled everything in
the vicinity--except his wife, who moved close to Tom.

"I want to see you," said Tom intently. "Get on the next train."

"All right."

"I'll meet you by the news-stand on the lower level."

She nodded and moved away from him just as George Wilson
emerged with two chairs from his office door.

We waited for her down the road and out of sight. It was a few days before
the Fourth of July, and a grey, scrawny Italian child was setting
torpedoes in a row along the railroad track.

"Terrible place, isn't it," said Tom, exchanging a frown with Doctor
Eckleburg.

"Awful."

"It does her good to get away."

"Doesn't her husband object?"

"Wilson? He thinks she goes to see her sister in New York. He's so dumb
he doesn't know he's alive."

So Tom Buchanan and his girl and I went up together to New York--or not
quite together, for Mrs. Wilson sat discreetly in another car. Tom
deferred that much to the sensibilities of those East Eggers who might be
on the train.

She had changed her dress to a brown figured muslin which stretched
tight over her rather wide hips as Tom helped her to the platform in
New York. At the news-stand she bought a copy of "Town Tattle" and a
moving-picture magazine and, in the station drug store, some cold cream
and a small flask of perfume. Upstairs, in the solemn echoing drive
she let four taxi cabs drive away before she selected a new one,
lavender-colored with grey upholstery, and in this we slid out from the
mass of the station into the glowing sunshine. But immediately she
turned sharply from the window and leaning forward tapped on the
front glass.

"I want to get one of those dogs," she said earnestly. "I want to get one
for the apartment. They're nice to have--a dog."

We backed up to a grey old man who bore an absurd resemblance to John
D. Rockefeller. In a basket, swung from his neck, cowered a dozen very
recent puppies of an indeterminate breed.

"What kind are they?" asked Mrs. Wilson eagerly as he came to the
taxi-window.

"All kinds. What kind do you want, lady?"

"I'd like to get one of those police dogs; I don't suppose you got that
kind?"

The man peered doubtfully into the basket, plunged in his hand and drew
one up, wriggling, by the back of the neck.

"That's no police dog," said Tom.

"No, it's not exactly a polICE dog," said the man with disappointment
in his voice. "It's more of an airedale." He passed his hand over the
brown wash-rag of a back. "Look at that coat. Some coat. That's a dog
that'll never bother you with catching cold."

"I think it's cute," said Mrs. Wilson enthusiastically. "How much is it?"

"That dog?" He looked at it admiringly. "That dog will cost you ten
dollars."

The airedale--undoubtedly there was an airedale concerned in it somewhere
though its feet were startlingly white--changed hands and settled down
into Mrs. Wilson's lap, where she fondled the weather-proof coat with
rapture.

"Is it a boy or a girl?" she asked delicately.

"That dog? That dog's a boy."

"It's a bitch," said Tom decisively. "Here's your money. Go and buy ten
more dogs with it."

We drove over to Fifth Avenue, so warm and soft, almost pastoral, on the
summer Sunday afternoon that I wouldn't have been surprised to see a great
flock of white sheep turn the corner.

"Hold on," I said, "I have to leave you here."

"No, you don't," interposed Tom quickly. "Myrtle'll be hurt if you don't 
come up to the apartment. Won't you,
Myrtle?"

"Come on," she urged. "I'll telephone my sister Catherine. She's said to
be very beautiful by people who ought to know."

"Well, I'd like to, but----"

We went on, cutting back again over the Park toward the West Hundreds.
At 158th Street the cab stopped at one slice in a long white cake of
apartment houses. Throwing a regal homecoming glance around the
neighborhood, Mrs. Wilson gathered up her dog and her other purchases
and went haughtily in.

"I'm going to have the McKees come up," she announced as we rose in the
elevator. "And of course I got to call up my sister, too."

The apartment was on the top floor--a small living room, a small
dining room, a small bedroom and a bath. The living room was crowded to
the doors with a set of tapestried furniture entirely too large for it
so that to move about was to stumble continually over scenes of
ladies swinging in the gardens of Versailles. The only picture was
an over-enlarged photograph, apparently a hen sitting on a blurred
rock. Looked at from a distance however the hen resolved itself
into a bonnet and the countenance of a stout old lady beamed down
into the room. Several old copies of "Town Tattle "lay on the table
together with a copy of "Simon Called Peter" and some of the small
scandal magazines of Broadway. Mrs. Wilson was first concerned with
the dog. A reluctant elevator boy went for a box full of straw and
some milk to which he added on his own initiative a tin of large
hard dog biscuits--one of which decomposed apathetically in the saucer
of milk all afternoon. Meanwhile Tom brought out a bottle of whiskey
from a locked bureau door.

I have been drunk just twice in my life and the second time was that
afternoon so everything that happened has a dim hazy cast over it
although until after eight o'clock the apartment was full of cheerful
sun. Sitting on Tom's lap Mrs. Wilson called up several people on the
telephone; then there were no cigarettes and I went out to buy some at
the drug store on the corner. When I came back they had disappeared so
I sat down discreetly in the living room and read a chapter of "Simon
Called Peter"--either it was terrible stuff or the whiskey distorted
things because it didn't make any sense to me.

Just as Tom and Myrtle--after the first drink Mrs. Wilson and I called
each other by our first names--reappeared, company commenced to arrive
at the apartment door.

The sister, Catherine, was a slender, worldly girl of about thirty
with a solid sticky bob of red hair and a complexion powdered milky
white. Her eyebrows had been plucked and then drawn on again at a more
rakish angle but the efforts of nature toward the restoration of the
old alignment gave a blurred air to her face. When she moved about
there was an incessant clicking as innumerable pottery bracelets
jingled up and down upon her arms. She came in with such a proprietary
haste and looked around so possessively at the furniture that I wondered
if she lived here. But when I asked her she laughed immoderately, repeated
my question aloud and told me she lived with a girl friend at a hotel.

Mr. McKee was a pale feminine man from the flat below. He had just
shaved for there was a white spot of lather on his cheekbone and he
was most respectful in his greeting to everyone in the room. He
informed me that he was in the "artistic game" and I gathered later
that he was a photographer and had made the dim enlargement of Mrs.
Wilson's mother which hovered like an ectoplasm on the wall. His wife
was shrill, languid, handsome and horrible. She told me with pride
that her husband had photographed her a hundred and twenty-seven times
since they had been married.

Mrs. Wilson had changed her costume some time before and was now
attired in an elaborate afternoon dress of cream colored chiffon, which
gave out a continual rustle as she swept about the room.
With the influence of the dress her personality had also undergone a
change. The intense vitality that had been so remarkable in the garage
was converted into impressive hauteur. Her laughter, her gestures, her
assertions became more violently affected moment by moment and as she
expanded the room grew smaller around her until she seemed to be
revolving on a noisy, creaking pivot through the smoky air.

"My dear," she told her sister in a high mincing shout, "most of these
fellas will cheat you every time. All they think of is money. I had a
woman up here last week to look at my feet and when she gave me the
bill you'd of thought she had my appendicitus out."

"What was the name of the woman?" asked Mrs. McKee.

"Mrs. Eberhardt. She goes around looking at people's feet in their own
homes."

"I like your dress," remarked Mrs. McKee, "I think it's adorable."

Mrs. Wilson rejected the compliment by raising her eyebrow in disdain.

"It's just a crazy old thing," she said. "I just slip it on sometimes when
I don't care what I look like."

"But it looks wonderful on you, if you know what I mean," pursued
Mrs. McKee. "If Chester could only get you in that pose I think he could
make something of it."

We all looked in silence at Mrs. Wilson who removed a strand of hair from
over her eyes and looked back at us with a brilliant smile. Mr. McKee
regarded her intently with his head on one side and then moved his hand
back and forth slowly in front of his face.

"I should change the light," he said after a moment. "I'd like to bring
out the modelling of the features. And I'd try to get hold of all the
back hair."

"I wouldn't think of changing the light," cried Mrs. McKee. "I think
it's----"

Her husband said "SH!" and we all looked at the subject again whereupon
Tom Buchanan yawned audibly and got to his feet.

"You McKees have something to drink," he said. "Get some more ice and
mineral water, Myrtle, before everybody goes to sleep."

"I told that boy about the ice." Myrtle raised her eyebrows in despair
at the shiftlessness of the lower orders. "These people! You have to keep
after them all the time."

She looked at me and laughed pointlessly. Then she flounced over to the
dog, kissed it with ecstasy and swept into the kitchen, implying that
a dozen chefs awaited her orders there.

"I've done some nice things out on Long Island," asserted Mr. McKee.

Tom looked at him blankly.

"Two of them we have framed downstairs."

"Two what?" demanded Tom.

"Two studies. One of them I call 'Montauk Point--the Gulls,' and the
other I call 'Montauk Point--the Sea.' "

The sister Catherine sat down beside me on the couch.

"Do you live down on Long Island, too?" she inquired.

"I live at West Egg."

"Really? I was down there at a party about a month ago. At a man named
Gatsby's. Do you know him?"

"I live next door to him."

"Well, they say he's a nephew or a cousin of Kaiser Wilhelm's. That's
where all his money comes from."

"Really?"

She nodded.

"I'm scared of him. I'd hate to have him get anything on me."

This absorbing information about my neighbor was interrupted by
Mrs. McKee's pointing suddenly at Catherine:

"Chester, I think you could do something with HER," she broke out,
but Mr. McKee only nodded in a bored way and turned his attention
to Tom.

"I'd like to do more work on Long Island if I could get the entry. All
I ask is that they should give me a start."

"Ask Myrtle," said Tom, breaking into a short shout of laughter as
Mrs. Wilson entered with a tray. "She'll give you a letter of
introduction, won't you, Myrtle?"

"Do what?" she asked, startled.

"You'll give McKee a letter of introduction to your husband, so he can
do some studies of him." His lips moved silently for a moment as he
invented. " 'George B. Wilson at the Gasoline Pump,' or something like
that."


Catherine leaned close to me and whispered in my ear: "Neither of them
can stand the person they're married to."

"Can't they?"

"Can't STAND them." She looked at Myrtle and then at Tom. "What I say is,
why go on living with them if they can't stand them? If I was them I'd get
a divorce and get married to each other right away."

"Doesn't she like Wilson either?"

The answer to this was unexpected. It came from Myrtle who had overheard
the question and it was violent and obscene.

"You see?" cried Catherine triumphantly. She lowered her voice again.
"It's really his wife that's keeping them apart. She's a Catholic and
they don't believe in divorce."

Daisy was not a Catholic and I was a little shocked at the elaborateness
of the lie.

"When they do get married," continued Catherine, "they're going west to
live for a while until it blows over."

"It'd be more discreet to go to Europe."

"Oh, do you like Europe?" she exclaimed surprisingly. "I just got back
from Monte Carlo."

"Really."

"Just last year. I went over there with another girl."

"Stay long?"

"No, we just went to Monte Carlo and back. We went by way of Marseilles.
We had over twelve hundred dollars when we started but we got gypped
out of it all in two days in the private rooms. We had an awful time
getting back, I can tell you. God, how I hated that town!"

The late afternoon sky bloomed in the window for a moment like the blue
honey of the Mediterranean--then the shrill voice of Mrs. McKee called me
back into the room.

"I almost made a mistake, too," she declared vigorously. "I almost
married a little kyke who'd been after me for years. I knew he was
below me. Everybody kept saying to me: 'Lucille, that man's way below
you!' But if I hadn't met Chester, he'd of got me sure."

"Yes, but listen," said Myrtle Wilson, nodding her head up and down,
"at least you didn't marry him."

"I know I didn't."

"Well, I married him," said Myrtle, ambiguously. "And that's the
difference between your case and mine."

"Why did you, Myrtle?" demanded Catherine. "Nobody forced you to."

Myrtle considered.

"I married him because I thought he was a gentleman," she said finally.
"I thought he knew something about breeding, but he wasn't fit to lick
my shoe."

"You were crazy about him for a while," said Catherine.

"Crazy about him!" cried Myrtle incredulously. "Who said I was crazy about
him? I never was any more crazy about him than I was about that man
there."

She pointed suddenly at me, and every one looked at me accusingly.
I tried to show by my expression that I had played no part in her past.

"The only CRAZY I was was when I married him. I knew right away I made a
mistake. He borrowed somebody's best suit to get married in and never
even told me about it, and the man came after it one day when he was out.
She looked around to see who was listening: " 'Oh, is that your suit?' I 
said.
'This is the first I ever heard about it.' But I gave it to him and then I 
lay down
and cried to beat the band all afternoon."

"She really ought to get away from him," resumed Catherine to me.
"They've been living over that garage for eleven years. And Tom's the
first sweetie she ever had."

The bottle of whiskey--a second one--was now in constant demand by all
present, excepting Catherine who "felt just as good on nothing at all."
Tom rang for the janitor and sent him for some celebrated sandwiches,
which were a complete supper in themselves. I wanted to get out and walk
eastward toward the park through the soft twilight but each time I tried
to go I became entangled in some wild strident argument which pulled me
back, as if with ropes, into my chair. Yet high over the city our line of
yellow windows must have contributed their share of human secrecy to the
casual watcher in the darkening streets, and I was him too, looking up and
wondering. I was within and without, simultaneously enchanted and repelled
by the inexhaustible variety of life.

Myrtle pulled her chair close to mine, and suddenly her warm breath
poured over me the story of her first meeting with Tom.

"It was on the two little seats facing each other that are always the
last ones left on the train. I was going up to New York to see my
sister and spend the night. He had on a dress suit and patent leather
shoes and I couldn't keep my eyes off him but every time he looked at
me I had to pretend to be looking at the advertisement over his head.
When we came into the station he was next to me and his white
shirt-front pressed against my arm--and so I told him I'd have to call
a policeman, but he knew I lied. I was so excited that when I got into
a taxi with him I didn't hardly know I wasn't getting into a subway
train. All I kept thinking about, over and over, was 'You can't live
forever, you can't live forever.' "

She turned to Mrs. McKee and the room rang full of her artificial
laughter.

"My dear," she cried, "I'm going to give you this dress as soon as I'm
through with it. I've got to get another one tomorrow. I'm going to
make a list of all the things I've got to get. A massage and a wave
and a collar for the dog and one of those cute little ash-trays where
you touch a spring, and a wreath with a black silk bow for mother's
grave that'll last all summer. I got to write down a list so I won't
forget all the things I got to do."

It was nine o'clock--almost immediately afterward I looked at my watch
and found it was ten. Mr. McKee was asleep on a chair with his fists
clenched in his lap, like a photograph of a man of action. Taking out my
handkerchief I wiped from his cheek the remains of the spot of dried
lather that had worried me all the afternoon.

The little dog was sitting on the table looking with blind eyes through
the smoke and from time to time groaning faintly. People disappeared,
reappeared, made plans to go somewhere, and then lost each other,
searched for each other, found each other a few feet away. Some time
toward midnight Tom Buchanan and Mrs. Wilson stood face to face
discussing in impassioned voices whether Mrs. Wilson had any right to
mention Daisy's name.

"Daisy! Daisy! Daisy!" shouted Mrs. Wilson. "I'll say it whenever I want
to! Daisy! Dai----"

Making a short deft movement Tom Buchanan broke her nose with his
open hand.

Then there were bloody towels upon the bathroom floor, and women's
voices scolding, and high over the confusion a long broken wail of
pain. Mr. McKee awoke from his doze and started in a daze toward the door.
When he had gone half way he turned around and stared at the scene--his
wife and Catherine scolding and consoling as they stumbled here and
there among the crowded furniture with articles of aid, and the
despairing figure on the couch bleeding fluently and trying to spread
a copy of "Town Tattle" over the tapestry scenes of Versailles.
Then Mr. McKee turned and continued on out the door. Taking my hat from
the chandelier I followed.

"Come to lunch some day," he suggested, as we groaned down in the
elevator.

"Where?"

"Anywhere."

"Keep your hands off the lever," snapped the elevator boy.

"I beg your pardon," said Mr. McKee with dignity, "I didn't know I was
touching it."

"All right," I agreed, "I'll be glad to."

. . . I was standing beside his bed and he was sitting up between the
sheets, clad in his underwear, with a great portfolio in his hands.

"Beauty and the Beast . . . Loneliness . . . Old Grocery Horse . . .
Brook'n Bridge . . . ."

Then I was lying half asleep in the cold lower level of the Pennsylvania
Station, staring at the morning "Tribune" and waiting for the four
o'clock train.




Chapter 3



There was music from my neighbor's house through the summer nights. In
his blue gardens men and girls came and went like moths among the
whisperings and the champagne and the stars. At high tide in the
afternoon I watched his guests diving from the tower of his raft or
taking the sun on the hot sand of his beach while his two motor-boats
slit the waters of the Sound, drawing aquaplanes over cataracts of
foam. On week-ends his Rolls-Royce became an omnibus, bearing parties
to and from the city, between nine in the morning and long past
midnight, while his station wagon scampered like a brisk yellow bug to
meet all trains. And on Mondays eight servants including an extra
gardener toiled all day with mops and scrubbing-brushes and hammers
and garden-shears, repairing the ravages of the night before.

Every Friday five crates of oranges and lemons arrived from a fruiterer
in New York--every Monday these same oranges and lemons left his back
door in a pyramid of pulpless halves. There was a machine in the
kitchen which could extract the juice of two hundred oranges in half an
hour, if a little button was pressed two hundred times by a butler's
thumb.

At least once a fortnight a corps of caterers came down with several
hundred feet of canvas and enough colored lights to make a Christmas
tree of Gatsby's enormous garden. On buffet tables, garnished with
glistening hors-d'oeuvre, spiced baked hams crowded against salads of
harlequin designs and pastry pigs and turkeys bewitched to a dark gold.
In the main hall a bar with a real brass rail was set up, and stocked
with gins and liquors and with cordials so long forgotten that most of
his female guests were too young to know one from another.

By seven o'clock the orchestra has arrived--no thin five-piece affair
but a whole pitful of oboes and trombones and saxophones and viols and
cornets and piccolos and low and high drums. The last swimmers have
come in from the beach now and are dressing upstairs; the cars from
New York are parked five deep in the drive, and already the halls and
salons and verandas are gaudy with primary colors and hair shorn in
strange new ways and shawls beyond the dreams of Castile. The
bar is in full swing and floating rounds of cocktails permeate the
garden outside until the air is alive with chatter and laughter and
casual innuendo and introductions forgotten on the spot and
enthusiastic meetings between women who never knew each other's names.

The lights grow brighter as the earth lurches away from the sun and
now the orchestra is playing yellow cocktail music and the opera of
voices pitches a key higher. Laughter is easier, minute by minute,
spilled with prodigality, tipped out at a cheerful word. The groups
change more swiftly, swell with new arrivals, dissolve and form in the
same breath--already there are wanderers, confident girls who weave
here and there among the stouter and more stable, become for a sharp,
joyous moment the center of a group and then excited with triumph
glide on through the sea-change of faces and voices and color under the
constantly changing light.

Suddenly one of these gypsies in trembling opal, seizes a cocktail out
of the air, dumps it down for courage and moving her hands like
Frisco dances out alone on the canvas platform. A momentary hush; the
orchestra leader varies his rhythm obligingly for her and there is a
burst of chatter as the erroneous news goes around that she is Gilda
Gray's understudy from the "Follies." The party has begun.

I believe that on the first night I went to Gatsby's house I was one of
the few guests who had actually been invited. People were not
invited--they went there. They got into automobiles which bore them out
to Long Island and somehow they ended up at Gatsby's door. Once there
they were introduced by somebody who knew Gatsby and after that they
conducted themselves according to the rules of behavior associated with
amusement parks. Sometimes they came and went without having met Gatsby
at all, came for the party with a simplicity of heart that was its own
ticket of admission.

I had been actually invited. A chauffeur in a uniform of robin's egg
blue crossed my lawn early that Saturday morning with a surprisingly
formal note from his employer--the honor would be entirely Gatsby's, it
said, if I would attend his "little party" that night. He had
seen me several times and had intended to call on me long before
but a peculiar combination of circumstances had prevented it--signed
Jay Gatsby in a majestic hand.

Dressed up in white flannels I went over to his lawn a little after
seven and wandered around rather ill-at-ease among swirls and eddies
of people I didn't know--though here and there was a face I had noticed
on the commuting train. I was immediately struck by the number of young
Englishmen dotted about; all well dressed, all looking a little hungry
and all talking in low earnest voices to solid and prosperous
Americans. I was sure that they were selling something: bonds or
insurance or automobiles. They were, at least, agonizingly aware of the
easy money in the vicinity and convinced that it was theirs for a few
words in the right key.

As soon as I arrived I made an attempt to find my host but the two or
three people of whom I asked his whereabouts stared at me in such an
amazed way and denied so vehemently any knowledge of his movements
that I slunk off in the direction of the cocktail table--the only place
in the garden where a single man could linger without looking
purposeless and alone.

I was on my way to get roaring drunk from sheer embarrassment when
Jordan Baker came out of the house and stood at the head of the marble
steps, leaning a little backward and looking with contemptuous interest
down into the garden.

Welcome or not, I found it necessary to attach myself to someone
before I should begin to address cordial remarks to the passers-by.

"Hello!" I roared, advancing toward her. My voice seemed unnaturally
loud across the garden.

"I thought you might be here," she responded absently as I came up.
"I remembered you lived next door to----"

She held my hand impersonally, as a promise that she'd take care
of me in a minute, and gave ear to two girls in twin yellow dresses
who stopped at the foot of the steps.

"Hello!" they cried together. "Sorry you didn't win."

That was for the golf tournament. She had lost in the finals the week
before.

"You don't know who we are," said one of the girls in yellow, "but we
met you here about a month ago."

"You've dyed your hair since then," remarked Jordan, and I started
but the girls had moved casually on and her remark was addressed to the
premature moon, produced like the supper, no doubt, out of a caterer's
basket. With Jordan's slender golden arm resting in mine we descended
the steps and sauntered about the garden. A tray of cocktails floated at
us through the twilight and we sat down at a table with the two girls in
yellow and three men, each one introduced to us as Mr. Mumble.

"Do you come to these parties often?" inquired Jordan of the girl
beside her.

"The last one was the one I met you at," answered the girl, in an alert,
confident voice. She turned to her companion: "Wasn't it for you,
Lucille?"

It was for Lucille, too.

"I like to come," Lucille said. "I never care what I do, so I always have
a good time. When I was here last I tore my gown on a chair, and he asked
me my name and address--inside of a week I got a package from Croirier's
with a new evening gown in it."

"Did you keep it?" asked Jordan.

"Sure I did. I was going to wear it tonight, but it was too big in the
bust and had to be altered. It was gas blue with lavender beads. Two
hundred and sixty-five dollars."

"There's something funny about a fellow that'll do a thing like that,"
said the other girl eagerly. "He doesn't want any trouble with ANYbody."

"Who doesn't?" I inquired.

"Gatsby. Somebody told me----"

The two girls and Jordan leaned together confidentially.

"Somebody told me they thought he killed a man once."

A thrill passed over all of us. The three Mr. Mumbles bent forward and
listened eagerly.

"I don't think it's so much THAT," argued Lucille skeptically; "it's
more that he was a German spy during the war."

One of the men nodded in confirmation.

"I heard that from a man who knew all about him, grew up with him in
Germany," he assured us positively.

"Oh, no," said the first girl, "it couldn't be that, because he was in
the American army during the war." As our credulity switched back to
her she leaned forward with enthusiasm. "You look at him sometimes when
he thinks nobody's looking at him. I'll bet he killed a man."

She narrowed her eyes and shivered. Lucille shivered. We all turned and
looked around for Gatsby. It was testimony to the romantic speculation he
inspired that there were whispers about him from those who found little
that it was necessary to whisper about in this world.

The first supper--there would be another one after midnight--was now
being served, and Jordan invited me to join her own party who were
spread around a table on the other side of the garden. There were
three married couples and Jordan's escort, a persistent undergraduate
given to violent innuendo and obviously under the impression
that sooner or later Jordan was going to yield him up her person
to a greater or lesser degree. Instead of rambling this party
had preserved a dignified homogeneity, and assumed to itself the
function of representing the staid nobility of the countryside--East
Egg condescending to West Egg, and carefully on guard against its
spectroscopic gayety.

"Let's get out," whispered Jordan, after a somehow wasteful and
inappropriate half hour. "This is much too polite for me."

We got up, and she explained that we were going to find the host--I
had never met him, she said, and it was making me uneasy. The
undergraduate nodded in a cynical, melancholy way.

The bar, where we glanced first, was crowded but Gatsby was not there.
She couldn't find him from the top of the steps, and he wasn't on the
veranda. On a chance we tried an important-looking door, and walked
into a high Gothic library, panelled with carved English oak, and
probably transported complete from some ruin overseas.

A stout, middle-aged man with enormous owl-eyed spectacles was
sitting somewhat drunk on the edge of a great table, staring with
unsteady concentration at the shelves of books. As we entered he
wheeled excitedly around and examined Jordan from head to foot.

"What do you think?" he demanded impetuously.

"About what?"

He waved his hand toward the book-shelves.

"About that. As a matter of fact you needn't bother to ascertain. I
ascertained. They're real."

"The books?"

He nodded.

"Absolutely real--have pages and everything. I thought they'd be a nice
durable cardboard. Matter of fact, they're absolutely real. Pages
and--Here! Lemme show you."

Taking our skepticism for granted, he rushed to the bookcases and
returned with Volume One of the "Stoddard Lectures."

"See!" he cried triumphantly. "It's a bona fide piece of printed matter.
It fooled me. This fella's a regular Belasco. It's a triumph. What
thoroughness! What realism! Knew when to stop too--didn't cut the pages.
But what do you want? What do you expect?"

He snatched the book from me and replaced it hastily on its shelf
muttering that if one brick was removed the whole library was liable
to collapse.

"Who brought you?" he demanded. "Or did you just come? I was brought.
Most people were brought."

Jordan looked at him alertly, cheerfully without answering.

"I was brought by a woman named Roosevelt," he continued. "Mrs. Claud
Roosevelt. Do you know her? I met her somewhere last night. I've
been drunk for about a week now, and I thought it might sober me
up to sit in a library."

"Has it?"

"A little bit, I think. I can't tell yet. I've only been here
an hour. Did I tell you about the books? They're real. They're----"

"You told us."

We shook hands with him gravely and went back outdoors.

There was dancing now on the canvas in the garden, old men pushing
young girls backward in eternal graceless circles, superior couples
holding each other tortuously, fashionably and keeping in the
corners--and a great number of single girls dancing individualistically
or relieving the orchestra for a moment of the burden of the banjo or
the traps. By midnight the hilarity had increased. A celebrated tenor had
sung in Italian and a notorious contralto had sung in jazz and between
the numbers people were doing "stunts" all over the garden, while happy
vacuous bursts of laughter rose toward the summer sky. A pair of stage
"twins"--who turned out to be the girls in yellow--did a baby act in
costume and champagne was served in glasses bigger than finger bowls.
The moon had risen higher, and floating in the Sound was a triangle of
silver scales, trembling a little to the stiff, tinny drip of the
banjoes on the lawn.

I was still with Jordan Baker. We were sitting at a table with a man of
about my age and a rowdy little girl who gave way upon the slightest
provocation to uncontrollable laughter. I was enjoying myself now. I
had taken two finger bowls of champagne and the scene had changed
before my eyes into something significant, elemental and profound.

At a lull in the entertainment the man looked at me and smiled.

"Your face is familiar," he said, politely. "Weren't you in the Third
Division during the war?"

"Why, yes. I was in the Ninth Machine-Gun Battalion."

"I was in the Seventh Infantry until June nineteen-eighteen. I knew I'd
seen you somewhere before."

We talked for a moment about some wet, grey little villages in France.
Evidently he lived in this vicinity for he told me that he had just
bought a hydroplane and was going to try it out in the morning.

"Want to go with me, old sport? Just near the shore along the Sound."

"What time?"

"Any time that suits you best."

It was on the tip of my tongue to ask his name when Jordan looked around
and smiled.

"Having a gay time now?" she inquired.

"Much better." I turned again to my new acquaintance. "This is an unusual
party for me. I haven't even seen the host. I live over there----" I waved
my hand at the invisible hedge in the distance, "and this man Gatsby sent
over his chauffeur with an invitation."

For a moment he looked at me as if he failed to understand.

"I'm Gatsby," he said suddenly.

"What!" I exclaimed. "Oh, I beg your pardon."

"I thought you knew, old sport. I'm afraid I'm not a very good host."

He smiled understandingly--much more than understandingly. It was
one of those rare smiles with a quality of eternal reassurance
in it, that you may come across four or five times in life. It faced--or
seemed to face--the whole external world for an instant, and then
concentrated on YOU with an irresistible prejudice in your favor. It
understood you just so far as you wanted to be understood, believed in
you as you would like to believe in yourself and assured you that it
had precisely the impression of you that, at your best, you hoped to
convey. Precisely at that point it vanished--and I was looking at an
elegant young rough-neck, a year or two over thirty, whose elaborate
formality of speech just missed being absurd. Some time before he
introduced himself I'd got a strong impression that he was picking his
words with care.

Almost at the moment when Mr. Gatsby identified himself a butler
hurried toward him with the information that Chicago was calling him on
the wire. He excused himself with a small bow that included each of us
in turn.

"If you want anything just ask for it, old sport," he urged me.
"Excuse me. I will rejoin you later."

When he was gone I turned immediately to Jordan--constrained to assure her
of my surprise. I had expected that Mr. Gatsby would be a florid and
corpulent person in his middle years.

"Who is he?" I demanded. "Do you know?"

"He's just a man named Gatsby."

"Where is he from, I mean? And what does he do?"

"Now YOU're started on the subject," she answered with a wan smile.
"Well,--he told me once he was an Oxford man."

A dim background started to take shape behind him but at her
next remark it faded away.

"However, I don't believe it."

"Why not?"

"I don't know," she insisted, "I just don't think he went there."

Something in her tone reminded me of the other girl's "I think
he killed a man," and had the effect of stimulating my curiosity. I
would have accepted without question the information that Gatsby sprang
from the swamps of Louisiana or from the lower East Side of New York.
That was comprehensible. But young men didn't--at least in my provincial
inexperience I believed they didn't--drift coolly out of nowhere and buy
a palace on Long Island Sound.

"Anyhow he gives large parties," said Jordan, changing the subject
with an urbane distaste for the concrete. "And I like large parties.
They're so intimate. At small parties there isn't any privacy."

There was the boom of a bass drum, and the voice of the orchestra leader
rang out suddenly above the echolalia of the garden.

"Ladies and gentlemen," he cried. "At the request of Mr. Gatsby we are
going to play for you Mr. Vladimir Tostoff's latest work which attracted
so much attention at Carnegie Hall last May. If you read the papers
you know there was a big sensation." He smiled with jovial condescension
and added "Some sensation!" whereupon everybody laughed.

"The piece is known," he concluded lustily, "as 'Vladimir Tostoff's
Jazz History of the World.' "

The nature of Mr. Tostoff's composition eluded me, because just as
it began my eyes fell on Gatsby, standing alone on the marble steps
and looking from one group to another with approving eyes.
His tanned skin was drawn attractively tight on his face and
his short hair looked as though it were trimmed every day. I could
see nothing sinister about him. I wondered if the fact that he was
not drinking helped to set him off from his guests, for it seemed
to me that he grew more correct as the fraternal hilarity increased.
When the "Jazz History of the World" was over girls were putting
their heads on men's shoulders in a puppyish, convivial way, girls were
swooning backward playfully into men's arms, even into groups knowing
that some one would arrest their falls--but no one swooned backward on
Gatsby and no French bob touched Gatsby's shoulder and no singing
quartets were formed with Gatsby's head for one link.

"I beg your pardon."

Gatsby's butler was suddenly standing beside us.

"Miss Baker?" he inquired. "I beg your pardon but Mr. Gatsby would like
to speak to you alone."

"With me?" she exclaimed in surprise.

"Yes, madame."

She got up slowly, raising her eyebrows at me in astonishment,
and followed the butler toward the house. I noticed that she wore
her evening dress, all her dresses, like sports clothes--there
was a jauntiness about her movements as if she had first learned to
walk upon golf courses on clean, crisp mornings.

I was alone and it was almost two. For some time confused and
intriguing sounds had issued from a long many-windowed room which
overhung the terrace. Eluding Jordan's undergraduate who was now
engaged in an obstetrical conversation with two chorus girls, and who
implored me to join him, I went inside.

The large room was full of people. One of the girls in yellow was
playing the piano and beside her stood a tall, red haired young lady
from a famous chorus, engaged in song. She had drunk a quantity of
champagne and during the course of her song she had decided ineptly
that everything was very very sad--she was not only singing, she was
weeping too. Whenever there was a pause in the song she filled it with
gasping broken sobs and then took up the lyric again in a quavering
soprano. The tears coursed down her cheeks--not freely, however, for when
they came into contact with her heavily beaded eyelashes they assumed an
inky color, and pursued the rest of their way in slow black rivulets. A
humorous suggestion was made that she sing the notes on her face
whereupon she threw up her hands, sank into a chair and went off into
a deep vinous sleep.

"She had a fight with a man who says he's her husband," explained a
girl at my elbow.

I looked around. Most of the remaining women were now having fights
with men said to be their husbands. Even Jordan's party, the quartet
from East Egg, were rent asunder by dissension. One of the men was
talking with curious intensity to a young actress, and his wife after
attempting to laugh at the situation in a dignified and indifferent
way broke down entirely and resorted to flank attacks--at intervals she
appeared suddenly at his side like an angry diamond, and hissed "You
promised!" into his ear.

The reluctance to go home was not confined to wayward men. The hall was at
present occupied by two deplorably sober men and their highly indignant
wives. The wives were sympathizing with each other in slightly raised
voices.

"Whenever he sees I'm having a good time he wants to go home."

"Never heard anything so selfish in my life."

"We're always the first ones to leave."

"So are we."

"Well, we're almost the last tonight," said one of the men sheepishly.
"The orchestra left half an hour ago."

In spite of the wives' agreement that such malevolence was beyond
credibility, the dispute ended in a short struggle, and both wives were
lifted kicking into the night.

As I waited for my hat in the hall the door of the library opened and
Jordan Baker and Gatsby came out together. He was saying some last word
to her but the eagerness in his manner tightened abruptly into
formality as several people approached him to say goodbye.

Jordan's party were calling impatiently to her from the porch but she
lingered for a moment to shake hands.

"I've just heard the most amazing thing," she whispered. "How long were
we in there?"

"Why,--about an hour."

"It was--simply amazing," she repeated abstractedly. "But I swore
I wouldn't tell it and here I am tantalizing you." She yawned
gracefully in my face. "Please come and see me. . . . Phone book.
. . . Under the name of Mrs. Sigourney Howard. . . . My aunt. . . ."
She was hurrying off as she talked--her brown hand waved a
jaunty salute as she melted into her party at the door.

Rather ashamed that on my first appearance I had stayed so late, I
joined the last of Gatsby's guests who were clustered around him. I
wanted to explain that I'd hunted for him early in the evening and to
apologize for not having known him in the garden.

"Don't mention it," he enjoined me eagerly. "Don't give it another
thought, old sport." The familiar expression held no more familiarity
than the hand which reassuringly brushed my shoulder. "And don't forget
we're going up in the hydroplane tomorrow morning at nine o'clock."

Then the butler, behind his shoulder:

"Philadelphia wants you on the phone, sir."

"All right, in a minute. Tell them I'll be right there. . . . good
night."

"Good night."

"Good night." He smiled--and suddenly there seemed to be a pleasant
significance in having been among the last to go, as if he had desired
it all the time. "Good night, old sport. . . . Good night."

But as I walked down the steps I saw that the evening was not quite over.
Fifty feet from the door a dozen headlights illuminated a bizarre and
tumultuous scene. In the ditch beside the road, right side up but
violently shorn of one wheel, rested a new coupé which had left Gatsby's
drive not two minutes before. The sharp jut of a wall accounted for the
detachment of the wheel which was now getting considerable attention from
half a dozen curious chauffeurs. However, as they had left their cars
blocking the road a harsh discordant din from those in the rear had been
audible for some time and added to the already violent confusion of
the scene.

A man in a long duster had dismounted from the wreck and now stood in
the middle of the road, looking from the car to the tire and from the
tire to the observers in a pleasant, puzzled way.

"See!" he explained. "It went in the ditch."

The fact was infinitely astonishing to him--and I recognized first the
unusual quality of wonder and then the man--it was the late patron of
Gatsby's library.

"How'd it happen?"

He shrugged his shoulders.

"I know nothing whatever about mechanics," he said decisively.

"But how did it happen? Did you run into the wall?"

"Don't ask me," said Owl Eyes, washing his hands of the whole matter.
"I know very little about driving--next to nothing. It happened,
and that's all I know."

"Well, if you're a poor driver you oughtn't to try driving at night."

"But I wasn't even trying," he explained indignantly, "I wasn't even
trying."

An awed hush fell upon the bystanders.

"Do you want to commit suicide?"

"You're lucky it was just a wheel! A bad driver and not even TRYing!"

"You don't understand," explained the criminal. "I wasn't driving. There's
another man in the car."

The shock that followed this declaration found voice in a sustained
"Ah-h-h!" as the door of the coupé swung slowly open. The crowd--it was
now a crowd--stepped back involuntarily and when the door had opened wide
there was a ghostly pause. Then, very gradually, part by part, a pale
dangling individual stepped out of the wreck, pawing tentatively at the
ground with a large uncertain dancing shoe.

Blinded by the glare of the headlights and confused by the incessant
groaning of the horns the apparition stood swaying for a moment before
he perceived the man in the duster.

"Wha's matter?" he inquired calmly. "Did we run outa gas?"

"Look!"

Half a dozen fingers pointed at the amputated wheel--he stared
at it for a moment and then looked upward as though he suspected that
it had dropped from the sky.

"It came off," some one explained.

He nodded.

"At first I din' notice we'd stopped."

A pause. Then, taking a long breath and straightening his shoulders
he remarked in a determined voice:

"Wonder'ff tell me where there's a gas'line station?"

At least a dozen men, some of them little better off than he was,
explained to him that wheel and car were no longer joined by any physical
bond.

"Back out," he suggested after a moment. "Put her in reverse."

"But the WHEEL'S off!"

He hesitated.

"No harm in trying," he said.

The caterwauling horns had reached a crescendo and I turned away and
cut across the lawn toward home. I glanced back once. A wafer of a moon
was shining over Gatsby's house, making the night fine as before and
surviving the laughter and the sound of his still glowing garden. A
sudden emptiness seemed to flow now from the windows and the great
doors, endowing with complete isolation the figure of the host who
stood on the porch, his hand up in a formal gesture of farewell.


Reading over what I have written so far I see I have given the
impression that the events of three nights several weeks apart were all
that absorbed me. On the contrary they were merely casual events in a
crowded summer and, until much later, they absorbed me infinitely less
than my personal affairs.

Most of the time I worked. In the early morning the sun threw my shadow
westward as I hurried down the white chasms of lower New York to the
Probity Trust. I knew the other clerks and young bond-salesmen by their
first names and lunched with them in dark crowded restaurants on
little pig sausages and mashed potatoes and coffee. I even had a short
affair with a girl who lived in Jersey City and worked in the
accounting department, but her brother began throwing mean looks in my
direction so when she went on her vacation in July I let it blow
quietly away.

I took dinner usually at the Yale Club--for some reason it was the
gloomiest event of my day--and then I went upstairs to the library and
studied investments and securities for a conscientious hour.
There were generally a few rioters around but they never came into the
library so it was a good place to work. After that, if the night was
mellow I strolled down Madison Avenue past the old Murray Hill Hotel
and over Thirty-third Street to the Pennsylvania Station.

I began to like New York, the racy, adventurous feel of it at night
and the satisfaction that the constant flicker of men and women and
machines gives to the restless eye. I liked to walk up Fifth Avenue and
pick out romantic women from the crowd and imagine that in a few
minutes I was going to enter into their lives, and no one would ever
know or disapprove. Sometimes, in my mind, I followed them to their
apartments on the corners of hidden streets, and they turned and smiled
back at me before they faded through a door into warm darkness. At the
enchanted metropolitan twilight I felt a haunting loneliness sometimes,
and felt it in others--poor young clerks who loitered in front of windows
waiting until it was time for a solitary restaurant dinner--young clerks
in the dusk, wasting the most poignant moments of night and life.

Again at eight o'clock, when the dark lanes of the Forties were five
deep with throbbing taxi cabs, bound for the theatre district, I felt a
sinking in my heart. Forms leaned together in the taxis as they waited,
and voices sang, and there was laughter from unheard jokes, and lighted
cigarettes outlined unintelligible gestures inside. Imagining that
I, too, was hurrying toward gayety and sharing their intimate
excitement, I wished them well.

For a while I lost sight of Jordan Baker, and then in midsummer I found
her again. At first I was flattered to go places with her because she
was a golf champion and every one knew her name. Then it was
something more. I wasn't actually in love, but I felt a sort of
tender curiosity. The bored haughty face that she turned to the
world concealed something--most affectations conceal something
eventually, even though they don't in the beginning--and one day I found
what it was. When we were on a house-party together up in Warwick, she
left a borrowed car out in the rain with the top down, and then lied
about it--and suddenly I remembered the story about her that had eluded
me that night at Daisy's. At her first big golf tournament there was a
row that nearly reached the newspapers--a suggestion that she had moved
her ball from a bad lie in the semi-final round. The thing approached
the proportions of a scandal--then died away. A caddy retracted his
statement and the only other witness admitted that he might have been
mistaken. The incident and the name had remained together in my mind.

Jordan Baker instinctively avoided clever, shrewd men, and now I saw
that this was because she felt safer on a plane where any divergence
from a code would be thought impossible. She was incurably dishonest.
She wasn't able to endure being at a disadvantage, and given this
unwillingness, I suppose she had begun dealing in subterfuges when she
was very young in order to keep that cool, insolent smile turned to the
world and yet satisfy the demands of her hard jaunty body.

It made no difference to me. Dishonesty in a woman is a thing you never
blame deeply--I was casually sorry, and then I forgot. It was on that
same house party that we had a curious conversation about driving a
car. It started because she passed so close to some workmen that our
fender flicked a button on one man's coat.

"You're a rotten driver," I protested. "Either you ought to be more
careful or you oughtn't to drive at all."

"I am careful."

"No, you're not."

"Well, other people are," she said lightly.

"What's that got to do with it?"

"They'll keep out of my way," she insisted. "It takes two to make an
accident."

"Suppose you met somebody just as careless as yourself."

"I hope I never will," she answered. "I hate careless people. That's why
I like you."

Her grey, sun-strained eyes stared straight ahead, but she had
deliberately shifted our relations, and for a moment I thought I loved
her. But I am slow-thinking and full of interior rules that act as brakes
on my desires, and I knew that first I had to get myself definitely out of
that tangle back home. I'd been writing letters once a week and signing
them: "Love, Nick," and all I could think of was how, when that certain
girl played tennis, a faint mustache of perspiration appeared on her
upper lip. Nevertheless there was a vague understanding that had to be
tactfully broken off before I was free.

Every one suspects himself of at least one of the cardinal virtues, and
this is mine: I am one of the few honest people that I have ever known.




Chapter 4



On Sunday morning while church bells rang in the villages along shore
the world and its mistress returned to Gatsby's house and twinkled
hilariously on his lawn.

"He's a bootlegger," said the young ladies, moving somewhere between
his cocktails and his flowers. "One time he killed a man who had found out
that he was nephew to von Hindenburg and second cousin to the devil.
Reach me a rose, honey, and pour me a last drop into that there crystal
glass."

Once I wrote down on the empty spaces of a time-table the names
of those who came to Gatsby's house that summer. It is an old time-table
now, disintegrating at its folds and headed "This schedule in effect
July 5th, 1922." But I can still read the grey names and they will give
you a better impression than my generalities of those who accepted
Gatsby's hospitality and paid him the subtle tribute of knowing nothing
whatever about him.

From East Egg, then, came the Chester Beckers and the Leeches and a
man named Bunsen whom I knew at Yale and Doctor Webster Civet who
was drowned last summer up in Maine. And the Hornbeams and the Willie
Voltaires and a whole clan named Blackbuck who always gathered in a
corner and flipped up their noses like goats at whosoever came near.
And the Ismays and the Chrysties (or rather Hubert Auerbach and Mr.
Chrystie's wife) and Edgar Beaver, whose hair they say turned
cotton-white one winter afternoon for no good reason at all.

Clarence Endive was from East Egg, as I remember. He came only
once, in white knickerbockers, and had a fight with a bum named
Etty in the garden. From farther out on the Island came the Cheadles
and the O. R. P. Schraeders and the Stonewall Jackson Abrams of
Georgia and the Fishguards and the Ripley Snells. Snell was there
three days before he went to the penitentiary, so drunk out on the
gravel drive that Mrs. Ulysses Swett's automobile ran over his right
hand. The Dancies came too and S. B. Whitebait, who was well over
sixty, and Maurice A. Flink and the Hammerheads and Beluga the
tobacco importer and Beluga's girls.

From West Egg came the Poles and the Mulreadys and Cecil Roebuck and
Cecil Schoen and Gulick the state senator and Newton Orchid who
controlled Films Par Excellence and Eckhaust and Clyde Cohen and Don
S. Schwartze (the son) and Arthur McCarty, all connected with the
movies in one way or another. And the Catlips and the Bembergs and G.
Earl Muldoon, brother to that Muldoon who afterward strangled his wife.
Da Fontano the promoter came there, and Ed Legros and James B.
("Rot-Gut") Ferret and the De Jongs and Ernest Lilly--they came to
gamble and when Ferret wandered into the garden it meant he was
cleaned out and Associated Traction would have to fluctuate profitably
next day.

A man named Klipspringer was there so often and so long that he became
known as "the boarder"--I doubt if he had any other home. Of theatrical
people there were Gus Waize and Horace O'Donavan and Lester Meyer and
George Duckweed and Francis Bull. Also from New York were the Chromes
and the Backhyssons and the Dennickers and Russel Betty and the
Corrigans and the Kellehers and the Dewars and the Scullys and S. W.
Belcher and the Smirkes and the young Quinns, divorced now, and Henry
L. Palmetto who killed himself by jumping in front of a subway train
in Times Square.

Benny McClenahan arrived always with four girls. They were never quite
the same ones in physical person but they were so identical one with
another that it inevitably seemed they had been there before. I have
forgotten their names--Jaqueline, I think, or else Consuela or Gloria
or Judy or June, and their last names were either the melodious names
of flowers and months or the sterner ones of the great American
capitalists whose cousins, if pressed, they would confess themselves to
be.

In addition to all these I can remember that Faustina O'Brien came
there at least once and the Baedeker girls and young Brewer who had
his nose shot off in the war and Mr. Albrucksburger and Miss Haag, his
fiancée, and Ardita Fitz-Peters, and Mr. P. Jewett, once head of the
American Legion, and Miss Claudia Hip with a man reputed to be her
chauffeur, and a prince of something whom we called Duke and whose name,
if I ever knew it, I have forgotten.

All these people came to Gatsby's house in the summer.


At nine o'clock, one morning late in July Gatsby's gorgeous car
lurched up the rocky drive to my door and gave out a burst of melody
from its three noted horn. It was the first time he had called on me
though I had gone to two of his parties, mounted in his hydroplane,
and, at his urgent invitation, made frequent use of his beach.

"Good morning, old sport. You're having lunch with me today and I
thought we'd ride up together."

He was balancing himself on the dashboard of his car with that
resourcefulness of movement that is so peculiarly American--that comes,
I suppose, with the absence of lifting work or rigid sitting in youth
and, even more, with the formless grace of our nervous, sporadic games.
This quality was continually breaking through his punctilious manner in
the shape of restlessness. He was never quite still; there was always a
tapping foot somewhere or the impatient opening and closing of a hand.

He saw me looking with admiration at his car.

"It's pretty, isn't it, old sport." He jumped off to give me a better
view. "Haven't you ever seen it before?"

I'd seen it. Everybody had seen it. It was a rich cream color, bright
with nickel, swollen here and there in its monstrous length with
triumphant hatboxes and supper-boxes and tool-boxes, and terraced with a
labyrinth of windshields that mirrored a dozen suns. Sitting down behind
many layers of glass in a sort of green leather conservatory we started
to town.

I had talked with him perhaps half a dozen times in the past month and
found, to my disappointment, that he had little to say. So my first
impression, that he was a person of some undefined consequence, had
gradually faded and he had become simply the proprietor of an elaborate
roadhouse next door.

And then came that disconcerting ride. We hadn't reached West Egg
village before Gatsby began leaving his elegant sentences unfinished
and slapping himself indecisively on the knee of his caramel-colored
suit.

"Look here, old sport," he broke out surprisingly. "What's your opinion
of me, anyhow?"

A little overwhelmed, I began the generalized evasions which
that question deserves.

"Well, I'm going to tell you something about my life," he interrupted.
"I don't want you to get a wrong idea of me from all these stories you
hear."

So he was aware of the bizarre accusations that flavored conversation in
his halls.

"I'll tell you God's truth." His right hand suddenly ordered divine
retribution to stand by. "I am the son of some wealthy people in the
middle-west--all dead now. I was brought up in America but educated at
Oxford because all my ancestors have been educated there for many years.
It is a family tradition."

He looked at me sideways--and I knew why Jordan Baker had believed he was
lying. He hurried the phrase "educated at Oxford," or swallowed it or
choked on it as though it had bothered him before. And with this doubt
his whole statement fell to pieces and I wondered if there wasn't
something a little sinister about him after all.

"What part of the middle-west?" I inquired casually.

"San Francisco."

"I see."

"My family all died and I came into a good deal of money."

His voice was solemn as if the memory of that sudden extinction of a clan
still haunted him. For a moment I suspected that he was pulling my leg
but a glance at him convinced me otherwise.

"After that I lived like a young rajah in all the capitals of
Europe--Paris, Venice, Rome--collecting jewels, chiefly rubies, hunting
big game, painting a little, things for myself only, and trying to
forget something very sad that had happened to me long ago."

With an effort I managed to restrain my incredulous laughter. The very
phrases were worn so threadbare that they evoked no image except that of a
turbaned "character" leaking sawdust at every pore as he pursued a
tiger through the Bois de Boulogne.

"Then came the war, old sport. It was a great relief and I tried very
hard to die but I seemed to bear an enchanted life. I accepted a
commission as first lieutenant when it began. In the Argonne Forest I
took two machine-gun detachments so far forward that there was a half
mile gap on either side of us where the infantry couldn't advance. We
stayed there two days and two nights, a hundred and thirty men with
sixteen Lewis guns, and when the infantry came up at last they found
the insignia of three German divisions among the piles of dead. I was
promoted to be a major and every Allied government gave me a
decoration--even Montenegro, little Montenegro down on the Adriatic
Sea!"

Little Montenegro! He lifted up the words and nodded at them--with
his smile. The smile comprehended Montenegro's troubled history and
sympathized with the brave struggles of the Montenegrin people. It
appreciated fully the chain of national circumstances which had
elicited this tribute from Montenegro's warm little heart. My
incredulity was submerged in fascination now; it was like skimming
hastily through a dozen magazines.

He reached in his pocket and a piece of metal, slung on a ribbon, fell
into my palm.

"That's the one from Montenegro."

To my astonishment, the thing had an authentic look.

_Orderi di Danilo_, ran the circular legend, _Montenegro, Nicolas Rex_.

"Turn it."

_Major Jay Gatsby_, I read, _For Valour Extraordinary_.

"Here's another thing I always carry. A souvenir of Oxford days. It was
taken in Trinity Quad--the man on my left is now the Earl of Dorcaster."

It was a photograph of half a dozen young men in blazers loafing in an
archway through which were visible a host of spires. There was Gatsby,
looking a little, not much, younger--with a cricket bat in his hand.

Then it was all true. I saw the skins of tigers flaming in his palace
on the Grand Canal; I saw him opening a chest of rubies to ease, with
their crimson-lighted depths, the gnawings of his broken heart.

"I'm going to make a big request of you today," he said, pocketing his
souvenirs with satisfaction, "so I thought you ought to know something
about me. I didn't want you to think I was just some nobody. You see,
I usually find myself among strangers because I drift here and there
trying to forget the sad thing that happened to me." He hesitated.
"You'll hear about it this afternoon."

"At lunch?"

"No, this afternoon. I happened to find out that you're taking Miss Baker
to tea."

"Do you mean you're in love with Miss Baker?"

"No, old sport, I'm not. But Miss Baker has kindly consented to speak
to you about this matter."

I hadn't the faintest idea what "this matter" was, but I was more
annoyed than interested. I hadn't asked Jordan to tea in order to discuss
Mr. Jay Gatsby. I was sure the request would be something utterly
fantastic and for a moment I was sorry I'd ever set foot upon his
overpopulated lawn.

He wouldn't say another word. His correctness grew on him as we neared
the city. We passed Port Roosevelt, where there was a glimpse of
red-belted ocean-going ships, and sped along a cobbled slum lined with
the dark, undeserted saloons of the faded gilt nineteen-hundreds. Then
the valley of ashes opened out on both sides of us, and I had a glimpse
of Mrs. Wilson straining at the garage pump with panting vitality as we
went by.

With fenders spread like wings we scattered light through half
Astoria--only half, for as we twisted among the pillars of the
elevated I heard the familiar "jug--jug--SPAT!" of a motor cycle, and a
frantic policeman rode alongside.

"All right, old sport," called Gatsby. We slowed down. Taking a white
card from his wallet he waved it before the man's eyes.

"Right you are," agreed the policeman, tipping his cap. "Know you next
time, Mr. Gatsby. Excuse ME!"

"What was that?" I inquired.  "The picture of Oxford?"

"I was able to do the commissioner a favor once, and he sends me a
Christmas card every year."

Over the great bridge, with the sunlight through the girders making a
constant flicker upon the moving cars, with the city rising up across the
river in white heaps and sugar lumps all built with a wish out of
non-olfactory money. The city seen from the Queensboro Bridge is always
the city seen for the first time, in its first wild promise of all the
mystery and the beauty in the world.

A dead man passed us in a hearse heaped with blooms, followed by two
carriages with drawn blinds and by more cheerful carriages for
friends. The friends looked out at us with the tragic eyes and short
upper lips of south-eastern Europe, and I was glad that the sight of
Gatsby's splendid car was included in their somber holiday. As we
crossed Blackwell's Island a limousine passed us, driven by a white
chauffeur, in which sat three modish Negroes, two bucks and a girl. I
laughed aloud as the yolks of their eyeballs rolled toward us in
haughty rivalry.

"Anything can happen now that we've slid over this bridge," I thought;
"anything at all. . . ."

Even Gatsby could happen, without any particular wonder.


Roaring noon. In a well-fanned Forty-second Street cellar I met Gatsby
for lunch. Blinking away the brightness of the street outside my eyes
picked him out obscurely in the anteroom, talking to another man.

"Mr. Carraway this is my friend Mr. Wolfshiem."

A small, flat-nosed Jew raised his large head and regarded me with two
fine growths of hair which luxuriated in either nostril. After a moment I
discovered his tiny eyes in the half darkness.

"--so I took one look at him--" said Mr. Wolfshiem, shaking my hand
earnestly, "--and what do you think I did?"

"What?" I inquired politely.

But evidently he was not addressing me for he dropped my hand and
covered Gatsby with his expressive nose.

"I handed the money to Katspaugh and I sid, 'All right, Katspaugh,
don't pay him a penny till he shuts his mouth.' He shut it then and
there."

Gatsby took an arm of each of us and moved forward into the
restaurant whereupon Mr. Wolfshiem swallowed a new sentence he was
starting and lapsed into a somnambulatory abstraction.

"Highballs?" asked the head waiter.

"This is a nice restaurant here," said Mr. Wolfshiem looking at the
Presbyterian nymphs on the ceiling. "But I like across the street better!"

"Yes, highballs," agreed Gatsby, and then to Mr. Wolfshiem: "It's too hot
over there."

"Hot and small--yes," said Mr. Wolfshiem, "but full of memories."

"What place is that?" I asked.

"The old Metropole.

"The old Metropole," brooded Mr. Wolfshiem gloomily. "Filled with faces
dead and gone. Filled with friends gone now forever. I can't forget so
long as I live the night they shot Rosy Rosenthal there. It was six of us
at the table and Rosy had eat and drunk a lot all evening. When it was
almost morning the waiter came up to him with a funny look and says
somebody wants to speak to him outside. 'All right,' says Rosy and begins
to get up and I pulled him down in his chair.

" 'Let the bastards come in here if they want you, Rosy, but don't you,
so help me, move outside this room.'

"It was four o'clock in the morning then, and if we'd of raised the blinds
we'd of seen daylight."

"Did he go?" I asked innocently.

"Sure he went,"--Mr. Wolfshiem's nose flashed at me indignantly--"He
turned around in the door and says, 'Don't let that waiter take away
my coffee!' Then he went out on the sidewalk and they shot him
three times in his full belly and drove away."

"Four of them were electrocuted," I said, remembering.

"Five with Becker." His nostrils turned to me in an interested way.
"I understand you're looking for a business gonnegtion."

The juxtaposition of these two remarks was startling. Gatsby answered
for me:

"Oh, no," he exclaimed, "this isn't the man!"

"No?" Mr. Wolfshiem seemed disappointed.

"This is just a friend. I told you we'd talk about that some other
time."

"I beg your pardon," said Mr. Wolfshiem, "I had a wrong man."

A succulent hash arrived, and Mr. Wolfshiem, forgetting the more
sentimental atmosphere of the old Metropole, began to eat with
ferocious delicacy. His eyes, meanwhile, roved very slowly all around the
room--he completed the arc by turning to inspect the people directly
behind. I think that, except for my presence, he would have taken one
short glance beneath our own table.

"Look here, old sport," said Gatsby, leaning toward me, "I'm afraid I
made you a little angry this morning in the car."

There was the smile again, but this time I held out against it.

"I don't like mysteries," I answered. "And I don't understand why you
won't come out frankly and tell me what you want. Why has it all got to
come through Miss Baker?"

"Oh, it's nothing underhand," he assured me. "Miss Baker's a great
sportswoman, you know, and she'd never do anything that wasn't all right."

Suddenly he looked at his watch, jumped up and hurried from the room
leaving me with Mr. Wolfshiem at the table.

"He has to telephone," said Mr. Wolfshiem, following him with his eyes.
"Fine fellow, isn't he? Handsome to look at and a perfect gentleman."

"Yes."

"He's an Oggsford man."

"Oh!"

"He went to Oggsford College in England. You know Oggsford College?"

"I've heard of it."

"It's one of the most famous colleges in the world."

"Have you known Gatsby for a long time?" I inquired.

"Several years," he answered in a gratified way. "I made the pleasure of
his acquaintance just after the war. But I knew I had discovered a man of
fine breeding after I talked with him an hour. I said to myself: 'There's
the kind of man you'd like to take home and introduce to your mother and
sister.' " He paused. "I see you're looking at my cuff buttons."

I hadn't been looking at them, but I did now.  They were composed of
oddly familiar pieces of ivory.

"Finest specimens of human molars," he informed me.

"Well!" I inspected them. "That's a very interesting idea."

"Yeah." He flipped his sleeves up under his coat. "Yeah, Gatsby's very
careful about women. He would never so much as look at a friend's wife."

When the subject of this instinctive trust returned to the table and sat
down Mr. Wolfshiem drank his coffee with a jerk and got to his feet.

"I have enjoyed my lunch," he said, "and I'm going to run off from you
two young men before I outstay my welcome."

"Don't hurry, Meyer," said Gatsby, without enthusiasm. Mr. Wolfshiem
raised his hand in a sort of benediction.

"You're very polite but I belong to another generation," he announced
solemnly. "You sit here and discuss your sports and your young ladies and
your----" He supplied an imaginary noun with another wave of his
hand--"As for me, I am fifty years old, and I won't impose myself
on you any longer."

As he shook hands and turned away his tragic nose was trembling.
I wondered if I had said anything to offend him.

"He becomes very sentimental sometimes," explained Gatsby. "This is one of
his sentimental days. He's quite a character around New York--a denizen of
Broadway."

"Who is he anyhow--an actor?"

"No."

"A dentist?"

"Meyer Wolfshiem? No, he's a gambler." Gatsby hesitated, then added
coolly: "He's the man who fixed the World's Series back in 1919."

"Fixed the World's Series?" I repeated.

The idea staggered me. I remembered of course that the World's Series
had been fixed in 1919 but if I had thought of it at all I would have
thought of it as a thing that merely HAPPENED, the end of some
inevitable chain. It never occurred to me that one man could start to
play with the faith of fifty million people--with the single-mindedness
of a burglar blowing a safe.

"How did he happen to do that?" I asked after a minute.

"He just saw the opportunity."

"Why isn't he in jail?"

"They can't get him, old sport. He's a smart man."

I insisted on paying the check. As the waiter brought my change I caught
sight of Tom Buchanan across the crowded room.

"Come along with me for a minute," I said. "I've got to say hello
to someone."

When he saw us Tom jumped up and took half a dozen steps in our
direction.

"Where've you been?" he demanded eagerly. "Daisy's furious because you
haven't called up."

"This is Mr. Gatsby, Mr. Buchanan."

They shook hands briefly and a strained, unfamiliar look of embarrassment
came over Gatsby's face.

"How've you been, anyhow?" demanded Tom of me. "How'd you happen to come
up this far to eat?"

"I've been having lunch with Mr. Gatsby."

I turned toward Mr. Gatsby, but he was no longer there.


One October day in nineteen-seventeen----
(said Jordan Baker that afternoon, sitting up very straight on a straight
chair in the tea-garden at the Plaza Hotel)
--I was walking along from one place to another half on the sidewalks and
half on the lawns. I was happier on the lawns because I had on shoes from
England with rubber nobs on the soles that bit into the soft ground.
I had on a new plaid skirt also that blew a little in the wind and
whenever this happened the red, white and blue banners in front of all
the houses stretched out stiff and said TUT-TUT-TUT-TUT in a disapproving
way.

The largest of the banners and the largest of the lawns belonged to
Daisy Fay's house. She was just eighteen, two years older than me, and
by far the most popular of all the young girls in Louisville. She
dressed in white, and had a little white roadster and all day long
the telephone rang in her house and excited young officers from Camp
Taylor demanded the privilege of monopolizing her that night, "anyways,
for an hour!"

When I came opposite her house that morning her white roadster was beside
the curb, and she was sitting in it with a lieutenant I had never seen
before. They were so engrossed in each other that she didn't see me until
I was five feet away.

"Hello Jordan," she called unexpectedly. "Please come here."

I was flattered that she wanted to speak to me, because of all the older
girls I admired her most. She asked me if I was going to the Red Cross and
make bandages. I was. Well, then, would I tell them that she couldn't come
that day? The officer looked at Daisy while she was speaking, in a way
that every young girl wants to be looked at sometime, and because it
seemed romantic to me I have remembered the incident ever since. His name
was Jay Gatsby and I didn't lay eyes on him again for over four
years--even after I'd met him on Long Island I didn't realize it was the
same man.

That was nineteen-seventeen. By the next year I had a few beaux myself,
and I began to play in tournaments, so I didn't see Daisy very often.
She went with a slightly older crowd--when she went with anyone at all.
Wild rumors were circulating about her--how her mother had found her
packing her bag one winter night to go to New York and say goodbye to a
soldier who was going overseas. She was effectually prevented, but she
wasn't on speaking terms with her family for several weeks. After
that she didn't play around with the soldiers any more but only
with a few flat-footed, short-sighted young men in town who couldn't
get into the army at all.

By the next autumn she was gay again, gay as ever. She had a debut
after the Armistice, and in February she was presumably engaged to a
man from New Orleans. In June she married Tom Buchanan of Chicago with
more pomp and circumstance than Louisville ever knew before. He came
down with a hundred people in four private cars and hired a whole
floor of the Seelbach Hotel, and the day before the wedding he gave her
a string of pearls valued at three hundred and fifty thousand dollars.

I was bridesmaid. I came into her room half an hour before the bridal
dinner, and found her lying on her bed as lovely as the June night in
her flowered dress--and as drunk as a monkey. She had a bottle of
sauterne in one hand and a letter in the other.

" 'Gratulate me," she muttered. "Never had a drink before but oh, how I do
enjoy it."

"What's the matter, Daisy?"

I was scared, I can tell you; I'd never seen a girl like that before.

"Here, dearis." She groped around in a waste-basket she had with her
on the bed and pulled out the string of pearls. "Take 'em downstairs and
give 'em back to whoever they belong to. Tell 'em all Daisy's change' her
mine. Say 'Daisy's change' her mine!'."

She began to cry--she cried and cried. I rushed out and found her
mother's maid and we locked the door and got her into a cold bath. She
wouldn't let go of the letter. She took it into the tub with her and
squeezed it up into a wet ball, and only let me leave it in the
soap dish when she saw that it was coming to pieces like snow.

But she didn't say another word. We gave her spirits of ammonia and put
ice on her forehead and hooked her back into her dress and half an
hour later when we walked out of the room the pearls were around her
neck and the incident was over. Next day at five o'clock she married Tom
Buchanan without so much as a shiver and started off on a three months'
trip to the South Seas.

I saw them in Santa Barbara when they came back and I thought I'd
never seen a girl so mad about her husband. If he left the room for a
minute she'd look around uneasily and say "Where's Tom gone?" and
wear the most abstracted expression until she saw him coming in the
door. She used to sit on the sand with his head in her lap by the hour
rubbing her fingers over his eyes and looking at him with unfathomable
delight. It was touching to see them together--it made you laugh in a
hushed, fascinated way. That was in August. A week after I left Santa
Barbara Tom ran into a wagon on the Ventura road one night and ripped
a front wheel off his car. The girl who was with him got into the
papers too because her arm was broken--she was one of the chambermaids
in the Santa Barbara Hotel.

The next April Daisy had her little girl and they went to France for a
year. I saw them one spring in Cannes and later in Deauville and then
they came back to Chicago to settle down. Daisy was popular in Chicago,
as you know. They moved with a fast crowd, all of them young and rich
and wild, but she came out with an absolutely perfect reputation.
Perhaps because she doesn't drink. It's a great advantage not to drink
among hard-drinking people. You can hold your tongue and, moreover,
you can time any little irregularity of your own so that everybody else
is so blind that they don't see or care. Perhaps Daisy never went in
for amour at all--and yet there's something in that voice of hers. . . .

Well, about six weeks ago, she heard the name Gatsby for the first time
in years. It was when I asked you--do you remember?--if you knew Gatsby
in West Egg. After you had gone home she came into my room and woke me
up, and said "What Gatsby?" and when I described him--I was half
asleep--she said in the strangest voice that it must be the man she used
to know. It wasn't until then that I connected this Gatsby with the
officer in her white car.


When Jordan Baker had finished telling all this we had left the Plaza
for half an hour and were driving in a Victoria through Central Park.
The sun had gone down behind the tall apartments of the movie stars in
the West Fifties and the clear voices of girls, already gathered like
crickets on the grass, rose through the hot twilight:


    "I'm the Sheik of Araby,
    Your love belongs to me.
    At night when you're asleep,
    Into your tent I'll creep----"


"It was a strange coincidence," I said.

"But it wasn't a coincidence at all."

"Why not?"

"Gatsby bought that house so that Daisy would be just across the bay."

Then it had not been merely the stars to which he had aspired
on that June night. He came alive to me, delivered suddenly from the
womb of his purposeless splendor.

"He wants to know--" continued Jordan "--if you'll invite Daisy to your
house some afternoon and then let him come over."

The modesty of the demand shook me. He had waited five years and bought a
mansion where he dispensed starlight to casual moths so that he could
"come over" some afternoon to a stranger's garden.

"Did I have to know all this before he could ask such a little thing?"

"He's afraid. He's waited so long. He thought you might be offended.
You see he's a regular tough underneath it all."

Something worried me.

"Why didn't he ask you to arrange a meeting?"

"He wants her to see his house," she explained. "And your house is right
next door."

"Oh!"

"I think he half expected her to wander into one of his parties,
some night," went on Jordan, "but she never did. Then he began asking
people casually if they knew her, and I was the first one he found.
It was that night he sent for me at his dance, and you should have
heard the elaborate way he worked up to it. Of course, I immediately
suggested a luncheon in New York--and I thought he'd go mad:

" 'I don't want to do anything out of the way!' he kept saying. 'I want to
see her right next door.'

"When I said you were a particular friend of Tom's he started to abandon
the whole idea. He doesn't know very much about Tom, though he says he's
read a Chicago paper for years just on the chance of catching a glimpse
of Daisy's name."

It was dark now, and as we dipped under a little bridge I put my arm
around Jordan's golden shoulder and drew her toward me and asked her to
dinner. Suddenly I wasn't thinking of Daisy and Gatsby any more but of
this clean, hard, limited person who dealt in universal skepticism and
who leaned back jauntily just within the circle of my arm. A phrase began
to beat in my ears with a sort of heady excitement: "There are only the
pursued, the pursuing, the busy and the tired."

"And Daisy ought to have something in her life," murmured Jordan to me.

"Does she want to see Gatsby?"

"She's not to know about it. Gatsby doesn't want her to know. You're
just supposed to invite her to tea."

We passed a barrier of dark trees, and then the facade of Fifty-ninth
Street, a block of delicate pale light, beamed down into the park.
Unlike Gatsby and Tom Buchanan I had no girl whose disembodied face
floated along the dark cornices and blinding signs and so I drew up the
girl beside me, tightening my arms. Her wan, scornful mouth smiled and so
I drew her up again, closer, this time to my face.




Chapter 5



When I came home to West Egg that night I was afraid for a moment that
my house was on fire. Two o'clock and the whole corner of the peninsula
was blazing with light which fell unreal on the shrubbery and made thin
elongating glints upon the roadside wires. Turning a corner I saw that it
was Gatsby's house, lit from tower to cellar.

At first I thought it was another party, a wild rout that had resolved
itself into "hide-and-go-seek" or "sardines-in-the-box" with all the
house thrown open to the game. But there wasn't a sound. Only wind in
the trees which blew the wires and made the lights go off and on again
as if the house had winked into the darkness. As my taxi groaned away I
saw Gatsby walking toward me across his lawn.

"Your place looks like the world's fair," I said.

"Does it?" He turned his eyes toward it absently. "I have been glancing
into some of the rooms. Let's go to Coney Island, old sport. In my car."

"It's too late."

"Well, suppose we take a plunge in the swimming pool? I haven't made use
of it all summer."

"I've got to go to bed."

"All right."

He waited, looking at me with suppressed eagerness.

"I talked with Miss Baker," I said after a moment. "I'm going to call up
Daisy tomorrow and invite her over here to tea."

"Oh, that's all right," he said carelessly. "I don't want to put you to
any trouble."

"What day would suit you?"

"What day would suit YOU?" he corrected me quickly. "I don't want to put
you to any trouble, you see."

"How about the day after tomorrow?" He considered for a moment. Then,
with reluctance:

"I want to get the grass cut," he said.

We both looked at the grass--there was a sharp line where my ragged lawn
ended and the darker, well-kept expanse of his began. I suspected that
he meant my grass.

"There's another little thing," he said uncertainly, and hesitated.

"Would you rather put it off for a few days?" I asked.

"Oh, it isn't about that. At least----" He fumbled with a series of
beginnings. "Why, I thought--why, look here, old sport, you don't make
much money, do you?"

"Not very much."

This seemed to reassure him and he continued more confidently.

"I thought you didn't, if you'll pardon my--you see, I carry on a
little business on the side, a sort of sideline, you understand. And I
thought that if you don't make very much--You're selling bonds, aren't
you, old sport?"

"Trying to."

"Well, this would interest you. It wouldn't take up much of your
time and you might pick up a nice bit of money. It happens to be
a rather confidential sort of thing."

I realize now that under different circumstances that conversation might
have been one of the crises of my life. But, because the offer was
obviously and tactlessly for a service to be rendered, I had no choice
except to cut him off there.

"I've got my hands full," I said. "I'm much obliged but I couldn't take
on any more work."

"You wouldn't have to do any business with Wolfshiem." Evidently he
thought that I was shying away from the "gonnegtion" mentioned at lunch,
but I assured him he was wrong. He waited a moment longer, hoping I'd
begin a conversation, but I was too absorbed to be responsive, so he went
unwillingly home.

The evening had made me light-headed and happy; I think I walked into a
deep sleep as I entered my front door. So I didn't know whether or not
Gatsby went to Coney Island or for how many hours he "glanced into
rooms" while his house blazed gaudily on. I called up Daisy from the
office next morning and invited her to come to tea.

"Don't bring Tom," I warned her.

"What?"

"Don't bring Tom."

"Who is 'Tom'?" she asked innocently.

The day agreed upon was pouring rain. At eleven o'clock a man in a
raincoat dragging a lawn-mower tapped at my front door and said that
Mr. Gatsby had sent him over to cut my grass. This reminded me that I
had forgotten to tell my Finn to come back so I drove into West Egg
Village to search for her among soggy white-washed alleys and to buy
some cups and lemons and flowers.

The flowers were unnecessary, for at two o'clock a greenhouse arrived
from Gatsby's, with innumerable receptacles to contain it. An hour
later the front door opened nervously, and Gatsby in a white flannel
suit, silver shirt and gold-colored tie hurried in. He was pale and
there were dark signs of sleeplessness beneath his eyes.

"Is everything all right?" he asked immediately.

"The grass looks fine, if that's what you mean."

"What grass?" he inquired blankly. "Oh, the grass in the yard." He looked
out the window at it, but judging from his expression I don't believe
he saw a thing.

"Looks very good," he remarked vaguely. "One of the papers said they
thought the rain would stop about four. I think it was 'The Journal.' Have
you got everything you need in the shape of--of tea?"

I took him into the pantry where he looked a little reproachfully at the
Finn. Together we scrutinized the twelve lemon cakes from the delicatessen
shop.

"Will they do?" I asked.

"Of course, of course! They're fine!" and he added hollowly, ". . .old
sport."

The rain cooled about half-past three to a damp mist through which
occasional thin drops swam like dew. Gatsby looked with vacant eyes
through a copy of Clay's "Economics," starting at the Finnish tread that
shook the kitchen floor and peering toward the bleared windows from time
to time as if a series of invisible but alarming happenings were taking
place outside. Finally he got up and informed me in an uncertain voice
that he was going home.

"Why's that?"

"Nobody's coming to tea. It's too late!" He looked at his watch as if
there was some pressing demand on his time elsewhere. "I can't wait
all day."

"Don't be silly; it's just two minutes to four."

He sat down, miserably, as if I had pushed him, and simultaneously there
was the sound of a motor turning into my lane. We both jumped up and,
a little harrowed myself, I went out into the yard.

Under the dripping bare lilac trees a large open car was coming up the
drive. It stopped. Daisy's face, tipped sideways beneath a
three-cornered lavender hat, looked out at me with a bright ecstatic
smile.

"Is this absolutely where you live, my dearest one?"

The exhilarating ripple of her voice was a wild tonic in the rain. I had
to follow the sound of it for a moment, up and down, with my ear alone
before any words came through. A damp streak of hair lay like a dash of
blue paint across her cheek and her hand was wet with glistening drops as
I took it to help her from the car.

"Are you in love with me," she said low in my ear. "Or why did I have
to come alone?"

"That's the secret of Castle Rackrent. Tell your chauffeur to go far
away and spend an hour."

"Come back in an hour, Ferdie." Then in a grave murmur, "His name is
Ferdie."

"Does the gasoline affect his nose?"

"I don't think so," she said innocently. "Why?"

We went in. To my overwhelming surprise the living room was deserted.

"Well, that's funny!" I exclaimed.

"What's funny?"

She turned her head as there was a light, dignified knocking at the front
door. I went out and opened it. Gatsby, pale as death, with his hands
plunged like weights in his coat pockets, was standing in a puddle of
water glaring tragically into my eyes.

With his hands still in his coat pockets he stalked by me into the
hall, turned sharply as if he were on a wire and disappeared into the
living room. It wasn't a bit funny. Aware of the loud beating of my own
heart I pulled the door to against the increasing rain.

For half a minute there wasn't a sound. Then from the living room I
heard a sort of choking murmur and part of a laugh followed by Daisy's
voice on a clear artificial note.

"I certainly am awfully glad to see you again."

A pause; it endured horribly. I had nothing to do in the hall so I went
into the room.

Gatsby, his hands still in his pockets, was reclining against the
mantelpiece in a strained counterfeit of perfect ease, even of boredom.
His head leaned back so far that it rested against the face of a
defunct mantelpiece clock and from this position his distraught eyes
stared down at Daisy who was sitting frightened but graceful on the
edge of a stiff chair.

"We've met before," muttered Gatsby. His eyes glanced momentarily at
me and his lips parted with an abortive attempt at a laugh. Luckily
the clock took this moment to tilt dangerously at the pressure of his
head, whereupon he turned and caught it with trembling fingers and set
it back in place. Then he sat down, rigidly, his elbow on the arm of the
sofa and his chin in his hand.

"I'm sorry about the clock," he said.

My own face had now assumed a deep tropical burn. I couldn't muster up
a single commonplace out of the thousand in my head.

"It's an old clock," I told them idiotically.

I think we all believed for a moment that it had smashed in pieces on
the floor.

"We haven't met for many years," said Daisy, her voice as matter-of-fact
as it could ever be.

"Five years next November."

The automatic quality of Gatsby's answer set us all back at least another
minute. I had them both on their feet with the desperate suggestion that
they help me make tea in the kitchen when the demoniac Finn brought it in
on a tray.

Amid the welcome confusion of cups and cakes a certain physical decency
established itself. Gatsby got himself into a shadow and while Daisy
and I talked looked conscientiously from one to the other of us with
tense unhappy eyes. However, as calmness wasn't an end in itself I
made an excuse at the first possible moment and got to my feet.

"Where are you going?" demanded Gatsby in immediate alarm.

"I'll be back."

"I've got to speak to you about something before you go."

He followed me wildly into the kitchen, closed the door and whispered:
"Oh, God!" in a miserable way.

"What's the matter?"

"This is a terrible mistake," he said, shaking his head from side to
side, "a terrible, terrible mistake."

"You're just embarrassed, that's all," and luckily I added: "Daisy's
embarrassed too."

"She's embarrassed?" he repeated incredulously.

"Just as much as you are."

"Don't talk so loud."

"You're acting like a little boy," I broke out impatiently. "Not only
that but you're rude. Daisy's sitting in there all alone."


He raised his hand to stop my words, looked at me with unforgettable
reproach and opening the door cautiously went back into the other room.

I walked out the back way--just as Gatsby had when he had made his
nervous circuit of the house half an hour before--and ran for a huge
black knotted tree whose massed leaves made a fabric against the rain.
Once more it was pouring and my irregular lawn, well-shaved by
Gatsby's gardener, abounded in small muddy swamps and prehistoric
marshes. There was nothing to look at from under the tree except
Gatsby's enormous house, so I stared at it, like Kant at his church
steeple, for half an hour. A brewer had built it early in the "period"
craze, a decade before, and there was a story that he'd agreed to pay
five years' taxes on all the neighboring cottages if the owners would
have their roofs thatched with straw. Perhaps their refusal took the
heart out of his plan to Found a Family--he went into an immediate
decline. His children sold his house with the black wreath still on the
door. Americans, while occasionally willing to be serfs, have always
been obstinate about being peasantry.

After half an hour the sun shone again and the grocer's automobile
rounded Gatsby's drive with the raw material for his servants' dinner--I
felt sure he wouldn't eat a spoonful. A maid began opening the upper
windows of his house, appeared momentarily in each, and, leaning from a
large central bay, spat meditatively into the garden. It was time I
went back. While the rain continued it had seemed like the murmur of
their voices, rising and swelling a little, now and then, with gusts of
emotion. But in the new silence I felt that silence had fallen within
the house too.

I went in--after making every possible noise in the kitchen short of
pushing over the stove--but I don't believe they heard a sound. They
were sitting at either end of the couch looking at each other as if
some question had been asked or was in the air, and every vestige of
embarrassment was gone. Daisy's face was smeared with tears and when I
came in she jumped up and began wiping at it with her handkerchief before
a mirror. But there was a change in Gatsby that was simply confounding.
He literally glowed; without a word or a gesture of exultation a new
well-being radiated from him and filled the little room.

"Oh, hello, old sport," he said, as if he hadn't seen me for years. I
thought for a moment he was going to shake hands.

"It's stopped raining."

"Has it?" When he realized what I was talking about, that there were
twinkle-bells of sunshine in the room, he smiled like a weather man,
like an ecstatic patron of recurrent light, and repeated the news to
Daisy. "What do you think of that? It's stopped raining."

"I'm glad, Jay." Her throat, full of aching, grieving beauty, told only
of her unexpected joy.

"I want you and Daisy to come over to my house," he said, "I'd like to
show her around."

"You're sure you want me to come?"

"Absolutely, old sport."

Daisy went upstairs to wash her face--too late I thought with humiliation
of my towels--while Gatsby and I waited on the lawn.

"My house looks well, doesn't it?" he demanded. "See how the whole
front of it catches the light."

I agreed that it was splendid.

"Yes." His eyes went over it, every arched door and square tower. "It took
me just three years to earn the money that bought it."

"I thought you inherited your money."

"I did, old sport," he said automatically, "but I lost most of it in
the big panic--the panic of the war."

I think he hardly knew what he was saying, for when I asked him what
business he was in he answered "That's my affair," before he realized
that it wasn't the appropriate reply.

"Oh, I've been in several things," he corrected himself. "I was in the
drug business and then I was in the oil business. But I'm not in either
one now." He looked at me with more attention. "Do you mean you've been
thinking over what I proposed the other night?"

Before I could answer, Daisy came out of the house and two rows of brass
buttons on her dress gleamed in the sunlight.

"That huge place THERE?" she cried pointing.

"Do you like it?"

"I love it, but I don't see how you live there all alone."

"I keep it always full of interesting people, night and day. People who
do interesting things. Celebrated people."

Instead of taking the short cut along the Sound we went down the road and
entered by the big postern. With enchanting murmurs Daisy admired this
aspect or that of the feudal silhouette against the sky, admired the
gardens, the sparkling odor of jonquils and the frothy odor of hawthorn
and plum blossoms and the pale gold odor of kiss-me-at-the-gate.
It was strange to reach the marble steps and find no stir of bright
dresses in and out the door, and hear no sound but bird voices in the
trees.

And inside as we wandered through Marie Antoinette music rooms and
Restoration salons I felt that there were guests concealed behind
every couch and table, under orders to be breathlessly silent until we
had passed through. As Gatsby closed the door of "the Merton College
Library" I could have sworn I heard the owl-eyed man break into
ghostly laughter.

We went upstairs, through period bedrooms swathed in rose and lavender
silk and vivid with new flowers, through dressing rooms and poolrooms,
and bathrooms with sunken baths--intruding into one chamber where a
dishevelled man in pajamas was doing liver exercises on the floor. It
was Mr. Klipspringer, the "boarder." I had seen him wandering hungrily
about the beach that morning. Finally we came to Gatsby's own apartment,
a bedroom and a bath and an Adam study, where we sat down and drank a
glass of some Chartreuse he took from a cupboard in the wall.

He hadn't once ceased looking at Daisy and I think he revalued
everything in his house according to the measure of response it drew
from her well-loved eyes. Sometimes, too, he stared around at his
possessions in a dazed way as though in her actual and astounding
presence none of it was any longer real. Once he nearly toppled down a
flight of stairs.

His bedroom was the simplest room of all--except where the dresser was
garnished with a toilet set of pure dull gold. Daisy took the brush
with delight and smoothed her hair, whereupon Gatsby sat down and
shaded his eyes and began to laugh.

"It's the funniest thing, old sport," he said hilariously. "I can't--when
I try to----"

He had passed visibly through two states and was entering upon a third.
After his embarrassment and his unreasoning joy he was consumed with
wonder at her presence. He had been full of the idea so long, dreamed it
right through to the end, waited with his teeth set, so to speak, at an
inconceivable pitch of intensity. Now, in the reaction, he was running
down like an overwound clock.

Recovering himself in a minute he opened for us two hulking patent
cabinets which held his massed suits and dressing-gowns and ties, and
his shirts, piled like bricks in stacks a dozen high.

"I've got a man in England who buys me clothes. He sends over a selection
of things at the beginning of each season, spring and fall."

He took out a pile of shirts and began throwing them, one by one
before us, shirts of sheer linen and thick silk and fine flannel
which lost their folds as they fell and covered the table in
many-colored disarray. While we admired he brought more and the soft
rich heap mounted higher--shirts with stripes and scrolls and plaids in
coral and apple-green and lavender and faint orange with monograms of
Indian blue. Suddenly with a strained sound, Daisy bent her head into
the shirts and began to cry stormily.

"They're such beautiful shirts," she sobbed, her voice muffled in the
thick folds. "It makes me sad because I've never seen such--such beautiful
shirts before."


After the house, we were to see the grounds and the swimming pool, and the
hydroplane and the midsummer flowers--but outside Gatsby's window it
began to rain again so we stood in a row looking at the corrugated
surface of the Sound.

"If it wasn't for the mist we could see your home across the bay," said
Gatsby. "You always have a green light that burns all night at the end of
your dock."

Daisy put her arm through his abruptly but he seemed absorbed
in what he had just said. Possibly it had occurred to him that the
colossal significance of that light had now vanished forever. Compared
to the great distance that had separated him from Daisy it had seemed
very near to her, almost touching her. It had seemed as close as a star
to the moon. Now it was again a green light on a dock. His count of
enchanted objects had diminished by one.

I began to walk about the room, examining various indefinite objects in
the half darkness. A large photograph of an elderly man in yachting
costume attracted me, hung on the wall over his desk.

"Who's this?"

"That? That's Mr. Dan Cody, old sport."

The name sounded faintly familiar.

"He's dead now. He used to be my best friend years ago."

There was a small picture of Gatsby, also in yachting costume, on the
bureau--Gatsby with his head thrown back defiantly--taken apparently
when he was about eighteen.

"I adore it!" exclaimed Daisy. "The pompadour! You never told me you had
a pompadour--or a yacht."

"Look at this," said Gatsby quickly. "Here's a lot of clippings--about
you."

They stood side by side examining it. I was going to ask to see the rubies
when the phone rang and Gatsby took up the receiver.

"Yes. . . . Well, I can't talk now. . . . I can't talk now, old
sport. . . . I said a SMALL town. . . . He must know what a small town
is. . . . Well, he's no use to us if Detroit is his idea of a small
town. . . ."

He rang off.

"Come here QUICK!" cried Daisy at the window.

The rain was still falling, but the darkness had parted in the west,
and there was a pink and golden billow of foamy clouds above the sea.

"Look at that," she whispered, and then after a moment: "I'd like to
just get one of those pink clouds and put you in it and push you
around."

I tried to go then, but they wouldn't hear of it; perhaps my presence
made them feel more satisfactorily alone.

"I know what we'll do," said Gatsby, "we'll have Klipspringer play the
piano."

He went out of the room calling "Ewing!" and returned in a few
minutes accompanied by an embarrassed, slightly worn young man with
shell-rimmed glasses and scanty blonde hair. He was now decently clothed
in a "sport shirt" open at the neck, sneakers and duck trousers of a
nebulous hue.

"Did we interrupt your exercises?" inquired Daisy politely.

"I was asleep," cried Mr. Klipspringer, in a spasm of embarrassment.
"That is, I'd BEEN asleep. Then I got up. . . ."

"Klipspringer plays the piano," said Gatsby, cutting him off. "Don't you,
Ewing, old sport?"

"I don't play well. I don't--I hardly play at all. I'm all out of
prac----"

"We'll go downstairs," interrupted Gatsby. He flipped a switch. The
grey windows disappeared as the house glowed full of light.

In the music room Gatsby turned on a solitary lamp beside the piano. He
lit Daisy's cigarette from a trembling match, and sat down with her on
a couch far across the room where there was no light save what the
gleaming floor bounced in from the hall.

When Klipspringer had played "The Love Nest" he turned around on the
bench and searched unhappily for Gatsby in the gloom.

"I'm all out of practice, you see. I told you I couldn't play. I'm all
out of prac----"

"Don't talk so much, old sport," commanded Gatsby. "Play!"


    IN THE MORNING,
    IN THE EVENING,
       AIN'T WE GOT FUN----

Outside the wind was loud and there was a faint flow of thunder along the
Sound. All the lights were going on in West Egg now; the electric trains,
men-carrying, were plunging home through the rain from New York. It was
the hour of a profound human change, and excitement was generating on
the air.


    ONE THING'S SURE AND NOTHING'S SURER
    THE RICH GET RICHER AND THE POOR GET--CHILDREN.
       IN THE MEANTIME,
       IN BETWEEN TIME----


As I went over to say goodbye I saw that the expression of bewilderment
had come back into Gatsby's face, as though a faint doubt had occurred to
him as to the quality of his present happiness. Almost five
years! There must have been moments even that afternoon when
Daisy tumbled short of his dreams--not through her own fault but
because of the colossal vitality of his illusion. It had gone beyond
her, beyond everything. He had thrown himself into it with a creative
passion, adding to it all the time, decking it out with every bright
feather that drifted his way. No amount of fire or freshness can
challenge what a man will store up in his ghostly heart.

As I watched him he adjusted himself a little, visibly. His hand took
hold of hers and as she said something low in his ear he turned toward
her with a rush of emotion. I think that voice held him most with its
fluctuating, feverish warmth because it couldn't be over-dreamed--that
voice was a deathless song.

They had forgotten me, but Daisy glanced up and held out her hand;
Gatsby didn't know me now at all. I looked once more at them and they
looked back at me, remotely, possessed by intense life. Then I went out
of the room and down the marble steps into the rain, leaving them there
together.




Chapter 6



About this time an ambitious young reporter from New York arrived one
morning at Gatsby's door and asked him if he had anything to say.

"Anything to say about what?" inquired Gatsby politely.

"Why,--any statement to give out."

It transpired after a confused five minutes that the man had heard
Gatsby's name around his office in a connection which he either
wouldn't reveal or didn't fully understand. This was his day off
and with laudable initiative he had hurried out "to see."

It was a random shot, and yet the reporter's instinct was right. Gatsby's
notoriety, spread about by the hundreds who had accepted his
hospitality and so become authorities on his past, had increased
all summer until he fell just short of being news. Contemporary
legends such as the "underground pipe-line to Canada" attached
themselves to him, and there was one persistent story that he
didn't live in a house at all, but in a boat that looked like a house
and was moved secretly up and down the Long Island shore. Just why
these inventions were a source of satisfaction to James Gatz of North
Dakota, isn't easy to say.

James Gatz--that was really, or at least legally, his name. He had
changed it at the age of seventeen and at the specific moment that
witnessed the beginning of his career--when he saw Dan Cody's yacht drop
anchor over the most insidious flat on Lake Superior. It was James Gatz
who had been loafing along the beach that afternoon in a torn green
jersey and a pair of canvas pants, but it was already Jay Gatsby who
borrowed a row-boat, pulled out to the TUOLOMEE and informed Cody that
a wind might catch him and break him up in half an hour.

I suppose he'd had the name ready for a long time, even then. His
parents were shiftless and unsuccessful farm people--his imagination had
never really accepted them as his parents at all. The truth was that
Jay Gatsby, of West Egg, Long Island, sprang from his Platonic
conception of himself. He was a son of God--a phrase which, if it means
anything, means just that--and he must be about His Father's Business,
the service of a vast, vulgar and meretricious beauty. So he invented
just the sort of Jay Gatsby that a seventeen-year-old boy would be
likely to invent, and to this conception he was faithful to the end.

For over a year he had been beating his way along the south shore of
Lake Superior as a clam digger and a salmon fisher or in any other
capacity that brought him food and bed. His brown, hardening body lived
naturally through the half fierce, half lazy work of the bracing days.
He knew women early and since they spoiled him he became contemptuous
of them, of young virgins because they were ignorant, of the others
because they were hysterical about things which in his overwhelming
self-absorption he took for granted.

But his heart was in a constant, turbulent riot. The most grotesque
and fantastic conceits haunted him in his bed at night. A universe
of ineffable gaudiness spun itself out in his brain while the
clock ticked on the wash-stand and the moon soaked with wet
light his tangled clothes upon the floor. Each night he added to the
pattern of his fancies until drowsiness closed down upon some vivid
scene with an oblivious embrace. For a while these reveries provided an
outlet for his imagination; they were a satisfactory hint of the
unreality of reality, a promise that the rock of the world was founded
securely on a fairy's wing.

An instinct toward his future glory had led him, some months before, to
the small Lutheran college of St. Olaf in southern Minnesota. He stayed
there two weeks, dismayed at its ferocious indifference to the drums of
his destiny, to destiny itself, and despising the janitor's work with
which he was to pay his way through. Then he drifted back to Lake
Superior, and he was still searching for something to do on the day
that Dan Cody's yacht dropped anchor in the shallows along shore.

Cody was fifty years old then, a product of the Nevada silver fields,
of the Yukon, of every rush for metal since Seventy-five. The
transactions in Montana copper that made him many times a millionaire
found him physically robust but on the verge of soft-mindedness, and,
suspecting this an infinite number of women tried to separate him from
his money. The none too savory ramifications by which Ella Kaye, the
newspaper woman, played Madame de Maintenon to his weakness and sent him
to sea in a yacht, were common knowledge to the turgid journalism
of 1902. He had been coasting along all too hospitable shores for five
years when he turned up as James Gatz's destiny at Little Girl Bay.

To the young Gatz, resting on his oars and looking up at the railed
deck, the yacht represented all the beauty and glamor in the world. I
suppose he smiled at Cody--he had probably discovered that people liked
him when he smiled. At any rate Cody asked him a few questions (one of
them elicited the brand new name) and found that he was quick, and
extravagantly ambitious. A few days later he took him to Duluth and
bought him a blue coat, six pair of white duck trousers and a yachting
cap. And when the TUOLOMEE left for the West Indies and the Barbary
Coast Gatsby left too.

He was employed in a vague personal capacity--while he remained with
Cody he was in turn steward, mate, skipper, secretary, and even jailor,
for Dan Cody sober knew what lavish doings Dan Cody drunk might soon be
about and he provided for such contingencies by reposing more and more
trust in Gatsby. The arrangement lasted five years during which the
boat went three times around the continent. It might have lasted
indefinitely except for the fact that Ella Kaye came on board one night
in Boston and a week later Dan Cody inhospitably died.

I remember the portrait of him up in Gatsby's bedroom, a grey, florid
man with a hard empty face--the pioneer debauchee who during one phase
of American life brought back to the eastern seaboard the savage
violence of the frontier brothel and saloon. It was indirectly due to
Cody that Gatsby drank so little. Sometimes in the course of gay parties
women used to rub champagne into his hair; for himself he formed the
habit of letting liquor alone.

And it was from Cody that he inherited money--a legacy of twenty-five
thousand dollars. He didn't get it. He never understood the legal
device that was used against him but what remained of the millions
went intact to Ella Kaye. He was left with his singularly appropriate
education; the vague contour of Jay Gatsby had filled out to the
substantiality of a man.


He told me all this very much later, but I've put it down here with the
idea of exploding those first wild rumors about his antecedents, which
weren't even faintly true. Moreover he told it to me at a time of
confusion, when I had reached the point of believing everything and
nothing about him. So I take advantage of this short halt, while
Gatsby, so to speak, caught his breath, to clear this set of
misconceptions away.

It was a halt, too, in my association with his affairs. For
several weeks I didn't see him or hear his voice on the phone--mostly
I was in New York, trotting around with Jordan and trying to
ingratiate myself with her senile aunt--but finally I went over to
his house one Sunday afternoon. I hadn't been there two minutes when
somebody brought Tom Buchanan in for a drink. I was startled,
naturally, but the really surprising thing was that it hadn't happened
before.

They were a party of three on horseback--Tom and a man named Sloane and
a pretty woman in a brown riding habit who had been there previously.

"I'm delighted to see you," said Gatsby standing on his porch.
"I'm delighted that you dropped in."

As though they cared!

"Sit right down. Have a cigarette or a cigar." He walked around the room
quickly, ringing bells. "I'll have something to drink for you in just
a minute."

He was profoundly affected by the fact that Tom was there. But he would be
uneasy anyhow until he had given them something, realizing in a vague
way that that was all they came for. Mr. Sloane wanted nothing. A
lemonade? No, thanks. A little champagne? Nothing at all,
thanks. . . . I'm sorry----

"Did you have a nice ride?"

"Very good roads around here."

"I suppose the automobiles----"

"Yeah."

Moved by an irresistible impulse, Gatsby turned to Tom who had accepted
the introduction as a stranger.

"I believe we've met somewhere before, Mr. Buchanan."

"Oh, yes," said Tom, gruffly polite but obviously not remembering.
"So we did. I remember very well."

"About two weeks ago."

"That's right. You were with Nick here."

"I know your wife," continued Gatsby, almost aggressively.

"That so?"

Tom turned to me.

"You live near here, Nick?"

"Next door."

"That so?"

Mr. Sloane didn't enter into the conversation but lounged back haughtily
in his chair; the woman said nothing either--until unexpectedly, after
two highballs, she became cordial.

"We'll all come over to your next party, Mr. Gatsby," she suggested.
"What do you say?"

"Certainly. I'd be delighted to have you."

"Be ver' nice," said Mr. Sloane, without gratitude. "Well--think ought to
be starting home."

"Please don't hurry," Gatsby urged them. He had control of himself now
and he wanted to see more of Tom. "Why don't you--why don't you stay for
supper? I wouldn't be surprised if some other people dropped in from
New York."

"You come to supper with ME," said the lady enthusiastically.
"Both of you."

This included me. Mr. Sloane got to his feet.

"Come along," he said--but to her only.

"I mean it," she insisted. "I'd love to have you. Lots of room."

Gatsby looked at me questioningly. He wanted to go and he didn't see
that Mr. Sloane had determined he shouldn't.

"I'm afraid I won't be able to," I said.

"Well, you come," she urged, concentrating on Gatsby.

Mr. Sloane murmured something close to her ear.

"We won't be late if we start now," she insisted aloud.

"I haven't got a horse," said Gatsby. "I used to ride in the army but
I've never bought a horse. I'll have to follow you in my car. Excuse me
for just a minute."

The rest of us walked out on the porch, where Sloane and the lady began
an impassioned conversation aside.

"My God, I believe the man's coming," said Tom. "Doesn't he know she
doesn't want him?"

"She says she does want him."

"She has a big dinner party and he won't know a soul there." He frowned.
"I wonder where in the devil he met Daisy. By God, I may be
old-fashioned in my ideas, but women run around too much these days to
suit me. They meet all kinds of crazy fish."

Suddenly Mr. Sloane and the lady walked down the steps and mounted
their horses.

"Come on," said Mr. Sloane to Tom, "we're late. We've got to go." And then
to me: "Tell him we couldn't wait, will you?"

Tom and I shook hands, the rest of us exchanged a cool nod and
they trotted quickly down the drive, disappearing under the August
foliage just as Gatsby with hat and light overcoat in hand came out
the front door.

Tom was evidently perturbed at Daisy's running around alone, for on the
following Saturday night he came with her to Gatsby's party. Perhaps
his presence gave the evening its peculiar quality of oppressiveness--it
stands out in my memory from Gatsby's other parties that summer. There
were the same people, or at least the same sort of people, the same
profusion of champagne, the same many-colored, many-keyed commotion,
but I felt an unpleasantness in the air, a pervading harshness that
hadn't been there before. Or perhaps I had merely grown used to it,
grown to accept West Egg as a world complete in itself, with its own
standards and its own great figures, second to nothing because it had
no consciousness of being so, and now I was looking at it again,
through Daisy's eyes. It is invariably saddening to look through new
eyes at things upon which you have expended your own powers of
adjustment.

They arrived at twilight and as we strolled out among the sparkling
hundreds Daisy's voice was playing murmurous tricks in her throat.

"These things excite me SO," she whispered. "If you want to kiss me
any time during the evening, Nick, just let me know and I'll be glad
to arrange it for you. Just mention my name. Or present a green card.
I'm giving out green----"

"Look around," suggested Gatsby.

"I'm looking around. I'm having a marvelous----"

"You must see the faces of many people you've heard about."

Tom's arrogant eyes roamed the crowd.

"We don't go around very much," he said. "In fact I was just thinking
I don't know a soul here."

"Perhaps you know that lady." Gatsby indicated a gorgeous, scarcely human
orchid of a woman who sat in state under a white plum tree. Tom and Daisy
stared, with that peculiarly unreal feeling that accompanies the
recognition of a hitherto ghostly celebrity of the movies.

"She's lovely," said Daisy.

"The man bending over her is her director."

He took them ceremoniously from group to group:

"Mrs. Buchanan . . . and Mr. Buchanan----" After an instant's hesitation
he added: "the polo player."

"Oh no," objected Tom quickly, "Not me."

But evidently the sound of it pleased Gatsby for Tom remained "the polo
player" for the rest of the evening.

"I've never met so many celebrities!" Daisy exclaimed. "I liked that
man--what was his name?--with the sort of blue nose."

Gatsby identified him, adding that he was a small producer.

"Well, I liked him anyhow."

"I'd a little rather not be the polo player," said Tom pleasantly, "I'd
rather look at all these famous people in--in oblivion."

Daisy and Gatsby danced. I remember being surprised by his graceful,
conservative fox-trot--I had never seen him dance before. Then they
sauntered over to my house and sat on the steps for half an hour while
at her request I remained watchfully in the garden: "In case there's a
fire or a flood," she explained, "or any act of God."

Tom appeared from his oblivion as we were sitting down to supper together.
"Do you mind if I eat with some people over here?" he said. "A fellow's
getting off some funny stuff."

"Go ahead," answered Daisy genially, "And if you want to take down any
addresses here's my little gold pencil. . . ." She looked around after
a moment and told me the girl was "common but pretty," and I knew that
except for the half hour she'd been alone with Gatsby she wasn't having
a good time.

We were at a particularly tipsy table. That was my fault--Gatsby had
been called to the phone and I'd enjoyed these same people only two
weeks before. But what had amused me then turned septic on the air now.

"How do you feel, Miss Baedeker?"

The girl addressed was trying, unsuccessfully, to slump against my
shoulder. At this inquiry she sat up and opened her eyes.

"Wha?"

A massive and lethargic woman, who had been urging Daisy to play golf
with her at the local club tomorrow, spoke in Miss Baedeker's defence:

"Oh, she's all right now. When she's had five or six cocktails she always
starts screaming like that. I tell her she ought to leave it alone."

"I do leave it alone," affirmed the accused hollowly.

"We heard you yelling, so I said to Doc Civet here: 'There's somebody
that needs your help, Doc.' "

"She's much obliged, I'm sure," said another friend, without gratitude.
"But you got her dress all wet when you stuck her head in the pool."

"Anything I hate is to get my head stuck in a pool," mumbled Miss
Baedeker. "They almost drowned me once over in New Jersey."

"Then you ought to leave it alone," countered Doctor Civet.

"Speak for yourself!" cried Miss Baedeker violently. "Your hand shakes.
I wouldn't let you operate on me!"

It was like that. Almost the last thing I remember was standing with
Daisy and watching the moving picture director and his Star. They were
still under the white plum tree and their faces were touching except
for a pale thin ray of moonlight between. It occurred to me that he
had been very slowly bending toward her all evening to attain this
proximity, and even while I watched I saw him stoop one ultimate degree
and kiss at her cheek.

"I like her," said Daisy, "I think she's lovely."

But the rest offended her--and inarguably, because it wasn't a gesture but
an emotion. She was appalled by West Egg, this unprecedented "place"
that Broadway had begotten upon a Long Island fishing village--appalled
by its raw vigor that chafed under the old euphemisms and by the too
obtrusive fate that herded its inhabitants along a short cut from nothing
to nothing. She saw something awful in the very simplicity she failed
to understand.

I sat on the front steps with them while they waited for their car. It
was dark here in front: only the bright door sent ten square feet of
light volleying out into the soft black morning. Sometimes a shadow
moved against a dressing-room blind above, gave way to another shadow,
an indefinite procession of shadows, who rouged and powdered in an
invisible glass.

"Who is this Gatsby anyhow?" demanded Tom suddenly. "Some big bootlegger?"

"Where'd you hear that?" I inquired.

"I didn't hear it. I imagined it. A lot of these newly rich people are
just big bootleggers, you know."

"Not Gatsby," I said shortly.

He was silent for a moment. The pebbles of the drive crunched under his
feet.

"Well, he certainly must have strained himself to get this menagerie
together."

A breeze stirred the grey haze of Daisy's fur collar.

"At least they're more interesting than the people we know," she said
with an effort.

"You didn't look so interested."

"Well, I was."

Tom laughed and turned to me.

"Did you notice Daisy's face when that girl asked her to put her under
a cold shower?"

Daisy began to sing with the music in a husky, rhythmic whisper,
bringing out a meaning in each word that it had never had
before and would never have again. When the melody rose, her voice
broke up sweetly, following it, in a way contralto voices have, and
each change tipped out a little of her warm human magic upon the air.

"Lots of people come who haven't been invited," she said suddenly.
"That girl hadn't been invited. They simply force their way in and he's
too polite to object."

"I'd like to know who he is and what he does," insisted Tom. "And I think
I'll make a point of finding out."

"I can tell you right now," she answered. "He owned some drug stores,
a lot of drug stores. He built them up himself."

The dilatory limousine came rolling up the drive.

"Good night, Nick," said Daisy.

Her glance left me and sought the lighted top of the steps where
"Three o'Clock in the Morning," a neat, sad little waltz of that year,
was drifting out the open door. After all, in the very casualness of
Gatsby's party there were romantic possibilities totally absent from
her world. What was it up there in the song that seemed to be calling
her back inside? What would happen now in the dim incalculable hours?
Perhaps some unbelievable guest would arrive, a person infinitely rare
and to be marvelled at, some authentically radiant young girl who with
one fresh glance at Gatsby, one moment of magical encounter, would blot
out those five years of unwavering devotion.


I stayed late that night. Gatsby asked me to wait until he was free
and I lingered in the garden until the inevitable swimming party had run
up, chilled and exalted, from the black beach, until the lights were
extinguished in the guest rooms overhead. When he came down the steps at
last the tanned skin was drawn unusually tight on his face, and his eyes
were bright and tired.

"She didn't like it," he said immediately.

"Of course she did."

"She didn't like it," he insisted. "She didn't have a good time."

He was silent and I guessed at his unutterable depression.

"I feel far away from her," he said. "It's hard to make her understand."

"You mean about the dance?"

"The dance?" He dismissed all the dances he had given with a snap of
his fingers. "Old sport, the dance is unimportant."

He wanted nothing less of Daisy than that she should go to Tom and say:
"I never loved you." After she had obliterated three years with that
sentence they could decide upon the more practical measures to be taken.
One of them was that, after she was free, they were to go back to
Louisville and be married from her house--just as if it were five
years ago.

"And she doesn't understand," he said. "She used to be able to
understand. We'd sit for hours----"

He broke off and began to walk up and down a desolate path of fruit rinds
and discarded favors and crushed flowers.

"I wouldn't ask too much of her," I ventured. "You can't repeat the past."

"Can't repeat the past?" he cried incredulously. "Why of course you can!"

He looked around him wildly, as if the past were lurking here in the
shadow of his house, just out of reach of his hand.

"I'm going to fix everything just the way it was before," he said,
nodding determinedly. "She'll see."

He talked a lot about the past and I gathered that he wanted to recover
something, some idea of himself perhaps, that had gone into loving Daisy.
His life had been confused and disordered since then, but if he could
once return to a certain starting place and go over it all slowly, he
could find out what that thing was. . . .

. . . One autumn night, five years before, they had been walking down
the street when the leaves were falling, and they came to a place where
there were no trees and the sidewalk was white with moonlight.
They stopped here and turned toward each other. Now it was a cool night
with that mysterious excitement in it which comes at the two changes of
the year. The quiet lights in the houses were humming out into the
darkness and there was a stir and bustle among the stars. Out of the
corner of his eye Gatsby saw that the blocks of the sidewalk really
formed a ladder and mounted to a secret place above the trees--he could
climb to it, if he climbed alone, and once there he could suck on the
pap of life, gulp down the incomparable milk of wonder.

His heart beat faster and faster as Daisy's white face came up to his
own. He knew that when he kissed this girl, and forever wed his
unutterable visions to her perishable breath, his mind would never romp
again like the mind of God. So he waited, listening for a moment longer
to the tuning fork that had been struck upon a star. Then he kissed
her. At his lips' touch she blossomed for him like a flower and the
incarnation was complete.

Through all he said, even through his appalling sentimentality, I was
reminded of something--an elusive rhythm, a fragment of lost words, that
I had heard somewhere a long time ago. For a moment a phrase tried to
take shape in my mouth and my lips parted like a dumb man's, as though
there was more struggling upon them than a wisp of startled air. But
they made no sound and what I had almost remembered was
uncommunicable forever.




Chapter 7



It was when curiosity about Gatsby was at its highest that the lights
in his house failed to go on one Saturday night--and, as obscurely as it
had begun, his career as Trimalchio was over.

Only gradually did I become aware that the automobiles which turned
expectantly into his drive stayed for just a minute and then drove
sulkily away. Wondering if he were sick I went over to find out--an
unfamiliar butler with a villainous face squinted at me suspiciously
from the door.

"Is Mr. Gatsby sick?"

"Nope." After a pause he added "sir" in a dilatory, grudging way.

"I hadn't seen him around, and I was rather worried. Tell him Mr. Carraway
came over."

"Who?" he demanded rudely.

"Carraway."

"Carraway. All right, I'll tell him." Abruptly he slammed the door.

My Finn informed me that Gatsby had dismissed every servant in his
house a week ago and replaced them with half a dozen others, who never
went into West Egg Village to be bribed by the tradesmen, but ordered
moderate supplies over the telephone. The grocery boy reported that the
kitchen looked like a pigsty, and the general opinion in the village was
that the new people weren't servants at all.

Next day Gatsby called me on the phone.

"Going away?" I inquired.

"No, old sport."

"I hear you fired all your servants."

"I wanted somebody who wouldn't gossip. Daisy comes over quite often--in
the afternoons."

So the whole caravansary had fallen in like a card house at the
disapproval in her eyes.

"They're some people Wolfshiem wanted to do something for. They're all
brothers and sisters. They used to run a small hotel."

"I see."

He was calling up at Daisy's request--would I come to lunch at
her house tomorrow? Miss Baker would be there. Half an hour later
Daisy herself telephoned and seemed relieved to find that I was coming.
Something was up. And yet I couldn't believe that they would choose
this occasion for a scene--especially for the rather harrowing scene
that Gatsby had outlined in the garden.

The next day was broiling, almost the last, certainly the warmest, of
the summer. As my train emerged from the tunnel into sunlight, only the
hot whistles of the National Biscuit Company broke the simmering hush
at noon. The straw seats of the car hovered on the edge of combustion;
the woman next to me perspired delicately for a while into her white
shirtwaist, and then, as her newspaper dampened under her fingers,
lapsed despairingly into deep heat with a desolate cry. Her pocket-book
slapped to the floor.

"Oh, my!" she gasped.

I picked it up with a weary bend and handed it back to her, holding it
at arm's length and by the extreme tip of the corners to indicate that
I had no designs upon it--but every one near by, including the woman,
suspected me just the same.

"Hot!" said the conductor to familiar faces. "Some weather! Hot! Hot! Hot!
Is it hot enough for you? Is it hot? Is it . . . ?"

My commutation ticket came back to me with a dark stain from his hand.
That any one should care in this heat whose flushed lips he kissed,
whose head made damp the pajama pocket over his heart!

. . . Through the hall of the Buchanans' house blew a faint wind,
carrying the sound of the telephone bell out to Gatsby and me as we
waited at the door.

"The master's body!" roared the butler into the mouthpiece. "I'm sorry,
madame, but we can't furnish it--it's far too hot to touch this noon!"

What he really said was: "Yes . . . yes . . . I'll see."

He set down the receiver and came toward us, glistening slightly, to take
our stiff straw hats.

"Madame expects you in the salon!" he cried, needlessly indicating the
direction. In this heat every extra gesture was an affront to the
common store of life.

The room, shadowed well with awnings, was dark and cool. Daisy and
Jordan lay upon an enormous couch, like silver idols, weighing down
their own white dresses against the singing breeze of the fans.

"We can't move," they said together.

Jordan's fingers, powdered white over their tan, rested for a moment in
mine.

"And Mr. Thomas Buchanan, the athlete?" I inquired.

Simultaneously I heard his voice, gruff, muffled, husky, at the hall
telephone.

Gatsby stood in the center of the crimson carpet and gazed around with
fascinated eyes. Daisy watched him and laughed, her sweet, exciting
laugh; a tiny gust of powder rose from her bosom into the air.

"The rumor is," whispered Jordan, "that that's Tom's girl on the
telephone."

We were silent. The voice in the hall rose high with annoyance.
"Very well, then, I won't sell you the car at all. . . . I'm
under no obligations to you at all. . . . And as for your bothering me
about it at lunch time I won't stand that at all!"

"Holding down the receiver," said Daisy cynically.

"No, he's not," I assured her. "It's a bona fide deal. I happen to
know about it."

Tom flung open the door, blocked out its space for a moment with his
thick body, and hurried into the room.

"Mr. Gatsby!" He put out his broad, flat hand with well-concealed
dislike. "I'm glad to see you, sir. . . . Nick. . . ."

"Make us a cold drink," cried Daisy.

As he left the room again she got up and went over to Gatsby and pulled
his face down kissing him on the mouth.

"You know I love you," she murmured.

"You forget there's a lady present," said Jordan.

Daisy looked around doubtfully.

"You kiss Nick too."

"What a low, vulgar girl!"

"I don't care!" cried Daisy and began to clog on the brick fireplace.
Then she remembered the heat and sat down guiltily on the couch just as
a freshly laundered nurse leading a little girl came into the room.

"Bles-sed pre-cious," she crooned, holding out her arms. "Come to your
own mother that loves you."

The child, relinquished by the nurse, rushed across the room and rooted
shyly into her mother's dress.

"The Bles-sed pre-cious! Did mother get powder on your old yellowy
hair? Stand up now, and say How-de-do."

Gatsby and I in turn leaned down and took the small reluctant hand.
Afterward he kept looking at the child with surprise. I don't think he had
ever really believed in its existence before.

"I got dressed before luncheon," said the child, turning eagerly to
Daisy.

"That's because your mother wanted to show you off." Her face bent into
the single wrinkle of the small white neck. "You dream, you. You absolute
little dream."

"Yes," admitted the child calmly. "Aunt Jordan's got on a white
dress too."

"How do you like mother's friends?" Daisy turned her around so that she
faced Gatsby. "Do you think they're pretty?"

"Where's Daddy?"

"She doesn't look like her father," explained Daisy. "She looks like me.
She's got my hair and shape of the face."

Daisy sat back upon the couch. The nurse took a step forward and held
out her hand.

"Come, Pammy."

"Goodbye, sweetheart!"

With a reluctant backward glance the well-disciplined child held to her
nurse's hand and was pulled out the door, just as Tom came back,
preceding four gin rickeys that clicked full of ice.

Gatsby took up his drink.

"They certainly look cool," he said, with visible tension.

We drank in long greedy swallows.

"I read somewhere that the sun's getting hotter every year," said Tom
genially. "It seems that pretty soon the earth's going to fall into the
sun--or wait a minute--it's just the opposite--the sun's getting colder
every year.

"Come outside," he suggested to Gatsby, "I'd like you to have a look at
the place."

I went with them out to the veranda. On the green Sound, stagnant in the
heat, one small sail crawled slowly toward the fresher sea. Gatsby's eyes
followed it momentarily; he raised his hand and pointed across the bay.

"I'm right across from you."

"So you are."

Our eyes lifted over the rosebeds and the hot lawn and the weedy refuse
of the dog days along shore. Slowly the white wings of the boat moved
against the blue cool limit of the sky. Ahead lay the scalloped ocean and
the abounding blessed isles.

"There's sport for you," said Tom, nodding. "I'd like to be out there
with him for about an hour."

We had luncheon in the dining-room, darkened, too, against the heat,
and drank down nervous gayety with the cold ale.

"What'll we do with ourselves this afternoon," cried Daisy, "and the
day after that, and the next thirty years?"

"Don't be morbid," Jordan said. "Life starts all over again when it gets
crisp in the fall."

"But it's so hot," insisted Daisy, on the verge of tears, "And
everything's so confused. Let's all go to town!"

Her voice struggled on through the heat, beating against it, moulding its
senselessness into forms.

"I've heard of making a garage out of a stable," Tom was saying to
Gatsby, "but I'm the first man who ever made a stable out of a garage."

"Who wants to go to town?" demanded Daisy insistently. Gatsby's eyes
floated toward her. "Ah," she cried, "you look so cool."

Their eyes met, and they stared together at each other, alone in space.
With an effort she glanced down at the table.

"You always look so cool," she repeated.

She had told him that she loved him, and Tom Buchanan saw. He was
astounded. His mouth opened a little and he looked at Gatsby and then
back at Daisy as if he had just recognized her as some one he knew a
long time ago.

"You resemble the advertisement of the man," she went on innocently.
"You know the advertisement of the man----"

"All right," broke in Tom quickly, "I'm perfectly willing to go to
town. Come on--we're all going to town."

He got up, his eyes still flashing between Gatsby and his wife.
No one moved.

"Come on!" His temper cracked a little. "What's the matter, anyhow?
If we're going to town let's start."

His hand, trembling with his effort at self control, bore to his lips the
last of his glass of ale. Daisy's voice got us to our feet and out on
to the blazing gravel drive.

"Are we just going to go?" she objected. "Like this? Aren't we going to
let any one smoke a cigarette first?"

"Everybody smoked all through lunch."

"Oh, let's have fun," she begged him. "It's too hot to fuss."

He didn't answer.

"Have it your own way," she said. "Come on, Jordan."

They went upstairs to get ready while we three men stood there shuffling
the hot pebbles with our feet. A silver curve of the moon hovered already
in the western sky. Gatsby started to speak, changed his mind, but not
before Tom wheeled and faced him expectantly.

"Have you got your stables here?" asked Gatsby with an effort.

"About a quarter of a mile down the road."

"Oh."

A pause.

"I don't see the idea of going to town," broke out Tom savagely.
"Women get these notions in their heads----"

"Shall we take anything to drink?" called Daisy from an upper window.

"I'll get some whiskey," answered Tom. He went inside.

Gatsby turned to me rigidly:

"I can't say anything in his house, old sport."

"She's got an indiscreet voice," I remarked. "It's full of----"

I hesitated.

"Her voice is full of money," he said suddenly.

That was it. I'd never understood before. It was full of money--that was
the inexhaustible charm that rose and fell in it, the jingle of it, the
cymbals' song of it. . . . High in a white palace the king's daughter,
the golden girl. . . .

Tom came out of the house wrapping a quart bottle in a towel, followed
by Daisy and Jordan wearing small tight hats of metallic cloth and
carrying light capes over their arms.

"Shall we all go in my car?" suggested Gatsby. He felt the hot, green
leather of the seat. "I ought to have left it in the shade."

"Is it standard shift?" demanded Tom.

"Yes."

"Well, you take my coupé and let me drive your car to town."

The suggestion was distasteful to Gatsby.

"I don't think there's much gas," he objected.

"Plenty of gas," said Tom boisterously. He looked at the gauge.
"And if it runs out I can stop at a drug store. You can buy anything at a
drug store nowadays."

A pause followed this apparently pointless remark. Daisy looked at Tom
frowning and an indefinable expression, at once definitely unfamiliar
and vaguely recognizable, as if I had only heard it described in words,
passed over Gatsby's face.

"Come on, Daisy," said Tom, pressing her with his hand toward Gatsby's
car. "I'll take you in this circus wagon."

He opened the door but she moved out from the circle of his arm.

"You take Nick and Jordan. We'll follow you in the coupé."

She walked close to Gatsby, touching his coat with her hand. Jordan and
Tom and I got into the front seat of Gatsby's car, Tom pushed the
unfamiliar gears tentatively and we shot off into the oppressive heat
leaving them out of sight behind.

"Did you see that?" demanded Tom.

"See what?"

He looked at me keenly, realizing that Jordan and I must have known all
along.

"You think I'm pretty dumb, don't you?" he suggested. "Perhaps I am, but
I have a--almost a second sight, sometimes, that tells me what to do.
Maybe you don't believe that, but science----"

He paused. The immediate contingency overtook him, pulled him back from
the edge of the theoretical abyss.

"I've made a small investigation of this fellow," he continued. "I could
have gone deeper if I'd known----"

"Do you mean you've been to a medium?" inquired Jordan humorously.

"What?" Confused, he stared at us as we laughed. "A medium?"

"About Gatsby."

"About Gatsby! No, I haven't. I said I'd been making a small
investigation of his past."

"And you found he was an Oxford man," said Jordan helpfully.

"An Oxford man!" He was incredulous. "Like hell he is! He wears a
pink suit."

"Nevertheless he's an Oxford man."

"Oxford, New Mexico," snorted Tom contemptuously, "or something like
that."

"Listen, Tom. If you're such a snob, why did you invite him to lunch?"
demanded Jordan crossly.

"Daisy invited him; she knew him before we were married--God knows
where!"

We were all irritable now with the fading ale and, aware of it,
we drove for a while in silence. Then as Doctor T. J. Eckleburg's faded
eyes came into sight down the road, I remembered Gatsby's caution about
gasoline.

"We've got enough to get us to town," said Tom.

"But there's a garage right here," objected Jordan. "I don't want to get
stalled in this baking heat."

Tom threw on both brakes impatiently and we slid to an abrupt
dusty stop under Wilson's sign. After a moment the proprietor emerged
from the interior of his establishment and gazed hollow-eyed at the car.

"Let's have some gas!" cried Tom roughly. "What do you think we stopped
for--to admire the view?"

"I'm sick," said Wilson without moving. "I been sick all day."

"What's the matter?"

"I'm all run down."

"Well, shall I help myself?" Tom demanded. "You sounded well enough
on the phone."

With an effort Wilson left the shade and support of the doorway and,
breathing hard, unscrewed the cap of the tank. In the sunlight his face
was green.

"I didn't mean to interrupt your lunch," he said. "But I need money
pretty bad and I was wondering what you were going to do with your
old car."

"How do you like this one?" inquired Tom. "I bought it last week."

"It's a nice yellow one," said Wilson, as he strained at the handle.

"Like to buy it?"

"Big chance," Wilson smiled faintly. "No, but I could make some money
on the other."

"What do you want money for, all of a sudden?"

"I've been here too long. I want to get away. My wife and I want to
go west."

"Your wife does!" exclaimed Tom, startled.

"She's been talking about it for ten years." He rested for a moment
against the pump, shading his eyes. "And now she's going whether she wants
to or not. I'm going to get her away."

The coupé flashed by us with a flurry of dust and the flash of a
waving hand.

"What do I owe you?" demanded Tom harshly.

"I just got wised up to something funny the last two days," remarked
Wilson. "That's why I want to get away. That's why I been bothering you
about the car."

"What do I owe you?"

"Dollar twenty."

The relentless beating heat was beginning to confuse me and I had
a bad moment there before I realized that so far his suspicions
hadn't alighted on Tom. He had discovered that Myrtle had some
sort of life apart from him in another world and the shock had
made him physically sick. I stared at him and then at Tom, who had made
a parallel discovery less than an hour before--and it occurred to me
that there was no difference between men, in intelligence or race, so
profound as the difference between the sick and the well. Wilson was so
sick that he looked guilty, unforgivably guilty--as if he had just got
some poor girl with child.

"I'll let you have that car," said Tom. "I'll send it over tomorrow
afternoon."

That locality was always vaguely disquieting, even in the broad
glare of afternoon, and now I turned my head as though I had been
warned of something behind. Over the ashheaps the giant eyes of
Doctor T. J. Eckleburg kept their vigil but I perceived, after
a moment, that other eyes were regarding us with peculiar intensity
from less than twenty feet away.

In one of the windows over the garage the curtains had been moved aside
a little and Myrtle Wilson was peering down at the car. So engrossed
was she that she had no consciousness of being observed and one
emotion after another crept into her face like objects into a slowly
developing picture. Her expression was curiously familiar--it was an
expression I had often seen on women's faces but on Myrtle Wilson's
face it seemed purposeless and inexplicable until I realized that her
eyes, wide with jealous terror, were fixed not on Tom, but on Jordan
Baker, whom she took to be his wife.


There is no confusion like the confusion of a simple mind, and as we
drove away Tom was feeling the hot whips of panic. His wife and his
mistress, until an hour ago secure and inviolate, were slipping
precipitately from his control. Instinct made him step on the
accelerator with the double purpose of overtaking Daisy and leaving
Wilson behind, and we sped along toward Astoria at fifty miles an hour,
until, among the spidery girders of the elevated, we came in sight of
the easygoing blue coupé.

"Those big movies around Fiftieth Street are cool," suggested Jordan.
"I love New York on summer afternoons when every one's away. There's
something very sensuous about it--overripe, as if all sorts of funny
fruits were going to fall into your hands."

The word "sensuous" had the effect of further disquieting Tom but before
he could invent a protest the coupé came to a stop and Daisy signalled us
to draw up alongside.

"Where are we going?" she cried.

"How about the movies?"

"It's so hot," she complained. "You go. We'll ride around and meet you
after." With an effort her wit rose faintly, "We'll meet you on some
corner. I'll be the man smoking two cigarettes."

"We can't argue about it here," Tom said impatiently as a truck gave
out a cursing whistle behind us. "You follow me to the south side of
Central Park, in front of the Plaza."

Several times he turned his head and looked back for their car,
and if the traffic delayed them he slowed up until they came into
sight. I think he was afraid they would dart down a side street and out
of his life forever.

But they didn't. And we all took the less explicable step of engaging
the parlor of a suite in the Plaza Hotel.

The prolonged and tumultuous argument that ended by herding us into
that room eludes me, though I have a sharp physical memory that, in the
course of it, my underwear kept climbing like a damp snake around my
legs and intermittent beads of sweat raced cool across my back. The
notion originated with Daisy's suggestion that we hire five bathrooms
and take cold baths, and then assumed more tangible form as "a place to
have a mint julep." Each of us said over and over that it was a "crazy
idea"--we all talked at once to a baffled clerk and thought, or
pretended to think, that we were being very funny. . . .

The room was large and stifling, and, though it was already four
o'clock, opening the windows admitted only a gust of hot shrubbery from
the Park. Daisy went to the mirror and stood with her back to us,
fixing her hair.

"It's a swell suite," whispered Jordan respectfully and every one
laughed.

"Open another window," commanded Daisy, without turning around.

"There aren't any more."

"Well, we'd better telephone for an axe----"

"The thing to do is to forget about the heat," said Tom impatiently.
"You make it ten times worse by crabbing about it."

He unrolled the bottle of whiskey from the towel and put it on the table.

"Why not let her alone, old sport?" remarked Gatsby. "You're the one that
wanted to come to town."

There was a moment of silence. The telephone book slipped from its nail
and splashed to the floor, whereupon Jordan whispered "Excuse me"--but
this time no one laughed.

"I'll pick it up," I offered.

"I've got it." Gatsby examined the parted string, muttered "Hum!" in an
interested way, and tossed the book on a chair.

"That's a great expression of yours, isn't it?" said Tom sharply.

"What is?"

"All this 'old sport' business. Where'd you pick that up?"

"Now see here, Tom," said Daisy, turning around from the mirror, "if
you're going to make personal remarks I won't stay here a minute. Call
up and order some ice for the mint julep."

As Tom took up the receiver the compressed heat exploded into sound and
we were listening to the portentous chords of Mendelssohn's Wedding March
from the ballroom below.

"Imagine marrying anybody in this heat!" cried Jordan dismally.

"Still--I was married in the middle of June," Daisy remembered,
"Louisville in June! Somebody fainted. Who was it fainted, Tom?"

"Biloxi," he answered shortly.

"A man named Biloxi. 'Blocks' Biloxi, and he made boxes--that's a
fact--and he was from Biloxi, Tennessee."

"They carried him into my house," appended Jordan, "because we lived
just two doors from the church. And he stayed three weeks, until Daddy
told him he had to get out. The day after he left Daddy died." After a
moment she added as if she might have sounded irreverent, "There
wasn't any connection."

"I used to know a Bill Biloxi from Memphis," I remarked.

"That was his cousin. I knew his whole family history before he left.
He gave me an aluminum putter that I use today."

The music had died down as the ceremony began and now a long cheer floated
in at the window, followed by intermittent cries of "Yea--ea--ea!"
and finally by a burst of jazz as the dancing began.

"We're getting old," said Daisy. "If we were young we'd rise and dance."

"Remember Biloxi," Jordan warned her. "Where'd you know him, Tom?"

"Biloxi?" He concentrated with an effort. "I didn't know him. He was a
friend of Daisy's."

"He was not," she denied. "I'd never seen him before. He came down in
the private car."

"Well, he said he knew you. He said he was raised in Louisville.
Asa Bird brought him around at the last minute and asked if we had room
for him."

Jordan smiled.

"He was probably bumming his way home. He told me he was president of
your class at Yale."

Tom and I looked at each other blankly.

"BilOxi?"

"First place, we didn't have any president----"

Gatsby's foot beat a short, restless tattoo and Tom eyed him suddenly.

"By the way, Mr. Gatsby, I understand you're an Oxford man."

"Not exactly."

"Oh, yes, I understand you went to Oxford."

"Yes--I went there."

A pause. Then Tom's voice, incredulous and insulting:

"You must have gone there about the time Biloxi went to New Haven."

Another pause. A waiter knocked and came in with crushed mint and ice but
the silence was unbroken by his "Thank you" and the soft closing of the
door. This tremendous detail was to be cleared up at last.

"I told you I went there," said Gatsby.

"I heard you, but I'd like to know when."

"It was in nineteen-nineteen, I only stayed five months. That's why I
can't really call myself an Oxford man."

Tom glanced around to see if we mirrored his unbelief. But we were all
looking at Gatsby.

"It was an opportunity they gave to some of the officers after the
Armistice," he continued. "We could go to any of the universities in
England or France."

I wanted to get up and slap him on the back. I had one of those renewals
of complete faith in him that I'd experienced before.

Daisy rose, smiling faintly, and went to the table.

"Open the whiskey, Tom," she ordered. "And I'll make you a mint julep.
Then you won't seem so stupid to yourself. . . . Look at the mint!"

"Wait a minute," snapped Tom, "I want to ask Mr. Gatsby one more
question."

"Go on," Gatsby said politely.

"What kind of a row are you trying to cause in my house anyhow?"

They were out in the open at last and Gatsby was content.

"He isn't causing a row." Daisy looked desperately from one to the
other. "You're causing a row. Please have a little self control."

"Self control!" repeated Tom incredulously. "I suppose the latest thing
is to sit back and let Mr. Nobody from Nowhere make love to your wife.
Well, if that's the idea you can count me out. . . . Nowadays people begin
by sneering at family life and family institutions and next they'll
throw everything overboard and have intermarriage between black
and white."

Flushed with his impassioned gibberish he saw himself standing alone on
the last barrier of civilization.

"We're all white here," murmured Jordan.

"I know I'm not very popular. I don't give big parties. I suppose
you've got to make your house into a pigsty in order to have any
friends--in the modern world."

Angry as I was, as we all were, I was tempted to laugh whenever he opened
his mouth. The transition from libertine to prig was so complete.

"I've got something to tell YOU, old sport,----" began Gatsby. But Daisy
guessed at his intention.

"Please don't!" she interrupted helplessly. "Please let's all go home.
Why don't we all go home?"

"That's a good idea." I got up. "Come on, Tom. Nobody wants a drink."

"I want to know what Mr. Gatsby has to tell me."

"Your wife doesn't love you," said Gatsby. "She's never loved you.
She loves me."

"You must be crazy!" exclaimed Tom automatically.

Gatsby sprang to his feet, vivid with excitement.

"She never loved you, do you hear?" he cried. "She only married you
because I was poor and she was tired of waiting for me. It was a terrible
mistake, but in her heart she never loved any one except me!"

At this point Jordan and I tried to go but Tom and Gatsby insisted with
competitive firmness that we remain--as though neither of them had
anything to conceal and it would be a privilege to partake vicariously
of their emotions.

"Sit down Daisy." Tom's voice groped unsuccessfully for the paternal
note. "What's been going on? I want to hear all about it."

"I told you what's been going on," said Gatsby. "Going on for five
years--and you didn't know."

Tom turned to Daisy sharply.

"You've been seeing this fellow for five years?"

"Not seeing," said Gatsby. "No, we couldn't meet. But both of us loved
each other all that time, old sport, and you didn't know. I used to laugh
sometimes--"but there was no laughter in his eyes, "to think that you
didn't know."

"Oh--that's all." Tom tapped his thick fingers together like a clergyman
and leaned back in his chair.

"You're crazy!" he exploded. "I can't speak about what happened five years
ago, because I didn't know Daisy then--and I'll be damned if I see how you
got within a mile of her unless you brought the groceries to the back
door. But all the rest of that's a God Damned lie. Daisy loved me when
she married me and she loves me now."

"No," said Gatsby, shaking his head.

"She does, though. The trouble is that sometimes she gets foolish ideas
in her head and doesn't know what she's doing." He nodded sagely. "And
what's more, I love Daisy too. Once in a while I go off on a spree
and make a fool of myself, but I always come back, and in my heart I
love her all the time."

"You're revolting," said Daisy. She turned to me, and her voice,
dropping an octave lower, filled the room with thrilling scorn: "Do you
know why we left Chicago? I'm surprised that they didn't treat you to
the story of that little spree."

Gatsby walked over and stood beside her.

"Daisy, that's all over now," he said earnestly. "It doesn't matter any
more. Just tell him the truth--that you never loved him--and it's all
wiped out forever."

She looked at him blindly. "Why,--how could I love him--possibly?"

"You never loved him."

She hesitated. Her eyes fell on Jordan and me with a sort of appeal,
as though she realized at last what she was doing--and as though she had
never, all along, intended doing anything at all. But it was done now.
It was too late.

"I never loved him," she said, with perceptible reluctance.

"Not at Kapiolani?" demanded Tom suddenly.

"No."

From the ballroom beneath, muffled and suffocating chords were drifting up
on hot waves of air.

"Not that day I carried you down from the Punch Bowl to keep your shoes
dry?" There was a husky tenderness in his tone. ". . . Daisy?"

"Please don't." Her voice was cold, but the rancour was gone from it.
She looked at Gatsby. "There, Jay," she said--but her hand as she tried
to light a cigarette was trembling. Suddenly she threw the cigarette and
the burning match on the carpet.

"Oh, you want too much!" she cried to Gatsby. "I love you now--isn't that
enough? I can't help what's past." She began to sob helplessly.
"I did love him once--but I loved you too."

Gatsby's eyes opened and closed.

"You loved me TOO?" he repeated.

"Even that's a lie," said Tom savagely. "She didn't know you were alive.
Why,--there're things between Daisy and me that you'll never know,
things that neither of us can ever forget."

The words seemed to bite physically into Gatsby.

"I want to speak to Daisy alone," he insisted. "She's all excited now----"

"Even alone I can't say I never loved Tom," she admitted in a pitiful
voice. "It wouldn't be true."

"Of course it wouldn't," agreed Tom.

She turned to her husband.

"As if it mattered to you," she said.

"Of course it matters. I'm going to take better care of you from now on."

"You don't understand," said Gatsby, with a touch of panic. "You're not
going to take care of her any more."

"I'm not?" Tom opened his eyes wide and laughed. He could afford to
control himself now. "Why's that?"

"Daisy's leaving you."

"Nonsense."

"I am, though," she said with a visible effort.

"She's not leaving me!" Tom's words suddenly leaned down over Gatsby.
"Certainly not for a common swindler who'd have to steal the ring he
put on her finger."

"I won't stand this!" cried Daisy. "Oh, please let's get out."

"Who are you, anyhow?" broke out Tom. "You're one of that bunch that
hangs around with Meyer Wolfshiem--that much I happen to know. I've made
a little investigation into your affairs--and I'll carry it further
tomorrow."

"You can suit yourself about that, old sport." said Gatsby steadily.

"I found out what your 'drug stores' were." He turned to us and spoke
rapidly. "He and this Wolfshiem bought up a lot of side-street drug stores
here and in Chicago and sold grain alcohol over the counter. That's one of
his little stunts. I picked him for a bootlegger the first time I saw
him and I wasn't far wrong."

"What about it?" said Gatsby politely. "I guess your friend Walter Chase
wasn't too proud to come in on it."

"And you left him in the lurch, didn't you? You let him go to jail for
a month over in New Jersey. God! You ought to hear Walter on the subject
of YOU."

"He came to us dead broke. He was very glad to pick up some money, old
sport."

"Don't you call me 'old sport'!" cried Tom. Gatsby said nothing.
"Walter could have you up on the betting laws too, but Wolfshiem scared
him into shutting his mouth."

That unfamiliar yet recognizable look was back again in Gatsby's face.

"That drug store business was just small change," continued Tom slowly,
"but you've got something on now that Walter's afraid to tell me
about."

I glanced at Daisy who was staring terrified between Gatsby
and her husband and at Jordan who had begun to balance an invisible
but absorbing object on the tip of her chin. Then I turned back to
Gatsby--and was startled at his expression. He looked--and this is said
in all contempt for the babbled slander of his garden--as if he had
"killed a man." For a moment the set of his face could be described in
just that fantastic way.

It passed, and he began to talk excitedly to Daisy, denying everything,
defending his name against accusations that had not been made. But with
every word she was drawing further and further into herself, so he gave
that up and only the dead dream fought on as the afternoon slipped
away, trying to touch what was no longer tangible, struggling
unhappily, undespairingly, toward that lost voice across the room.

The voice begged again to go.

"PLEASE, Tom! I can't stand this any more."

Her frightened eyes told that whatever intentions, whatever courage
she had had, were definitely gone.

"You two start on home, Daisy," said Tom. "In Mr. Gatsby's car."

She looked at Tom, alarmed now, but he insisted with magnanimous scorn.

"Go on. He won't annoy you. I think he realizes that his presumptuous
little flirtation is over."

They were gone, without a word, snapped out, made accidental, isolated,
like ghosts even from our pity.

After a moment Tom got up and began wrapping the unopened bottle of
whiskey in the towel.

"Want any of this stuff? Jordan? . . . Nick?"

I didn't answer.

"Nick?" He asked again.

"What?"

"Want any?"

"No . . . I just remembered that today's my birthday."

I was thirty. Before me stretched the portentous menacing road of a
new decade.

It was seven o'clock when we got into the coupé with him and started
for Long Island. Tom talked incessantly, exulting and laughing, but his
voice was as remote from Jordan and me as the foreign clamor on the
sidewalk or the tumult of the elevated overhead. Human sympathy
has its limits and we were content to let all their tragic arguments
fade with the city lights behind. Thirty--the promise of a decade
of loneliness, a thinning list of single men to know, a thinning
brief-case of enthusiasm, thinning hair. But there was Jordan beside
me who, unlike Daisy, was too wise ever to carry well-forgotten
dreams from age to age. As we passed over the dark bridge her wan face
fell lazily against my coat's shoulder and the formidable stroke of
thirty died away with the reassuring pressure of her hand.

So we drove on toward death through the cooling twilight.


The young Greek, Michaelis, who ran the coffee joint beside the
ashheaps was the principal witness at the inquest. He had slept through
the heat until after five, when he strolled over to the garage and
found George Wilson sick in his office--really sick, pale as his own
pale hair and shaking all over. Michaelis advised him to go to bed but
Wilson refused, saying that he'd miss a lot of business if he did.
While his neighbor was trying to persuade him a violent racket broke
out overhead.

"I've got my wife locked in up there," explained Wilson calmly.
"She's going to stay there till the day after tomorrow and then we're
going to move away."

Michaelis was astonished; they had been neighbors for four years and
Wilson had never seemed faintly capable of such a statement. Generally
he was one of these worn-out men: when he wasn't working he sat on a
chair in the doorway and stared at the people and the cars that passed
along the road. When any one spoke to him he invariably laughed in an
agreeable, colorless way. He was his wife's man and not his own.

So naturally Michaelis tried to find out what had happened, but Wilson
wouldn't say a word--instead he began to throw curious, suspicious
glances at his visitor and ask him what he'd been doing at certain
times on certain days. Just as the latter was getting uneasy some
workmen came past the door bound for his restaurant and Michaelis took
the opportunity to get away, intending to come back later. But he didn't.
He supposed he forgot to, that's all. When he came outside again
a little after seven he was reminded of the conversation because he
heard Mrs. Wilson's voice, loud and scolding, downstairs in the garage.

"Beat me!" he heard her cry. "Throw me down and beat me, you dirty
little coward!"

A moment later she rushed out into the dusk, waving her hands and
shouting; before he could move from his door the business was over.

The "death car" as the newspapers called it, didn't stop; it came out
of the gathering darkness, wavered tragically for a moment and then
disappeared around the next bend. Michaelis wasn't even sure of its
color--he told the first policeman that it was light green. The other
car, the one going toward New York, came to rest a hundred yards
beyond, and its driver hurried back to where Myrtle Wilson, her life
violently extinguished, knelt in the road and mingled her thick, dark
blood with the dust.

Michaelis and this man reached her first but when they had torn open
her shirtwaist still damp with perspiration, they saw that her left
breast was swinging loose like a flap and there was no need to listen
for the heart beneath. The mouth was wide open and ripped at the
corners as though she had choked a little in giving up the tremendous
vitality she had stored so long.


We saw the three or four automobiles and the crowd when we were still
some distance away.

"Wreck!" said Tom. "That's good. Wilson'll have a little business
at last."

He slowed down, but still without any intention of stopping until,
as we came nearer, the hushed intent faces of the people at the garage
door made him automatically put on the brakes.

"We'll take a look," he said doubtfully, "just a look."

I became aware now of a hollow, wailing sound which issued incessantly
from the garage, a sound which as we got out of the coupé and walked
toward the door resolved itself into the words "Oh, my God!" uttered over
and over in a gasping moan.

"There's some bad trouble here," said Tom excitedly.

He reached up on tiptoes and peered over a circle of heads into the
garage which was lit only by a yellow light in a swinging wire basket
overhead. Then he made a harsh sound in his throat and with a violent
thrusting movement of his powerful arms pushed his way through.

The circle closed up again with a running murmur of expostulation; it
was a minute before I could see anything at all. Then new arrivals
disarranged the line and Jordan and I were pushed suddenly inside.

Myrtle Wilson's body wrapped in a blanket and then in another
blanket as though she suffered from a chill in the hot night lay on a
work table by the wall and Tom, with his back to us, was bending over
it, motionless. Next to him stood a motorcycle policeman taking down
names with much sweat and correction in a little book. At first I
couldn't find the source of the high, groaning words that echoed
clamorously through the bare garage--then I saw Wilson standing on the
raised threshold of his office, swaying back and forth and holding to
the doorposts with both hands. Some man was talking to him in a low
voice and attempting from time to time to lay a hand on his shoulder,
but Wilson neither heard nor saw. His eyes would drop slowly from the
swinging light to the laden table by the wall and then jerk back to
the light again and he gave out incessantly his high horrible call.

"O, my Ga-od! O, my Ga-od! Oh, Ga-od! Oh, my Ga-od!"

Presently Tom lifted his head with a jerk and after staring around the
garage with glazed eyes addressed a mumbled incoherent remark to the
policeman.

"M-a-v--" the policeman was saying, "--o----"

"No,--r--" corrected the man, "M-a-v-r-o----"

"Listen to me!" muttered Tom fiercely.

"r--" said the policeman, "o----"

"g----"

"g--" He looked up as Tom's broad hand fell sharply on his shoulder.
"What you want, fella?"

"What happened--that's what I want to know!"

"Auto hit her. Ins'antly killed."

"Instantly killed," repeated Tom, staring.

"She ran out ina road. Son-of-a-bitch didn't even stopus car."

"There was two cars," said Michaelis, "one comin', one goin', see?"

"Going where?" asked the policeman keenly.

"One goin' each way. Well, she--" His hand rose toward the blankets but
stopped half way and fell to his side, "--she ran out there an' the one
comin' from N'York knock right into her goin' thirty or forty miles an
hour."

"What's the name of this place here?" demanded the officer.

"Hasn't got any name."

A pale, well-dressed Negro stepped near.

"It was a yellow car," he said, "big yellow car. New."

"See the accident?" asked the policeman.

"No, but the car passed me down the road, going faster'n forty. Going
fifty, sixty."

"Come here and let's have your name. Look out now. I want to get his
name."

Some words of this conversation must have reached Wilson swaying
in the office door, for suddenly a new theme found voice among
his gasping cries.

"You don't have to tell me what kind of car it was! I know what kind of
car it was!"

Watching Tom I saw the wad of muscle back of his shoulder tighten
under his coat. He walked quickly over to Wilson and standing
in front of him seized him firmly by the upper arms.

"You've got to pull yourself together," he said with soothing
gruffness.

Wilson's eyes fell upon Tom; he started up on his tiptoes and then
would have collapsed to his knees had not Tom held him upright.

"Listen," said Tom, shaking him a little. "I just got here a minute ago,
from New York. I was bringing you that coupé we've been talking about.
That yellow car I was driving this afternoon wasn't mine, do you hear? I
haven't seen it all afternoon."

Only the Negro and I were near enough to hear what he said but the
policeman caught something in the tone and looked over with truculent
eyes.

"What's all that?" he demanded.

"I'm a friend of his." Tom turned his head but kept his hands firm on
Wilson's body. "He says he knows the car that did it. . . . It was a yellow
car."

Some dim impulse moved the policeman to look suspiciously at Tom.

"And what color's your car?"

"It's a blue car, a coupé."

"We've come straight from New York," I said.

Some one who had been driving a little behind us confirmed this and
the policeman turned away.

"Now, if you'll let me have that name again correct----"

Picking up Wilson like a doll Tom carried him into the office,
set him down in a chair and came back.

"If somebody'll come here and sit with him!" he snapped
authoritatively. He watched while the two men standing closest glanced
at each other and went unwillingly into the room. Then Tom shut the
door on them and came down the single step, his eyes avoiding the
table. As he passed close to me he whispered "Let's get out."

Self consciously, with his authoritative arms breaking the way, we
pushed through the still gathering crowd, passing a hurried doctor,
case in hand, who had been sent for in wild hope half an hour ago.

Tom drove slowly until we were beyond the bend--then his foot came down
hard and the coupé raced along through the night. In a little while I
heard a low husky sob and saw that the tears were overflowing down his
face.

"The God Damn coward!" he whimpered. "He didn't even stop his car."


The Buchanans' house floated suddenly toward us through the dark rustling
trees. Tom stopped beside the porch and looked up at the second floor
where two windows bloomed with light among the vines.

"Daisy's home," he said. As we got out of the car he glanced at me and
frowned slightly.

"I ought to have dropped you in West Egg, Nick. There's nothing we can
do tonight."

A change had come over him and he spoke gravely, and with decision.
As we walked across the moonlight gravel to the porch he disposed of
the situation in a few brisk phrases.

"I'll telephone for a taxi to take you home, and while you're waiting
you and Jordan better go in the kitchen and have them get you some
supper--if you want any." He opened the door. "Come in."

"No thanks. But I'd be glad if you'd order me the taxi. I'll wait
outside."

Jordan put her hand on my arm.

"Won't you come in, Nick?"

"No thanks."

I was feeling a little sick and I wanted to be alone. But Jordan lingered
for a moment more.

"It's only half past nine," she said.

I'd be damned if I'd go in; I'd had enough of all of them for one day
and suddenly that included Jordan too. She must have seen something of
this in my expression for she turned abruptly away and ran up the
porch steps into the house. I sat down for a few minutes with my head
in my hands, until I heard the phone taken up inside and the butler's
voice calling a taxi. Then I walked slowly down the drive away from the
house intending to wait by the gate.

I hadn't gone twenty yards when I heard my name and Gatsby stepped from
between two bushes into the path. I must have felt pretty weird by that
time because I could think of nothing except the luminosity of his
pink suit under the moon.

"What are you doing?" I inquired.

"Just standing here, old sport."

Somehow, that seemed a despicable occupation. For all I knew he was going
to rob the house in a moment; I wouldn't have been surprised to see
sinister faces, the faces of "Wolfshiem's people," behind him in the
dark shrubbery.

"Did you see any trouble on the road?" he asked after a minute.

"Yes."

He hesitated.

"Was she killed?"

"Yes."

"I thought so; I told Daisy I thought so. It's better that the shock
should all come at once. She stood it pretty well."

He spoke as if Daisy's reaction was the only thing that mattered.

"I got to West Egg by a side road," he went on, "and left the car in my
garage. I don't think anybody saw us but of course I can't be sure."

I disliked him so much by this time that I didn't find it necessary to
tell him he was wrong.

"Who was the woman?" he inquired.

"Her name was Wilson. Her husband owns the garage. How the devil did it
happen?"

"Well, I tried to swing the wheel----" He broke off, and suddenly I
guessed at the truth.

"Was Daisy driving?"

"Yes," he said after a moment, "but of course I'll say I was. You see,
when we left New York she was very nervous and she thought it would
steady her to drive--and this woman rushed out at us just as we were
passing a car coming the other way. It all happened in a minute but it
seemed to me that she wanted to speak to us, thought we were somebody
she knew. Well, first Daisy turned away from the woman toward the other
car, and then she lost her nerve and turned back. The second my hand
reached the wheel I felt the shock--it must have killed her instantly."

"It ripped her open----"

"Don't tell me, old sport." He winced. "Anyhow--Daisy stepped on it.
I tried to make her stop, but she couldn't so I pulled on the emergency
brake. Then she fell over into my lap and I drove on.

"She'll be all right tomorrow," he said presently. "I'm just going to
wait here and see if he tries to bother her about that unpleasantness
this afternoon. She's locked herself into her room and if he tries any
brutality she's going to turn the light out and on again."

"He won't touch her," I said. "He's not thinking about her."

"I don't trust him, old sport."

"How long are you going to wait?"

"All night if necessary. Anyhow till they all go to bed."

A new point of view occurred to me. Suppose Tom found out that Daisy had
been driving. He might think he saw a connection in it--he might think
anything. I looked at the house: there were two or three bright windows
downstairs and the pink glow from Daisy's room on the second floor.

"You wait here," I said. "I'll see if there's any sign of a commotion."

I walked back along the border of the lawn, traversed the gravel softly
and tiptoed up the veranda steps. The drawing-room curtains were open,
and I saw that the room was empty. Crossing the porch where we had dined
that June night three months before I came to a small rectangle of light
which I guessed was the pantry window. The blind was drawn but I found
a rift at the sill.

Daisy and Tom were sitting opposite each other at the kitchen table
with a plate of cold fried chicken between them and two bottles of
ale. He was talking intently across the table at her and in his
earnestness his hand had fallen upon and covered her own. Once in a
while she looked up at him and nodded in agreement.

They weren't happy, and neither of them had touched the chicken or the
ale--and yet they weren't unhappy either. There was an unmistakable air
of natural intimacy about the picture and anybody would have said that
they were conspiring together.

As I tiptoed from the porch I heard my taxi feeling its way along the
dark road toward the house. Gatsby was waiting where I had left him in
the drive.

"Is it all quiet up there?" he asked anxiously.

"Yes, it's all quiet." I hesitated. "You'd better come home and get
some sleep."

He shook his head.

"I want to wait here till Daisy goes to bed. Good night, old sport."

He put his hands in his coat pockets and turned back eagerly to his
scrutiny of the house, as though my presence marred the sacredness of
the vigil. So I walked away and left him standing there in the
moonlight--watching over nothing.




Chapter 8



I couldn't sleep all night; a fog-horn was groaning incessantly on the
Sound, and I tossed half-sick between grotesque reality and savage
frightening dreams. Toward dawn I heard a taxi go up Gatsby's drive
and immediately I jumped out of bed and began to dress--I felt that I
had something to tell him, something to warn him about and morning
would be too late.

Crossing his lawn I saw that his front door was still open and he was
leaning against a table in the hall, heavy with dejection or sleep.

"Nothing happened," he said wanly. "I waited, and about four o'clock she
came to the window and stood there for a minute and then turned out
the light."

His house had never seemed so enormous to me as it did that night when we
hunted through the great rooms for cigarettes. We pushed aside curtains
that were like pavilions and felt over innumerable feet of dark wall for
electric light switches--once I tumbled with a sort of splash upon the
keys of a ghostly piano. There was an inexplicable amount of dust
everywhere and the rooms were musty as though they hadn't been aired for
many days. I found the humidor on an unfamiliar table with two stale dry
cigarettes inside. Throwing open the French windows of the
drawing-room we sat smoking out into the darkness.

"You ought to go away," I said. "It's pretty certain they'll trace
your car."

"Go away NOW, old sport?"

"Go to Atlantic City for a week, or up to Montreal."

He wouldn't consider it. He couldn't possibly leave Daisy until he knew
what she was going to do. He was clutching at some last hope and I
couldn't bear to shake him free.

It was this night that he told me the strange story of his youth with
Dan Cody--told it to me because "Jay Gatsby" had broken up like glass
against Tom's hard malice and the long secret extravaganza was played
out. I think that he would have acknowledged anything, now, without
reserve, but he wanted to talk about Daisy.

She was the first "nice" girl he had ever known. In various unrevealed
capacities he had come in contact with such people but always
with indiscernible barbed wire between. He found her excitingly
desirable. He went to her house, at first with other officers
from Camp Taylor, then alone. It amazed him--he had never been
in such a beautiful house before. But what gave it an air of breathless
intensity was that Daisy lived there--it was as casual a thing to her
as his tent out at camp was to him. There was a ripe mystery about it,
a hint of bedrooms upstairs more beautiful and cool than other
bedrooms, of gay and radiant activities taking place through its
corridors and of romances that were not musty and laid away already in
lavender but fresh and breathing and redolent of this year's shining
motor cars and of dances whose flowers were scarcely withered. It
excited him too that many men had already loved Daisy--it increased
her value in his eyes. He felt their presence all about the house,
pervading the air with the shades and echoes of still vibrant emotions.

But he knew that he was in Daisy's house by a colossal accident.
However glorious might be his future as Jay Gatsby, he was at present a
penniless young man without a past, and at any moment the invisible
cloak of his uniform might slip from his shoulders. So he made
the most of his time. He took what he could get, ravenously and
unscrupulously--eventually he took Daisy one still October night,
took her because he had no real right to touch her hand.

He might have despised himself, for he had certainly taken her under
false pretenses. I don't mean that he had traded on his phantom
millions, but he had deliberately given Daisy a sense of security; he
let her believe that he was a person from much the same stratum as
herself--that he was fully able to take care of her. As a matter of
fact he had no such facilities--he had no comfortable family standing
behind him and he was liable at the whim of an impersonal government
to be blown anywhere about the world.

But he didn't despise himself and it didn't turn out as he had
imagined. He had intended, probably, to take what he could and go--but
now he found that he had committed himself to the following of a grail.
He knew that Daisy was extraordinary but he didn't realize just how
extraordinary a "nice" girl could be. She vanished into her rich
house, into her rich, full life, leaving Gatsby--nothing. He felt
married to her, that was all.

When they met again two days later it was Gatsby who was breathless,
who was somehow betrayed. Her porch was bright with the bought
luxury of star-shine; the wicker of the settee squeaked fashionably
as she turned toward him and he kissed her curious and lovely mouth.
She had caught a cold and it made her voice huskier and more charming
than ever and Gatsby was overwhelmingly aware of the youth and mystery
that wealth imprisons and preserves, of the freshness of many clothes
and of Daisy, gleaming like silver, safe and proud above the hot
struggles of the poor.


"I can't describe to you how surprised I was to find out I loved her,
old sport. I even hoped for a while that she'd throw me over, but she
didn't, because she was in love with me too. She thought I knew a lot
because I knew different things from her. . . . Well, there I was,
way off my ambitions, getting deeper in love every minute, and
all of a sudden I didn't care. What was the use of doing great
things if I could have a better time telling her what I was going
to do?"

On the last afternoon before he went abroad he sat with Daisy in
his arms for a long, silent time. It was a cold fall day with fire
in the room and her cheeks flushed. Now and then she moved and he
changed his arm a little and once he kissed her dark shining hair. The
afternoon had made them tranquil for a while as if to give them a deep
memory for the long parting the next day promised. They had never been
closer in their month of love nor communicated more profoundly one
with another than when she brushed silent lips against his coat's
shoulder or when he touched the end of her fingers, gently, as though
she were asleep.


He did extraordinarily well in the war. He was a captain before he went
to the front and following the Argonne battles he got his majority and
the command of the divisional machine guns. After the Armistice
he tried frantically to get home but some complication or
misunderstanding sent him to Oxford instead. He was worried now--there
was a quality of nervous despair in Daisy's letters. She didn't see why
he couldn't come. She was feeling the pressure of the world outside
and she wanted to see him and feel his presence beside her and be
reassured that she was doing the right thing after all.

For Daisy was young and her artificial world was redolent of orchids
and pleasant, cheerful snobbery and orchestras which set the rhythm of
the year, summing up the sadness and suggestiveness of life in new
tunes. All night the saxophones wailed the hopeless comment of the
"Beale Street Blues" while a hundred pairs of golden and silver
slippers shuffled the shining dust. At the grey tea hour there were
always rooms that throbbed incessantly with this low sweet fever,
while fresh faces drifted here and there like rose petals blown by the
sad horns around the floor.

Through this twilight universe Daisy began to move again with the
season; suddenly she was again keeping half a dozen dates a day with
half a dozen men and drowsing asleep at dawn with the beads and
chiffon of an evening dress tangled among dying orchids on the floor
beside her bed. And all the time something within her was crying for a
decision. She wanted her life shaped now, immediately--and the decision
must be made by some force--of love, of money, of unquestionable
practicality--that was close at hand.

That force took shape in the middle of spring with the arrival of Tom
Buchanan. There was a wholesome bulkiness about his person and his
position and Daisy was flattered. Doubtless there was a certain
struggle and a certain relief. The letter reached Gatsby while he was
still at Oxford.


It was dawn now on Long Island and we went about opening the rest of
the windows downstairs, filling the house with grey turning,
gold turning light. The shadow of a tree fell abruptly across the dew
and ghostly birds began to sing among the blue leaves. There was a
slow pleasant movement in the air, scarcely a wind, promising a cool
lovely day.

"I don't think she ever loved him." Gatsby turned around from a window
and looked at me challengingly. "You must remember, old sport, she was
very excited this afternoon. He told her those things in a way that
frightened her--that made it look as if I was some kind of cheap sharper.
And the result was she hardly knew what she was saying."

He sat down gloomily.

"Of course she might have loved him, just for a minute, when they were
first married--and loved me more even then, do you see?"

Suddenly he came out with a curious remark:

"In any case," he said, "it was just personal."

What could you make of that, except to suspect some intensity in
his conception of the affair that couldn't be measured?

He came back from France when Tom and Daisy were still on their wedding
trip, and made a miserable but irresistible journey to Louisville
on the last of his army pay. He stayed there a week, walking the
streets where their footsteps had clicked together through the
November night and revisiting the out-of-the-way places to which
they had driven in her white car. Just as Daisy's house had always
seemed to him more mysterious and gay than other houses so his
idea of the city itself, even though she was gone from it, was pervaded
with a melancholy beauty.

He left feeling that if he had searched harder he might have found
her--that he was leaving her behind. The day-coach--he was penniless
now--was hot. He went out to the open vestibule and sat down on a
folding-chair, and the station slid away and the backs of unfamiliar
buildings moved by. Then out into the spring fields, where a yellow
trolley raced them for a minute with people in it who might once have
seen the pale magic of her face along the casual street.

The track curved and now it was going away from the sun which, as it
sank lower, seemed to spread itself in benediction over the vanishing
city where she had drawn her breath. He stretched out his hand
desperately as if to snatch only a wisp of air, to save a fragment of
the spot that she had made lovely for him. But it was all going by too
fast now for his blurred eyes and he knew that he had lost that part of
it, the freshest and the best, forever.


It was nine o'clock when we finished breakfast and went out on the
porch. The night had made a sharp difference in the weather and there
was an autumn flavor in the air. The gardener, the last one of Gatsby's
former servants, came to the foot of the steps.

"I'm going to drain the pool today, Mr. Gatsby. Leaves'll start falling
pretty soon and then there's always trouble with the pipes."

"Don't do it today," Gatsby answered. He turned to me apologetically.
"You know, old sport, I've never used that pool all summer?"

I looked at my watch and stood up.

"Twelve minutes to my train."

I didn't want to go to the city. I wasn't worth a decent stroke of work
but it was more than that--I didn't want to leave Gatsby. I missed that
train, and then another, before I could get myself away.

"I'll call you up," I said finally.

"Do, old sport."

"I'll call you about noon."

We walked slowly down the steps.

"I suppose Daisy'll call too." He looked at me anxiously as if he
hoped I'd corroborate this.

"I suppose so."

"Well--goodbye."

We shook hands and I started away. Just before I reached the hedge I
remembered something and turned around.

"They're a rotten crowd," I shouted across the lawn. "You're worth the
whole damn bunch put together."

I've always been glad I said that. It was the only compliment I ever gave
him, because I disapproved of him from beginning to end. First he nodded
politely, and then his face broke into that radiant and understanding
smile, as if we'd been in ecstatic cahoots on that fact all the time.
His gorgeous pink rag of a suit made a bright spot of color against the
white steps and I thought of the night when I first came to his ancestral
home three months before. The lawn and drive had been crowded with the
faces of those who guessed at his corruption--and he had stood on those
steps, concealing his incorruptible dream, as he waved them goodbye.

I thanked him for his hospitality. We were always thanking him for
that--I and the others.

"Goodbye," I called. "I enjoyed breakfast, Gatsby."


Up in the city I tried for a while to list the quotations on an
interminable amount of stock, then I fell asleep in my swivel-chair.
Just before noon the phone woke me and I started up with sweat
breaking out on my forehead. It was Jordan Baker; she often called
me up at this hour because the uncertainty of her own movements
between hotels and clubs and private houses made her hard to find
in any other way. Usually her voice came over the wire as something
fresh and cool as if a divot from a green golf links had come
sailing in at the office window but this morning it seemed harsh and dry.

"I've left Daisy's house," she said. "I'm at Hempstead and I'm going down
to Southampton this afternoon."

Probably it had been tactful to leave Daisy's house, but the act
annoyed me and her next remark made me rigid.

"You weren't so nice to me last night."

"How could it have mattered then?"

Silence for a moment. Then--

"However--I want to see you."

"I want to see you too."

"Suppose I don't go to Southampton, and come into town this afternoon?"

"No--I don't think this afternoon."

"Very well."

"It's impossible this afternoon. Various----"

We talked like that for a while and then abruptly we weren't talking any
longer. I don't know which of us hung up with a sharp click but I know I
didn't care. I couldn't have talked to her across a tea-table that day if
I never talked to her again in this world.

I called Gatsby's house a few minutes later, but the line was busy. I
tried four times; finally an exasperated central told me the wire was
being kept open for long distance from Detroit. Taking out my
time-table I drew a small circle around the three-fifty train. Then I
leaned back in my chair and tried to think. It was just noon.


When I passed the ashheaps on the train that morning I had crossed
deliberately to the other side of the car. I suppose there'd be a
curious crowd around there all day with little boys searching for dark
spots in the dust and some garrulous man telling over and over what
had happened until it became less and less real even to him and he
could tell it no longer and Myrtle Wilson's tragic achievement was
forgotten. Now I want to go back a little and tell what happened at the
garage after we left there the night before.

They had difficulty in locating the sister, Catherine. She must
have broken her rule against drinking that night for when she
arrived she was stupid with liquor and unable to understand that the
ambulance had already gone to Flushing. When they convinced her of
this she immediately fainted as if that was the intolerable part of
the affair. Someone kind or curious took her in his car and drove
her in the wake of her sister's body.

Until long after midnight a changing crowd lapped up against the front
of the garage while George Wilson rocked himself back and forth on the
couch inside. For a while the door of the office was open and
everyone who came into the garage glanced irresistibly through it.
Finally someone said it was a shame and closed the door. Michaelis and
several other men were with him--first four or five men, later two or
three men. Still later Michaelis had to ask the last stranger to wait
there fifteen minutes longer while he went back to his own place and made
a pot of coffee. After that he stayed there alone with Wilson until dawn.

About three o'clock the quality of Wilson's incoherent muttering
changed--he grew quieter and began to talk about the yellow car. He
announced that he had a way of finding out whom the yellow car belonged
to, and then he blurted out that a couple of months ago his wife had
come from the city with her face bruised and her nose swollen.

But when he heard himself say this, he flinched and began to cry "Oh,
my God!" again in his groaning voice. Michaelis made a clumsy attempt
to distract him.

"How long have you been married, George? Come on there, try and sit
still a minute and answer my question. How long have you been married?"

"Twelve years."

"Ever had any children? Come on, George, sit still--I asked you a
question. Did you ever have any children?"

The hard brown beetles kept thudding against the dull light and whenever
Michaelis heard a car go tearing along the road outside it sounded to him
like the car that hadn't stopped a few hours before. He didn't like to go
into the garage because the work bench was stained where the body had
been lying so he moved uncomfortably around the office--he knew every
object in it before morning--and from time to time sat down beside Wilson
trying to keep him more quiet.

"Have you got a church you go to sometimes, George? Maybe even if you
haven't been there for a long time? Maybe I could call up the church
and get a priest to come over and he could talk to you, see?"

"Don't belong to any."

"You ought to have a church, George, for times like this. You must have
gone to church once. Didn't you get married in a church? Listen, George,
listen to me. Didn't you get married in a church?"

"That was a long time ago."

The effort of answering broke the rhythm of his rocking--for a moment he
was silent. Then the same half knowing, half bewildered look came back
into his faded eyes.

"Look in the drawer there," he said, pointing at the desk.

"Which drawer?"

"That drawer--that one."

Michaelis opened the drawer nearest his hand. There was nothing in it but
a small expensive dog leash made of leather and braided silver. It was
apparently new.

"This?" he inquired, holding it up.

Wilson stared and nodded.

"I found it yesterday afternoon. She tried to tell me about it but I
knew it was something funny."

"You mean your wife bought it?"

"She had it wrapped in tissue paper on her bureau."

Michaelis didn't see anything odd in that and he gave Wilson a dozen
reasons why his wife might have bought the dog leash. But conceivably
Wilson had heard some of these same explanations before, from Myrtle,
because he began saying "Oh, my God!" again in a whisper--his comforter
left several explanations in the air.

"Then he killed her," said Wilson. His mouth dropped open suddenly.

"Who did?"

"I have a way of finding out."

"You're morbid, George," said his friend. "This has been a strain to you
and you don't know what you're saying. You'd better try and sit quiet
till morning."

"He murdered her."

"It was an accident, George."

Wilson shook his head. His eyes narrowed and his mouth widened slightly
with the ghost of a superior "Hm!"

"I know," he said definitely, "I'm one of these trusting fellas and I
don't think any harm to NObody, but when I get to know a thing I know
it. It was the man in that car. She ran out to speak to him and he
wouldn't stop."

Michaelis had seen this too but it hadn't occurred to him that there was
any special significance in it. He believed that Mrs. Wilson had been
running away from her husband, rather than trying to stop any
particular car.

"How could she of been like that?"

"She's a deep one," said Wilson, as if that answered the question.
"Ah-h-h----"

He began to rock again and Michaelis stood twisting the leash in
his hand.

"Maybe you got some friend that I could telephone for, George?"

This was a forlorn hope--he was almost sure that Wilson had no friend:
there was not enough of him for his wife. He was glad a little later when
he noticed a change in the room, a blue quickening by the window, and
realized that dawn wasn't far off. About five o'clock it was blue enough
outside to snap off the light.

Wilson's glazed eyes turned out to the ashheaps, where small grey
clouds took on fantastic shape and scurried here and there in the faint
dawn wind.

"I spoke to her," he muttered, after a long silence. "I told her she might
fool me but she couldn't fool God. I took her to the window--" With an
effort he got up and walked to the rear window and leaned with his face
pressed against it, "--and I said 'God knows what you've been doing,
everything you've been doing. You may fool me but you can't fool God!' "

Standing behind him Michaelis saw with a shock that he was looking at the
eyes of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg which had just emerged pale and enormous
from the dissolving night.

"God sees everything," repeated Wilson.

"That's an advertisement," Michaelis assured him. Something made him turn
away from the window and look back into the room. But Wilson stood there a
long time, his face close to the window pane, nodding into the twilight.


By six o'clock Michaelis was worn out and grateful for the sound of a
car stopping outside. It was one of the watchers of the night before
who had promised to come back so he cooked breakfast for three which
he and the other man ate together. Wilson was quieter now and Michaelis
went home to sleep; when he awoke four hours later and hurried back to the
garage Wilson was gone.

His movements--he was on foot all the time--were afterward traced to Port
Roosevelt and then to Gad's Hill where he bought a sandwich that he
didn't eat and a cup of coffee. He must have been tired and walking
slowly for he didn't reach Gad's Hill until noon. Thus far there was
no difficulty in accounting for his time--there were boys who had seen a
man "acting sort of crazy" and motorists at whom he stared oddly from
the side of the road. Then for three hours he disappeared from view.
The police, on the strength of what he said to Michaelis, that he "had
a way of finding out," supposed that he spent that time going from
garage to garage thereabouts inquiring for a yellow car. On the other
hand no garage man who had seen him ever came forward--and perhaps he
had an easier, surer way of finding out what he wanted to know. By
half past two he was in West Egg where he asked someone the way to
Gatsby's house. So by that time he knew Gatsby's name.


At two o'clock Gatsby put on his bathing suit and left word with the
butler that if any one phoned word was to be brought to him at the
pool. He stopped at the garage for a pneumatic mattress that had amused
his guests during the summer, and the chauffeur helped him pump it up.
Then he gave instructions that the open car wasn't to be taken out
under any circumstances--and this was strange because the front right
fender needed repair.

Gatsby shouldered the mattress and started for the pool. Once he
stopped and shifted it a little, and the chauffeur asked him if he
needed help, but he shook his head and in a moment disappeared among
the yellowing trees.

No telephone message arrived but the butler went without his sleep and
waited for it until four o'clock--until long after there was any one to
give it to if it came. I have an idea that Gatsby himself didn't
believe it would come and perhaps he no longer cared. If that was true
he must have felt that he had lost the old warm world, paid a high
price for living too long with a single dream. He must have looked up
at an unfamiliar sky through frightening leaves and shivered as he
found what a grotesque thing a rose is and how raw the sunlight was
upon the scarcely created grass. A new world, material without being
real, where poor ghosts, breathing dreams like air, drifted
fortuitously about . . . like that ashen, fantastic figure gliding toward
him through the amorphous trees.

The chauffeur--he was one of Wolfshiem's protégés--heard the
shots--afterward he could only say that he hadn't thought anything much
about them. I drove from the station directly to Gatsby's house and my
rushing anxiously up the front steps was the first thing that alarmed any
one. But they knew then, I firmly believe. With scarcely a word said, four
of us, the chauffeur, butler, gardener and I, hurried down to the pool.

There was a faint, barely perceptible movement of the water as the
fresh flow from one end urged its way toward the drain at the other.
With little ripples that were hardly the shadows of waves, the laden
mattress moved irregularly down the pool. A small gust of wind that
scarcely corrugated the surface was enough to disturb its accidental
course with its accidental burden. The touch of a cluster of leaves
revolved it slowly, tracing, like the leg of compass, a thin red circle
in the water.

It was after we started with Gatsby toward the house that the gardener
saw Wilson's body a little way off in the grass, and the holocaust was
complete.




Chapter 9



After two years I remember the rest of that day, and that night and the
next day, only as an endless drill of police and photographers and
newspaper men in and out of Gatsby's front door. A rope stretched
across the main gate and a policeman by it kept out the curious, but
little boys soon discovered that they could enter through my yard and
there were always a few of them clustered open-mouthed about the pool.
Someone with a positive manner, perhaps a detective, used the
expression "mad man" as he bent over Wilson's body that afternoon, and
the adventitious authority of his voice set the key for the newspaper
reports next morning.

Most of those reports were a nightmare--grotesque, circumstantial,
eager and untrue. When Michaelis's testimony at the inquest brought to
light Wilson's suspicions of his wife I thought the whole tale would
shortly be served up in racy pasquinade--but Catherine, who might have
said anything, didn't say a word. She showed a surprising amount of
character about it too--looked at the coroner with determined eyes under
that corrected brow of hers and swore that her sister had never seen
Gatsby, that her sister was completely happy with her husband, that her
sister had been into no mischief whatever. She convinced herself of it
and cried into her handkerchief as if the very suggestion was more
than she could endure. So Wilson was reduced to a man "deranged by
grief" in order that the case might remain in its simplest form. And
it rested there.

But all this part of it seemed remote and unessential. I found myself on
Gatsby's side, and alone. From the moment I telephoned news of
the catastrophe to West Egg village, every surmise about him, and
every practical question, was referred to me. At first I was surprised and
confused; then, as he lay in his house and didn't move or breathe or
speak hour upon hour it grew upon me that I was responsible, because no
one else was interested--interested, I mean, with that intense personal
interest to which every one has some vague right at the end.

I called up Daisy half an hour after we found him, called her
instinctively and without hesitation. But she and Tom had gone away
early that afternoon, and taken baggage with them.

"Left no address?"

"No."

"Say when they'd be back?"

"No."

"Any idea where they are? How I could reach them?"

"I don't know. Can't say."

I wanted to get somebody for him. I wanted to go into the room where he
lay and reassure him: "I'll get somebody for you, Gatsby. Don't worry.
Just trust me and I'll get somebody for you----"

Meyer Wolfshiem's name wasn't in the phone book. The butler gave me his
office address on Broadway and I called Information, but by the time I
had the number it was long after five and no one answered the phone.

"Will you ring again?"

"I've rung them three times."

"It's very important."

"Sorry. I'm afraid no one's there."

I went back to the drawing room and thought for an instant that they were
chance visitors, all these official people who suddenly filled it. But
as they drew back the sheet and looked at Gatsby with unmoved eyes,
his protest continued in my brain.

"Look here, old sport, you've got to get somebody for me. You've got
to try hard. I can't go through this alone."

Some one started to ask me questions but I broke away and going upstairs
looked hastily through the unlocked parts of his desk--he'd never told me
definitely that his parents were dead. But there was nothing--only the
picture of Dan Cody, a token of forgotten violence staring down from
the wall.

Next morning I sent the butler to New York with a letter to Wolfshiem
which asked for information and urged him to come out on the next
train. That request seemed superfluous when I wrote it. I was sure he'd
start when he saw the newspapers, just as I was sure there'd be a wire
from Daisy before noon--but neither a wire nor Mr. Wolfshiem arrived, no
one arrived except more police and photographers and newspaper men.
When the butler brought back Wolfshiem's answer I began to have a
feeling of defiance, of scornful solidarity between Gatsby and me
against them all.


_Dear Mr. Carraway. This has been one of the most terrible shocks of my
life to me I hardly can believe it that it is true at all. Such a mad
act as that man did should make us all think. I cannot come down now as
I am tied up in some very important business and cannot get mixed up in
this thing now. If there is anything I can do a little later let me
know in a letter by Edgar. I hardly know where I am when I hear about a
thing like this and am completely knocked down and out.

                                        Yours truly
                                                      MEYER WOLFSHIEM_

and then hasty addenda beneath:

_Let me know about the funeral etc do not know his family at all._


When the phone rang that afternoon and Long Distance said Chicago was
calling I thought this would be Daisy at last. But the connection came
through as a man's voice, very thin and far away.

"This is Slagle speaking. . . ."

"Yes?" The name was unfamiliar.

"Hell of a note, isn't it? Get my wire?"

"There haven't been any wires."

"Young Parke's in trouble," he said rapidly. "They picked him up when he
handed the bonds over the counter. They got a circular from New York
giving 'em the numbers just five minutes before. What d'you know about
that, hey? You never can tell in these hick towns----"

"Hello!" I interrupted breathlessly. "Look here--this isn't Mr. Gatsby.
Mr. Gatsby's dead."

There was a long silence on the other end of the wire, followed by an
exclamation . . . then a quick squawk as the connection was broken.


I think it was on the third day that a telegram signed Henry C. Gatz
arrived from a town in Minnesota. It said only that the sender was
leaving immediately and to postpone the funeral until he came.

It was Gatsby's father, a solemn old man very helpless and dismayed,
bundled up in a long cheap ulster against the warm September day. His
eyes leaked continuously with excitement and when I took the bag and
umbrella from his hands he began to pull so incessantly at his sparse
grey beard that I had difficulty in getting off his coat. He was on the
point of collapse so I took him into the music room and made him sit
down while I sent for something to eat. But he wouldn't eat and the
glass of milk spilled from his trembling hand.

"I saw it in the Chicago newspaper," he said. "It was all in the Chicago
newspaper. I started right away."

"I didn't know how to reach you."

His eyes, seeing nothing, moved ceaselessly about the room.

"It was a mad man," he said. "He must have been mad."

"Wouldn't you like some coffee?" I urged him.

"I don't want anything. I'm all right now, Mr.----"

"Carraway."

"Well, I'm all right now. Where have they got Jimmy?"

I took him into the drawing-room, where his son lay, and left him there.
Some little boys had come up on the steps and were looking into the hall;
when I told them who had arrived they went reluctantly away.

After a little while Mr. Gatz opened the door and came out, his mouth
ajar, his face flushed slightly, his eyes leaking isolated and
unpunctual tears. He had reached an age where death no longer has the
quality of ghastly surprise, and when he looked around him now for the
first time and saw the height and splendor of the hall and the great
rooms opening out from it into other rooms his grief began to be mixed
with an awed pride. I helped him to a bedroom upstairs; while he took
off his coat and vest I told him that all arrangements had been
deferred until he came.

"I didn't know what you'd want, Mr. Gatsby----"

"Gatz is my name."

"--Mr. Gatz. I thought you might want to take the body west."

He shook his head.

"Jimmy always liked it better down East. He rose up to his position in
the East. Were you a friend of my boy's, Mr.--?"

"We were close friends."

"He had a big future before him, you know. He was only a young man but
he had a lot of brain power here."

He touched his head impressively and I nodded.

"If he'd of lived he'd of been a great man. A man like James J. Hill.
He'd of helped build up the country."

"That's true," I said, uncomfortably.

He fumbled at the embroidered coverlet, trying to take it from the bed,
and lay down stiffly--was instantly asleep.

That night an obviously frightened person called up and demanded to know
who I was before he would give his name.

"This is Mr. Carraway," I said.

"Oh--" He sounded relieved. "This is Klipspringer."

I was relieved too for that seemed to promise another friend
at Gatsby's grave. I didn't want it to be in the papers and draw
a sightseeing crowd so I'd been calling up a few people myself.
They were hard to find.

"The funeral's tomorrow," I said. "Three o'clock, here at the house.
I wish you'd tell anybody who'd be interested."

"Oh, I will," he broke out hastily. "Of course I'm not likely to see
anybody, but if I do."

His tone made me suspicious.

"Of course you'll be there yourself."

"Well, I'll certainly try. What I called up about is----"

"Wait a minute," I interrupted. "How about saying you'll come?"

"Well, the fact is--the truth of the matter is that I'm staying with
some people up here in Greenwich and they rather expect me to be with
them tomorrow. In fact there's a sort of picnic or something.
Of course I'll do my very best to get away."

I ejaculated an unrestrained "Huh!" and he must have heard me for he went
on nervously:

"What I called up about was a pair of shoes I left there. I wonder if
it'd be too much trouble to have the butler send them on. You
see they're tennis shoes and I'm sort of helpless without them. My
address is care of B. F.----"

I didn't hear the rest of the name because I hung up the receiver.

After that I felt a certain shame for Gatsby--one gentleman to whom I
telephoned implied that he had got what he deserved. However, that was
my fault, for he was one of those who used to sneer most bitterly at
Gatsby on the courage of Gatsby's liquor and I should have known
better than to call him.

The morning of the funeral I went up to New York to see Meyer
Wolfshiem; I couldn't seem to reach him any other way. The door that I
pushed open on the advice of an elevator boy was marked "The Swastika
Holding Company" and at first there didn't seem to be any one inside.
But when I'd shouted "Hello" several times in vain an argument broke
out behind a partition and presently a lovely Jewess appeared at an
interior door and scrutinized me with black hostile eyes.

"Nobody's in," she said. "Mr. Wolfshiem's gone to Chicago."

The first part of this was obviously untrue for someone had begun to
whistle "The Rosary," tunelessly, inside.

"Please say that Mr. Carraway wants to see him."

"I can't get him back from Chicago, can I?"

At this moment a voice, unmistakably Wolfshiem's called "Stella!"
from the other side of the door.

"Leave your name on the desk," she said quickly. "I'll give it to him
when he gets back."

"But I know he's there."

She took a step toward me and began to slide her hands indignantly up
and down her hips.

"You young men think you can force your way in here any time," she
scolded. "We're getting sickantired of it. When I say he's in Chicago,
he's in ChiCAgo."

I mentioned Gatsby.

"Oh--h!" She looked at me over again. "Will you just--what was your name?"

She vanished. In a moment Meyer Wolfshiem stood solemnly in the doorway,
holding out both hands. He drew me into his office, remarking in a
reverent voice that it was a sad time for all of us, and offered me
a cigar.

"My memory goes back to when I first met him," he said. "A young
major just out of the army and covered over with medals he got
in the war. He was so hard up he had to keep on wearing his uniform
because he couldn't buy some regular clothes. First time I saw him was
when he come into Winebrenner's poolroom at Forty-third Street and
asked for a job. He hadn't eat anything for a couple of days. 'Come on
have some lunch with me,' I sid. He ate more than four dollars' worth of
food in half an hour."

"Did you start him in business?" I inquired.

"Start him! I made him."

"Oh."

"I raised him up out of nothing, right out of the gutter. I saw right
away he was a fine appearing, gentlemanly young man, and when he told
me he was an Oggsford I knew I could use him good. I got him to join up
in the American Legion and he used to stand high there. Right off he
did some work for a client of mine up to Albany. We were so thick like
that in everything--" He held up two bulbous fingers "--always
together."

I wondered if this partnership had included the World's Series transaction
in 1919.

"Now he's dead," I said after a moment. "You were his closest friend,
so I know you'll want to come to his funeral this afternoon."

"I'd like to come."

"Well, come then."

The hair in his nostrils quivered slightly and as he shook his head his
eyes filled with tears.

"I can't do it--I can't get mixed up in it," he said.

"There's nothing to get mixed up in. It's all over now."

"When a man gets killed I never like to get mixed up in it in any way.
I keep out. When I was a young man it was different--if a friend of mine
died, no matter how, I stuck with them to the end. You may think that's
sentimental but I mean it--to the bitter end."

I saw that for some reason of his own he was determined not to come,
so I stood up.

"Are you a college man?" he inquired suddenly.

For a moment I thought he was going to suggest a "gonnegtion" but he
only nodded and shook my hand.

"Let us learn to show our friendship for a man when he is alive and not
after he is dead," he suggested. "After that my own rule is to let
everything alone."

When I left his office the sky had turned dark and I got back to West Egg
in a drizzle. After changing my clothes I went next door and found
Mr. Gatz walking up and down excitedly in the hall. His pride in his
son and in his son's possessions was continually increasing and now he
had something to show me.

"Jimmy sent me this picture." He took out his wallet with trembling
fingers. "Look there."

It was a photograph of the house, cracked in the corners and dirty with
many hands. He pointed out every detail to me eagerly. "Look there!" and
then sought admiration from my eyes. He had shown it so often that I think
it was more real to him now than the house itself.

"Jimmy sent it to me. I think it's a very pretty picture. It shows up
well."

"Very well. Had you seen him lately?"

"He come out to see me two years ago and bought me the house I live in
now. Of course we was broke up when he run off from home but I see now
there was a reason for it. He knew he had a big future in front of him.
And ever since he made a success he was very generous with me."

He seemed reluctant to put away the picture, held it for another minute,
lingeringly, before my eyes. Then he returned the wallet and pulled from
his pocket a ragged old copy of a book called "Hopalong Cassidy."

"Look here, this is a book he had when he was a boy. It just shows
you."

He opened it at the back cover and turned it around for me to see.
On the last fly-leaf was printed the word SCHEDULE, and the date
September 12th, 1906. And underneath:


Rise from bed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6.00       A.M.
Dumbbell exercise and wall-scaling . . . . . . 6.15-6.30   "
Study electricity, etc . . . . . . . . . . . . 7.15-8.15   "
Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8.30-4.30  P.M.
Baseball and sports . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4.30-5.00   "
Practice elocution, poise and how to attain it 5.00-6.00   "
Study needed inventions . . . . . . . . . . .  7.00-9.00   "

                GENERAL RESOLVES

No wasting time at Shafters or [a name, indecipherable]
No more smokeing or chewing
Bath every other day
Read one improving book or magazine per week
Save $5.00 [crossed out] $3.00 per week
Be better to parents


"I come across this book by accident," said the old man. "It just shows
you, don't it?"

"It just shows you."

"Jimmy was bound to get ahead. He always had some resolves like this or
something. Do you notice what he's got about improving his mind? He was
always great for that. He told me I et like a hog once and I beat him
for it."

He was reluctant to close the book, reading each item aloud and then
looking eagerly at me. I think he rather expected me to copy down the
list for my own use.

A little before three the Lutheran minister arrived from Flushing and
I began to look involuntarily out the windows for other cars. So did
Gatsby's father. And as the time passed and the servants came in and
stood waiting in the hall, his eyes began to blink anxiously and he
spoke of the rain in a worried uncertain way. The minister glanced
several times at his watch so I took him aside and asked him to wait
for half an hour. But it wasn't any use. Nobody came.


About five o'clock our procession of three cars reached the cemetery
and stopped in a thick drizzle beside the gate--first a motor hearse,
horribly black and wet, then Mr. Gatz and the minister and I in the
limousine, and, a little later, four or five servants and the postman
from West Egg in Gatsby's station wagon, all wet to the skin. As we
started through the gate into the cemetery I heard a car stop and then
the sound of someone splashing after us over the soggy ground. I looked
around. It was the man with owl-eyed glasses whom I had found
marvelling over Gatsby's books in the library one night three months
before.

I'd never seen him since then. I don't know how he knew about the
funeral or even his name. The rain poured down his thick glasses and
he took them off and wiped them to see the protecting canvas unrolled
from Gatsby's grave.

I tried to think about Gatsby then for a moment but he was already too
far away and I could only remember, without resentment, that Daisy
hadn't sent a message or a flower. Dimly I heard someone murmur
"Blessed are the dead that the rain falls on," and then the owl-eyed
man said "Amen to that," in a brave voice.

We straggled down quickly through the rain to the cars. Owl-Eyes spoke
to me by the gate.

"I couldn't get to the house," he remarked.

"Neither could anybody else."

"Go on!" He started. "Why, my God! they used to go there by the
hundreds."

He took off his glasses and wiped them again outside and in.

"The poor son-of-a-bitch," he said.


One of my most vivid memories is of coming back west from prep school
and later from college at Christmas time. Those who went farther than
Chicago would gather in the old dim Union Station at six o'clock of a
December evening with a few Chicago friends already caught up into
their own holiday gayeties to bid them a hasty goodbye. I remember
the fur coats of the girls returning from Miss This or That's and
the chatter of frozen breath and the hands waving overhead as
we caught sight of old acquaintances and the matchings of invitations:
"Are you going to the Ordways'? the Herseys'? the Schultzes'?"
and the long green tickets clasped tight in our gloved hands.
And last the murky yellow cars of the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul
Railroad looking cheerful as Christmas itself on the tracks beside
the gate.

When we pulled out into the winter night and the real snow, our snow,
began to stretch out beside us and twinkle against the windows, and the
dim lights of small Wisconsin stations moved by, a sharp wild brace
came suddenly into the air. We drew in deep breaths of it as we walked
back from dinner through the cold vestibules, unutterably aware of our
identity with this country for one strange hour before we melted
indistinguishably into it again.

That's my middle west--not the wheat or the prairies or the lost Swede
towns but the thrilling, returning trains of my youth and the street
lamps and sleigh bells in the frosty dark and the shadows of holly
wreaths thrown by lighted windows on the snow. I am part of that, a
little solemn with the feel of those long winters, a little complacent
from growing up in the Carraway house in a city where dwellings are
still called through decades by a family's name. I see now that this
has been a story of the West, after all--Tom and Gatsby, Daisy and
Jordan and I, were all Westerners, and perhaps we possessed some
deficiency in common which made us subtly unadaptable to Eastern life.

Even when the East excited me most, even when I was most keenly aware
of its superiority to the bored, sprawling, swollen towns beyond the
Ohio, with their interminable inquisitions which spared only the
children and the very old--even then it had always for me a quality of
distortion. West Egg especially still figures in my more fantastic
dreams. I see it as a night scene by El Greco: a hundred houses, at
once conventional and grotesque, crouching under a sullen, overhanging
sky and a lustreless moon. In the foreground four solemn men in dress
suits are walking along the sidewalk with a stretcher on which lies a
drunken woman in a white evening dress. Her hand, which dangles over
the side, sparkles cold with jewels. Gravely the men turn in at a
house--the wrong house. But no one knows the woman's name, and no one
cares.

After Gatsby's death the East was haunted for me like that, distorted
beyond my eyes' power of correction. So when the blue smoke of brittle
leaves was in the air and the wind blew the wet laundry stiff on the
line I decided to come back home.

There was one thing to be done before I left, an awkward, unpleasant
thing that perhaps had better have been let alone. But I wanted to
leave things in order and not just trust that obliging and indifferent
sea to sweep my refuse away. I saw Jordan Baker and talked over and
around what had happened to us together and what had happened
afterward to me, and she lay perfectly still listening in a big
chair.

She was dressed to play golf and I remember thinking she looked like a
good illustration, her chin raised a little, jauntily, her hair the
color of an autumn leaf, her face the same brown tint as the fingerless
glove on her knee. When I had finished she told me without comment that
she was engaged to another man. I doubted that though there were
several she could have married at a nod of her head but I pretended to
be surprised. For just a minute I wondered if I wasn't making a
mistake, then I thought it all over again quickly and got up to say
goodbye.

"Nevertheless you did throw me over," said Jordan suddenly. "You threw me
over on the telephone. I don't give a damn about you now but it was a
new experience for me and I felt a little dizzy for a while."

We shook hands.

"Oh, and do you remember--" she added, "----a conversation we had once
about driving a car?"

"Why--not exactly."

"You said a bad driver was only safe until she met another bad driver?
Well, I met another bad driver, didn't I? I mean it was careless of me
to make such a wrong guess. I thought you were rather an honest,
straightforward person. I thought it was your secret pride."

"I'm thirty," I said. "I'm five years too old to lie to myself and call
it honor."

She didn't answer. Angry, and half in love with her, and tremendously
sorry, I turned away.


One afternoon late in October I saw Tom Buchanan. He was walking ahead
of me along Fifth Avenue in his alert, aggressive way, his hands out a
little from his body as if to fight off interference, his head moving
sharply here and there, adapting itself to his restless eyes. Just as I
slowed up to avoid overtaking him he stopped and began frowning into
the windows of a jewelry store. Suddenly he saw me and walked back
holding out his hand.

"What's the matter, Nick? Do you object to shaking hands with me?"

"Yes. You know what I think of you."

"You're crazy, Nick," he said quickly. "Crazy as hell. I don't know
what's the matter with you."

"Tom," I inquired, "what did you say to Wilson that afternoon?"

He stared at me without a word and I knew I had guessed right about
those missing hours. I started to turn away but he took a step after me
and grabbed my arm.

"I told him the truth," he said. "He came to the door while we were
getting ready to leave and when I sent down word that we weren't in he
tried to force his way upstairs. He was crazy enough to kill me if I
hadn't told him who owned the car. His hand was on a revolver in his
pocket every minute he was in the house----" He broke off defiantly.
"What if I did tell him? That fellow had it coming to him. He threw
dust into your eyes just like he did in Daisy's but he was a tough
one. He ran over Myrtle like you'd run over a dog and never even stopped
his car."

There was nothing I could say, except the one unutterable fact
that it wasn't true.

"And if you think I didn't have my share of suffering--look here, when I
went to give up that flat and saw that damn box of dog biscuits sitting
there on the sideboard I sat down and cried like a baby. By God it
was awful----"

I couldn't forgive him or like him but I saw that what he had done was,
to him, entirely justified. It was all very careless and confused.
They were careless people, Tom and Daisy--they smashed up things and
creatures and then retreated back into their money or their vast
carelessness or whatever it was that kept them together, and let other
people clean up the mess they had made. . . .

I shook hands with him; it seemed silly not to, for I felt suddenly as
though I were talking to a child. Then he went into the jewelry store to
buy a pearl necklace--or perhaps only a pair of cuff buttons--rid of my
provincial squeamishness forever.


Gatsby's house was still empty when I left--the grass on his lawn had
grown as long as mine. One of the taxi drivers in the village never
took a fare past the entrance gate without stopping for a minute and
pointing inside; perhaps it was he who drove Daisy and Gatsby over to
East Egg the night of the accident and perhaps he had made a story
about it all his own. I didn't want to hear it and I avoided him when I
got off the train.

I spent my Saturday nights in New York because those gleaming, dazzling
parties of his were with me so vividly that I could still hear the
music and the laughter faint and incessant from his garden and the
cars going up and down his drive. One night I did hear a material car
there and saw its lights stop at his front steps. But I didn't
investigate. Probably it was some final guest who had been away at the
ends of the earth and didn't know that the party was over.

On the last night, with my trunk packed and my car sold to the grocer,
I went over and looked at that huge incoherent failure of a house once
more. On the white steps an obscene word, scrawled by some boy with a
piece of brick, stood out clearly in the moonlight and I erased it,
drawing my shoe raspingly along the stone. Then I wandered down to the
beach and sprawled out on the sand.

Most of the big shore places were closed now and there were hardly any
lights except the shadowy, moving glow of a ferryboat across the Sound.
And as the moon rose higher the inessential houses began to melt away
until gradually I became aware of the old island here that flowered
once for Dutch sailors' eyes--a fresh, green breast of the new world.
Its vanished trees, the trees that had made way for Gatsby's house, had
once pandered in whispers to the last and greatest of all human dreams;
for a transitory enchanted moment man must have held his breath in the
presence of this continent, compelled into an aesthetic contemplation
he neither understood nor desired, face to face for the last time in
history with something commensurate to his capacity for wonder.

And as I sat there brooding on the old, unknown world, I thought of
Gatsby's wonder when he first picked out the green light at the end of
Daisy's dock. He had come a long way to this blue lawn and his dream must
have seemed so close that he could hardly fail to grasp it. He did not
know that it was already behind him, somewhere back in that vast obscurity
beyond the city, where the dark fields of the republic rolled on under
the night.

Gatsby believed in the green light, the orgastic future that year by
year recedes before us. It eluded us then, but that's no matter--tomorrow
we will run faster, stretch out our arms farther. . . . And one fine
morning----

So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into
the past.



THE END




	
I.

One day when the young Mathers had been married for about a year, Jaqueline walked into the rooms of the hardware brokerage which her husband carried on with more than average success. At the open door of the inner office she stopped and said: "Oh, excuse me—" She had interrupted an apparently trivial yet somehow intriguing scene. A young man named Bronson whom she knew slightly was standing with her husband; the latter had risen from his desk. Bronson seized her husband's hand and shook it earnestly—something more than earnestly. When they heard Jaqueline's step in the doorway both men turned and Jaqueline saw that Bronson's eyes were red.

A moment later he came out, passing her with a somewhat embarrassed "How do you do?" She walked into her husband's office.

"What was Ed Bronson doing here?" she demanded curiously, and at once.

Jim Mather smiled at her, half shutting his gray eyes, and drew her quietly to a sitting position on his desk.

"He just dropped in for a minute," he answered easily. "How's everything at home?"

"All right." She looked at him with curiosity. "What did he want?" she insisted.

"Oh, he just wanted to see me about something."

"What?"

"Oh, just something. Business."

"Why were his eyes red?"

"Were they?" He looked at her innocently, and then suddenly they both began to laugh. Jaqueline rose and walked around the desk and plumped down into his swivel chair.

"You might as well tell me," she announced cheerfully, "because I'm going to stay right here till you do."

"Well—" he hesitated, frowning. "He wanted me to do him a little favor."

Then Jaqueline understood, or rather her mind leaped half accidentally to the truth.

"Oh." Her voice tightened a little. "You've been lending him some money."

"Only a little."

"How much?"

"Only three hundred."

"Only three hundred." The voice was of the texture of Bessemer cooled. "How much do we spend a month, Jim?"

"Why—why, about five or six hundred, I guess." He shifted uneasily. "Listen, Jack. Bronson'll pay that back. He's in a little trouble. He's made a mistake about a girl out in Woodmere—"

"And he knows you're famous for being an easy mark, so he comes to you," interrupted Jaqueline.

"No." He denied this formally.

"Don't you suppose I could use that three hundred dollars?" she demanded. "How about that trip to New York we couldn't afford last November?"

The lingering smile faded from Mather's face. He went over and shut the door to the outer office.

"Listen, Jack," he began, "you don't understand this. Bronson's one of the men I eat lunch with almost every day. We used to play together when we were kids, we went to school together. Don't you see that I'm just the person he'd be right to come to in trouble? And that's just why I couldn't refuse."

Jaqueline gave her shoulders a twist as if to shake off this reasoning.

"Well," she answered decidedly, "all I know is that he's no good. He's always lit and if he doesn't choose to work he has no business living off the work you do."

They were sitting now on either side of the desk, each having adopted the attitude of one talking to a child. They began their sentences with "Listen!" and their faces wore expressions of rather tried patience.

"If you can't understand, I can't tell you," Mather concluded, at the end of fifteen minutes, on what was, for him, an irritated key. "Such obligations do happen to exist sometimes among men and they have to be met. It's more complicated than just refusing to lend money, especially in a business like mine where so much depends on the good-will of men down-town."

Mather was putting on his coat as he said this. He was going home with her on the street-car to lunch. They were between automobiles—they had sold their old one and were going to get a new one in the spring.

Now the street-car, on this particular day, was distinctly unfortunate. The argument in the office might have been forgotten under other circumstances, but what followed irritated the scratch until it became a serious temperamental infection.

They found a seat near the front of the car. It was late February and an eager, unpunctilious sun was turning the scrawny street snow into dirty, cheerful rivulets that echoed in the gutters. Because of this the car was less full than usual—there was no one standing. The motorman had even opened his window and a yellow breeze was blowing the late breath of winter from the car.

It occurred pleasurably to Jaqueline that her husband sitting beside her was handsome and kind above other men. It was silly to try to change him. Perhaps Bronson might return the money after all, and anyhow three hundred dollars wasn't a fortune. Of course he had no business doing it—but then—

Her musings were interrupted as an eddy of passengers pushed up the aisle. Jaqueline wished they'd put their hands over their mouths when they coughed, and she hoped that Jim would get a new machine pretty soon. You couldn't tell what disease you'd run into in these trolleys.

She turned to Jim to discuss the subject—but Jim had stood up and was offering his seat to a woman who had been standing beside him in the aisle. The woman, without so much as a grunt, sat down. Jaqueline frowned.

The woman was about fifty and enormous. When she first sat down she was content merely to fill the unoccupied part of the seat, but after a moment she began to expand and to spread her great rolls of fat over a larger and larger area until the process took on the aspect of violent trespassing. When the car rocked in Jaqueline's direction the woman slid with it, but when it rocked back she managed by some exercise of ingenuity to dig in and hold the ground won.

Jaqueline caught her husband's eye—he was swaying on a strap—and in an angry glance conveyed to him her entire disapproval of his action. He apologized mutely and became urgently engrossed in a row of car cards. The fat woman moved once more against Jaqueline—she was now practically overlapping her. Then she turned puffy, disagreeable eyes full on Mrs. James Mather, and coughed rousingly in her face.

With a smothered exclamation Jaqueline got to her feet, squeezed with brisk violence past the fleshy knees, and made her way, pink with rage, toward the rear of the car. There she seized a strap, and there she was presently joined by her husband in a state of considerable alarm.

They exchanged no word, but stood silently side by side for ten minutes while a row of men sitting in front of them crackled their newspapers and kept their eyes fixed virtuously upon the day's cartoons.

When they left the car at last Jaqueline exploded.

"You big fool!" she cried wildly. "Did you see that horrible woman you gave your seat to? Why don't you consider me occasionally instead of every fat selfish washwoman you meet?"

"How should I know—"

But Jaqueline was as angry at him as she had ever been—it was unusual for any one to get angry at him.

"You didn't see any of those men getting up for me, did you? No wonder you were too tired to go out last Monday night. You'd probably given your seat to some—to some horrible, Polish wash woman that's strong as an ox and likes to stand up!"

They were walking along the slushy street stepping wildly into great pools of water. Confused and distressed, Mather could utter neither apology nor defense.

Jaqueline broke off and then turned to him with a curious light in her eyes. The words in which she couched her summary of the situation were probably the most disagreeable that had ever been addressed to him in his life.

"The trouble with you, Jim, the reason you're such an easy mark, is that you've got the ideas of a college freshman—you're a professional nice fellow."

II.

The incident and the unpleasantness were forgotten. Mather's vast good nature had smoothed over the roughness within an hour. References to it fell with a dying cadence throughout several days—then ceased and tumbled into the limbo of oblivion. I say "limbo," for oblivion is, unfortunately, never quite oblivious. The subject was drowned out by the fact that Jaqueline with her customary spirit and coolness began the long, arduous, up-hill business of bearing a child. Her natural traits and prejudices became intensified and she was less inclined to let things pass.

It was April now, and as yet they had not bought a car. Mather had discovered that he was saving practically nothing and that in another half-year he would have a family on his hands. It worried him. A wrinkle—small, tentative, undisturbing—appeared for the first time as a shadow around his honest, friendly eyes. He worked far into the spring twilight now, and frequently brought home with him the overflow from his office day. The new car would have to be postponed for a while.

April afternoon, and all the city shopping on Washington Street. Jaqueline walked slowly past the shops, brooding without fear or depression on the shape into which her life was now being arbitrarily forced. Dry summer dust was in the wind; the sun bounded cheerily from the plate-glass windows and made radiant gasoline rainbows where automobile drippings had formed pools on the street.

Jaqueline stopped. Not six feet from her a bright new sport roadster was parked at the curb. Beside it stood two men in conversation, and at the moment when she identified one of them as young Bronson she heard him say to the other in a casual tone:

"What do you think of it? Just got it this morning."

Jaqueline turned abruptly and walked with quick tapping steps to her husband's office. With her usual curt nod to the stenographer she strode by her to the inner room. Mather looked up from his desk in surprise at her brusque entry.

"Jim," she began breathlessly, "did Bronson ever pay you that three hundred?"

"Why—no," he answered hesitantly, "not yet. He was in here last week and he explained that he was a little bit hard up."

Her eyes gleamed with angry triumph.

"Oh, he did?" she snapped. "Well, he's just bought a new sport roadster that must have cost anyhow twenty-five hundred dollars."

He shook his head, unbelieving.

"I saw it," she insisted. "I heard him say he'd just bought it."

"He told me he was hard up," repeated Mather helplessly.

Jaqueline audibly gave up by heaving a profound noise, a sort of groanish sigh.

"He was using you! He knew you were easy and he was using you. Can't you see? He wanted you to buy him the car and you did!" She laughed bitterly. "He's probably roaring his sides out to think how easily he worked you."

"Oh, no," protested Mather with a shocked expression, "you must have mistaken somebody for him—"

"We walk—and he rides on our money," she interrupted excitedly. "Oh, it's rich—it's rich. If it wasn't so maddening, it'd be just absurd. Look here—!" Her voice grew sharper, more restrained—there was a touch of contempt in it now. "You spend half your time doing things for people who don't give a damn about you or what becomes of you. You give up your seat on the street-car to hogs, and come home too dead tired to even move. You're on all sorts of committees that take at least an hour a day out of your business and you don't get a cent out of them. You're—eternally—being used! I won't stand it! I thought I married a man—not a professional Samaritan who's going to fetch and carry for the world!"

As she finished her invective Jaqueline reeled suddenly and sank into a chair—nervously exhausted.

"Just at this time," she went on brokenly, "I need you. I need your strength and your health and your arms around me. And if you—if you just give it to every one, it's spread so thin when it reaches me—"

He knelt by her side, moving her tired young head until it lay against his shoulder.

"I'm sorry, Jaqueline," he said humbly, "I'll be more careful. I didn't realize what I was doing."

"You're the dearest person in the world," murmured Jaqueline huskily, "but I want all of you and the best of you for me."

He smoothed her hair over and over. For a few minutes they rested there silently, having attained a sort of Nirvana of peace and understanding. Then Jaqueline reluctantly raised her head as they were interrupted by the voice of Miss Clancy in the doorway.

"Oh, I beg your pardon."

"What is it?"

"A boy's here with some boxes. It's C. O. D."

Mather rose and followed Miss Clancy into the outer office.

"It's fifty dollars."

He searched his wallet—he had omitted to go to the bank that morning.

"Just a minute," he said abstractedly. His mind was on Jaqueline, Jaqueline who seemed forlorn in her trouble, waiting for him in the other room. He walked into the corridor, and opening the door of "Clayton and Drake, Brokers" across the way, swung wide a low gate and went up to a man seated at a desk.

"Morning, Fred," said Mather.

Drake, a little man of thirty with pince-nez and bald head, rose and shook hands.

"Morning, Jim. What can I do for you?"

"Why, a boy's in my office with some stuff C. O. D. and I haven't a cent. Can you let me have fifty till this afternoon?"

Drake looked closely at Mather. Then, slowly and startlingly, he shook his head—not up and down but from side to side.

"Sorry, Jim," he answered stiffly, "I've made a rule never to make a personal loan to anybody on any conditions. I've seen it break up too many friendships."

"What?"

Mather had come out of his abstraction now, and the monosyllable held an undisguised quality of shock. Then his natural tact acted automatically, springing to his aid and dictating his words though his brain was suddenly numb. His immediate instinct was to put Drake at ease in his refusal.

"Oh, I see." He nodded his head as if in full agreement, as if he himself had often considered adopting just such a rule. "Oh, I see how you feel. Well—I just—I wouldn't have you break a rule like that for anything. It's probably a good thing."

They talked for a minute longer. Drake justified his position easily; he had evidently rehearsed the part a great deal. He treated Mather to an exquisitely frank smile.

Mather went politely back to his office leaving Drake under the impression that the latter was the most tactful man in the city. Mather knew how to leave people with that impression. But when he entered his own office and saw his wife staring dismally out the window into the sunshine he clinched his hands, and his mouth moved in an unfamiliar shape.

"All right, Jack," he said slowly, "I guess you're right about most things, and I'm wrong as hell."

III.

During the next three months Mather thought back through many years. He had had an unusually happy life. Those frictions between man and man, between man and society, which harden most of us into a rough and cynical quarrelling trim, had been conspicuous by their infrequency in his life. It had never occurred to him before that he had paid a price for this immunity, but now he perceived how here and there, and constantly, he had taken the rough side of the road to avoid enmity or argument, or even question.

There was, for instance, much money that he had lent privately, about thirteen hundred dollars in all, which he realized, in his new enlightenment, he would never see again. It had taken Jaqueline's harder, feminine intelligence to know this. It was only now when he owed it to Jaqueline to have money in the bank that he missed these loans at all.

He realized too the truth of her assertions that he was continually doing favors—a little something here, a little something there; the sum total, in time and energy expended, was appalling. It had pleased him to do the favors. He reacted warmly to being thought well of, but he wondered now if he had not been merely indulging a selfish vanity of his own. In suspecting this, he was, as usual, not quite fair to himself. The truth was that Mather was essentially and enormously romantic.

He decided that these expenditures of himself made him tired at night, less efficient in his work, and less of a prop to Jaqueline, who, as the months passed, grew more heavy and bored, and sat through the long summer afternoons on the screened veranda waiting for his step at the end of the walk.

Lest that step falter, Mather gave up many things—among them the presidency of his college alumni association. He let slip other labors less prized. When he was put on a committee, men had a habit of electing him chairman and retiring into a dim background, where they were inconveniently hard to find. He was done with such things now. Also he avoided those who were prone to ask favors—fleeing a certain eager look that would be turned on him from some group at his club.

The change in him came slowly. He was not exceptionally unworldly—under other circumstances Drake's refusal of money would not have surprised him. Had it come to him as a story he would scarcely have given it a thought. But it had broken in with harsh abruptness upon a situation existing in his own mind, and the shock had given it a powerful and literal significance.

It was mid-August now, and the last of a baking week. The curtains of his wide-open office windows had scarcely rippled all the day, but lay like sails becalmed in warm juxtaposition with the smothering screens. Mather was worried—Jaqueline had over-tired herself, and was paying for it by violent sick headaches, and business seemed to have come to an apathetic standstill. That morning he had been so irritable with Miss Clancy that she had looked at him in surprise. He had immediately apologized, wishing afterward that he hadn't. He was working at high speed through this heat—why shouldn't she?

She came to his door now, and he looked up faintly frowning.

"Mr. Edward Lacy."

"All right," he answered listlessly. Old man Lacy—he knew him slightly. A melancholy figure—a brilliant start back in the eighties, and now one of the city's failures. He couldn't imagine what Lacy wanted unless he were soliciting.

"Good afternoon, Mr. Mather."

A little, solemn, gray-haired man stood on the threshold. Mather rose and greeted him politely.

"Are you busy, Mr. Mather?"

"Well, not so very." He stressed the qualifying word slightly.

Mr. Lacy sat down, obviously ill at ease. He kept his hat in his hands, and clung to it tightly as he began to speak.

"Mr. Mather, if you've got five minutes to spare, I'm going to tell you something that—that I find at present it's necessary for me to tell you."

Mather nodded. His instinct warned him that there was a favor to be asked, but he was tired, and with a sort of lassitude he let his chin sink into his hand, welcoming any distraction from his more immediate cares.

"You see," went on Mr. Lacy—Mather noticed that the hands which fingered at the hat were trembling—"back in eighty-four your father and I were very good friends. You've heard him speak of me no doubt."

Mather nodded.

"I was asked to be one of the pallbearers. Once we were—very close. It's because of that that I come to you now. Never before in my life have I ever had to come to any one as I've come to you now, Mr. Mather—come to a stranger. But as you grow older your friends die or move away or some misunderstanding separates you. And your children die unless you're fortunate enough to go first—and pretty soon you get to be alone, so that you don't have any friends at all. You're isolated." He smiled faintly. His hands were trembling violently now.

"Once upon a time almost forty years ago your father came to me and asked me for a thousand dollars. I was a few years older than he was, and though I knew him only slightly, I had a high opinion of him. That was a lot of money in those days, and he had no security—he had nothing but a plan in his head—but I liked the way he had of looking out of his eyes—you'll pardon me if I say you look not unlike him—so I gave it to him without security."

Mr. Lacy paused.

"Without security," he repeated. "I could afford it then. I didn't lose by it. He paid it back with interest at six per cent before the year was up."

Mather was looking down at his blotter, tapping out a series of triangles with his pencil. He knew what was coming now, and his muscles physically tightened as he mustered his forces for the refusal he would have to make.

"I'm now an old man, Mr. Mather," the cracked voice went on. "I've made a failure—I am a failure—only we needn't go into that now. I have a daughter, an unmarried daughter who lives with me. She does stenographic work and has been very kind to me. We live together, you know, on Selby Avenue—we have an apartment, quite a nice apartment."

The old man sighed quaveringly. He was trying—and at the same time was afraid—to get to his request. It was insurance, it seemed. He had a ten-thousand-dollar policy, he had borrowed on it up to the limit, and he stood to lose the whole amount unless he could raise four hundred and fifty dollars. He and his daughter had about seventy-five dollars between them. They had no friends—he had explained that—and they had found it impossible to raise the money. . . .

Mather could stand the miserable story no longer. He could not spare the money, but he could at least relieve the old man of the blistered agony of asking for it.

"I'm sorry, Mr. Lacy," he interrupted as gently as possible, "but I can't lend you that money."

"No?" The old man looked at him with faded, blinking eyes that were beyond all shock, almost, it seemed, beyond any human emotion except ceaseless care. The only change in his expression was that his mouth dropped slowly ajar.

Mather fixed his eyes determinately upon his blotter.

"We're going to have a baby in a few months, and I've been saving for that. It wouldn't be fair to my wife to take anything from her—or the child—right now."

His voice sank to a sort of mumble. He found himself saying platitudinously that business was bad—saying it with revolting facility.

Mr. Lacy made no argument. He rose without visible signs of disappointment. Only his hands were still trembling and they worried Mather. The old man was apologetic—he was sorry to have bothered him at a time like this. Perhaps something would turn up. He had thought that if Mr. Mather did happen to have a good deal extra—why, he might be the person to go to because he was the son of an old friend.

As he left the office he had trouble opening the outer door. Miss Clancy helped him. He went shabbily and unhappily down the corridor with his faded eyes blinking and his mouth still faintly ajar.

Jim Mather stood by his desk, and put his hand over his face and shivered suddenly as if he were cold. But the five-o'clock air outside was hot as a tropic noon.

IV.

The twilight was hotter still an hour later as he stood at the corner waiting for his car. The trolley-ride to his house was twenty-five minutes, and he bought a pink-jacketed newspaper to appetize his listless mind. Life had seemed less happy, less glamourous of late. Perhaps he had learned more of the world's ways—perhaps its glamour was evaporating little by little with the hurried years.

Nothing like this afternoon, for instance, had ever happened to him before. He could not dismiss the old man from his mind. He pictured him plodding home in the weary heat—on foot, probably, to save carfare—opening the door of a hot little flat, and confessing to his daughter that the son of his friend had not been able to help him out. All evening they would plan helplessly until they said good night to each other—father and daughter, isolated by chance in this world—and went to lie awake with a pathetic loneliness in their two beds.

Mather's street-car came along, and he found a seat near the front, next to an old lady who looked at him grudgingly as she moved over. At the next block a crowd of girls from the department-store district flowed up the aisle, and Mather unfolded his paper. Of late he had not indulged his habit of giving up his seat. Jaqueline was right—the average young girl was able to stand as well as he was. Giving up his seat was silly, a mere gesture. Nowadays not one woman in a dozen even bothered to thank him.

It was stifling hot in the car, and he wiped the heavy damp from his forehead. The aisle was thickly packed now, and a woman standing beside his seat was thrown momentarily against his shoulder as the car turned a corner. Mather took a long breath of the hot foul air, which persistently refused to circulate, and tried to centre his mind on a cartoon at the top of the sporting page.

"Move for'ard ina car, please!" The conductor's voice pierced the opaque column of humanity with raucous irritation. "Plen'y of room for'ard!"

The crowd made a feeble attempt to shove forward, but the unfortunate fact that there was no space into which to move precluded any marked success. The car turned another corner, and again the woman next to Mather swayed against his shoulder. Ordinarily he would have given up his seat if only to avoid this reminder that she was there. It made him feel unpleasantly cold-blooded. And the car was horrible—horrible. They ought to put more of them on the line these sweltering days.

For the fifth time he looked at the pictures in the comic strip. There was a beggar in the second picture, and the wavering image of Mr. Lacy persistently inserted itself in the beggar's place. God! Suppose the old man really did starve to death—suppose he threw himself into the river.

"Once," thought Mather, "he helped my father. Perhaps, if he hadn't, my own life would have been different than it has been. But Lacy could afford it then—and I can't."

To force out the picture of Mr. Lacy, Mather tried to think of Jaqueline. He said to himself over and over that he would have been sacrificing Jaqueline to a played-out man who had had his chance and failed. Jaqueline needed her chance now as never before.

Mather looked at his watch. He had been on the car ten minutes. Fifteen minutes still to ride, and the heat increasing with breathless intensity. The woman swayed against him once more, and looking out the window he saw that they were turning the last down-town corner.

It occurred to him that perhaps he ought, after all, to give the woman his seat—her last sway toward him had been a particularly tired sway. If he were sure she was an older woman—but the texture of her dress as it brushed his hand gave somehow the impression that she was a young girl. He did not dare look up to see. He was afraid of the appeal that might look out of her eyes if they were old eyes or the sharp contempt if they were young.

For the next five minutes his mind worked in a vague suffocated way on what now seemed to him the enormous problem of whether or not to give her the seat. He felt dimly that doing so would partially atone for his refusal to Mr. Lacy that afternoon. It would be rather terrible to have done those two cold-blooded things in succession—and on such a day.

He tried the cartoon again, but in vain. He must concentrate on Jaqueline. He was dead tired now, and if he stood up he would be more tired. Jaqueline would be waiting for him, needing him, She would be depressed and she would want him to hold her quietly in his arms for an hour after dinner. When he was tired this was rather a strain. And afterward when they went to bed she would ask him from time to time to get her her medicine or a glass of ice-water. He hated to show any weariness in doing these things. She might notice and, needing something, refrain from asking for it.

The girl in the aisle swayed against him once more—this time it was more like a sag. She was tired, too. Well, it was weary to work. The ends of many proverbs that had to do with toil and the long day floated fragmentarily through his mind. Everybody in the world was tired—this woman, for instance, whose body was sagging so wearily, so strangely against his. But his home came first and his girl that he loved was waiting for him there. He must keep his strength for her, and he said to himself over and over that he would not give up his seat.

Then he heard a long sigh, followed by a sudden exclamation, and he realized that the girl was no longer leaning against him. The exclamation multiplied into a clatter of voices—then came a pause—then a renewed clatter that travelled down the car in calls and little staccato cries to the conductor. The bell clanged violently, and the hot car jolted to a sudden stop.

"Girl fainted up here!"

"Too hot for her!"

"Just keeled right over!"

"Get back there! Gangway, you!"

The crowd eddied apart. The passengers in front squeezed back and those on the rear platform temporarily disembarked. Curiosity and pity bubbled out of suddenly conversing groups. People tried to help, got in the way. Then the bell rang and voices rose stridently again.

"Get her out all right?"

"Say, did you see that?"

"This damn' company ought to—"

"Did you see the man that carried her out? He was pale as a ghost, too."

"Yes, but did you hear—?"

"What?"

"That fella. That pale fella that carried her out. He was sittin' beside her—he says she's his wife!"

The house was quiet. A breeze pressed back the dark vine leaves of the veranda, letting in thin yellow rods of moonlight on the wicker chairs. Jaqueline rested placidly on the long settee with her head in his arms. After a while she stirred lazily; her hand reaching up patted his cheek.

"I think I'll go to bed now. I'm so tired. Will you help me up?"

He lifted her and then laid her back among the pillows.

"I'll be with you in a minute," he said gently. "Can you wait for just a minute?"

He passed into the lighted living-room, and she heard him thumbing the pages of a telephone directory; then she listened as he called a number.

"Hello, is Mr. Lacy there? Why—yes, it is pretty important—if he hasn't gone to sleep."

A pause. Jaqueline could hear restless sparrows splattering through the leaves of the magnolia over the way. Then her husband at the telephone:

"Is this Mr. Lacy? Oh, this is Mather. Why—why, in regard to that matter we talked about this afternoon, I think I'll be able to fix that up after all." He raised his voice a little as though some one at the other end found it difficult to hear. "James Mather's son, I said—About that little matter this afternoon—"

THE END


	
Sitting by the window and staring out into the early autumn dusk, San Juan Chandler remembered only that Noel was coming tomorrow; but when, with a romantic sound that was half gasp, half sigh, he turned from the window, snapped on the light and looked at himself in the mirror, his expression became more materially complicated. He leaned closer. Delicacy balked at the abominable word "pimple," but some such blemish had undoubtedly appeared on his cheek within the last hour, and now formed, with a pair from last week, a distressing constellation of three. Going into the bathroom adjoining his room—Juan had never possessed a bathroom to himself before—he opened a medicine closet, and, after peering about, carefully extracted a promising-looking jar of black ointment and covered each slight protuberance with a black gluey mound. Then, strangely dotted, he returned to the bedroom, put out the light and resumed his vigil over the shadowy garden.

He waited. That roof among the trees on the hill belonged to Noel Garneau's house. She was coming back to it tomorrow; he would see her there...A loud clock on the staircase inside struck seven. Juan went to the glass and removed the ointment with a handkerchief. To his chagrin the spots were still there, even slightly irritated from the chemical sting of the remedy. That settled it—no more chocolate malted milks or eating between meals during his visit to Culpepper Bay. Taking the lid from the jar of talcum he had observed on the dressing table, he touched the laden puff to his cheek. Immediately his brows and lashes bloomed with snow and he coughed chokingly, observing that the triangle of humiliation was still observable upon his otherwise handsome face.

"Disgusting," he muttered to himself. "I never saw anything so disgusting." At twenty, such childish phenomena should be behind him.

Downstairs three gongs, melodious and metallic, hummed and sang. He listened for a moment, fascinated. Then he wiped the powder from his face, ran a comb through his yellow hair and went down to dinner.

Dinner at Cousin Cora's he had found embarrassing. She was so stiff and formal about things like that, and so familiar about Juan's private affairs. The first night of his visit he had tried politely to pull out her chair and bumped into the maid; the second night he remembered the experience—but so did the maid, and Cousin Cora seated herself unassisted. At home Juan was accustomed to behave as he liked; like all children of deferent and indulgent mothers, he lacked both confidence and good manners. Tonight there were guests. "This is San Juan Chandler, my cousin's son—Mrs Holyoke—and Mr. Holyoke."

The phrase "my cousin's son" seemed to explain him away, seemed to account for his being in Miss Chandler's house: "You understand—we must have our poor relations with us occasionally." But a tone which implied that would be rude—and certainly Cousin Cora, with all her social position, couldn't be rude.

Mr and Mrs Holyoke acknowledged the introduction politely and coolly and dinner was served.

The conversation, dictated by Cousin Cora, bored Juan. It was about the garden and about her father, for whom she lived and who was dying slowly and unwillingly upstairs. Towards the salad Juan was wedged into the conversation by a question from Mr Holyoke and a quick look from his cousin.

"I'm just staying for a week," he answered politely; "then I've got to go home because college opens pretty soon."

"Where are you at college?"

Juan named his college, adding almost apologetically, "You see, my father went there."

He wished that he could have answered that he was at Yale or Princeton, where he wanted to go.

He was prominent at Henderson and belonged to a good fraternity, but it annoyed him when people occasionally failed to recognize his alma mater's name.

"I suppose you've met all the young people here," supposed Mrs Holyoke, "—my daughter?"

"Oh, yes—" her daughter was the dumpy, ugly girl with the thick spectacles. "Oh, yes." And he added, "I knew some people who lived here before I came."

"The little Garneau girl," explained Cousin Cora.

"Oh, yes. Noel Garneau," agreed Mrs Holyoke. "Her mother's a great beauty. How old is Noel now? She must be—"

"Seventeen," supplied Juan; "but she's old for her age."

"Juan met her on a ranch last summer. They were on a ranch together. What is it that they call those ranches, Juan?"

"Dude ranches."

"Dude ranches. Juan and another boy worked for their board." Juan saw no reason why Cousin Cora should have supplied this information; she continued on an even more annoying note: "Noel's mother sent her out there to keep her out of mischief, but Juan says the ranch was pretty gay itself."

Mr Holyoke supplied a welcome change of subject.

"Your name is—" he inquired, smiling and curious.

"San Juan Chandler. My father was wounded in the battle of San Juan Hill and so they called me after it—like Kenesaw Mountain Landis."

He had explained this so many times that the sentences rolled off automatically—in school he had been called Santy, in college he was Don.

"You must come to dinner while you're here," said Mrs Holyoke vaguely.

The conversation slipped away from him as he realized freshly, strongly, that Noel would arrive tomorrow. And she was coming because he was here. She had cut short a visit in the Adirondacks on receipt of his letter. Would she like him now—in this place that was so different from Montana? There was a spaciousness, an air of money and pleasure about Culpepper for which San Juan Chandler—a shy, handsome, spoiled, brilliant, Penniless boy from a small Ohio city—was unprepared. At home, where father was a retired clergyman, Juan went with the nice people. He didn't realize until this visit to a fashionable New England resort that where there are enough rich families to form a self-sufficient and exclusive group, such a group is invariably formed. On the dude ranch they had all dressed alike; here his ready-made Prince of Wales suit seemed exaggerated in style, his hat correct only in theory—an imitation hat—his very ties only projections of the ineffable Platonic ties which were worn here at Culpepper Bay. Yet all the differences were so small that he was unable quite to discern them.

But from the morning three days ago when he had stepped off the train into a group of young people who were waiting at the station for some friend of their own, he had been uneasy; and Cousin Cora's introductions, which seemed to foist him horribly upon whomever he was introduced to, did not lessen his discomfort. He thought mechanically that she was being kind, and considered himself lucky that her invitation had coincided with his wild desire to see Noel Garneau again. He did not realize that in three days he had come to hate Cousin Cora's cold and snobbish patronage.

Noel's fresh, adventurous voice on the telephone next morning made his own voice quiver with nervous happiness. She would call for him at two and they would spend the afternoon together. All morning he lay in the garden, trying unsuccessfully to renew his summer tan in the mild lemon light of the September sun, sitting up quickly whenever he heard the sound of Cousin Cora's garden shears at the end of a neighbouring border. He was back in his room, still meddling desperately with the white powder puff, when Noel's roadster stopped outside and she came up the front walk. Noel's eyes were dark blue, almost violet, and her lips, Juan had often thought, were like very small, very soft, red cushions—only cushions sounded all wrong, for they were really the most delicate lips in the world. When she talked they parted to the shape of "Oo!" and her eyes opened wide as though she was torn between tears and laughter at the poignancy of what she was saying. Already, at seventeen, she knew that men hung on her words in a way that frightened her. To Juan her most indifferent remarks assumed a highly ponderable significance and begot an intensity in him—a fact which Noel had several times found somewhat of a strain. He ran downstairs, down the gravel path towards her. "Noel, my dear," he wanted so much to say, "you are the loveliest thing—the loveliest thing. My heart turns over when I see your beautiful face and smell that sweet fresh smell you have around you." That would have been the precious, the irreplaceable truth. Instead he faltered, "Why, hello, Noel! How are you?...Well, I certainly am glad. Well, is this your car? What kind is it? Well, you certainly look fine." And he couldn't look at her, because when he did his face seemed to him to be working idiotically—like someone else's face. He got in, they drove off and he made a mighty effort to compose himself; but as her hand left the steering wheel to fall lightly on his, a perverse instinct made him jerk his hand away. Noel perceived the embarrassment and was puzzled and—sorry.

They went to the tennis tournament at the Culpepper Club. He was so little aware of anything except Noel that later he told Cousin Cora they hadn't seen the tennis, and believed it himself. Afterwards they loitered about the grounds, stopped by innumerable people who welcomed Noel home. Two men made him uneasy—one a small handsome youth of his own age with shining brown eyes that were bright as the glass eyes of a stuffed owl; the other a tall, languid dandy of twenty-five who was introduced to her, Juan rightly deduced, at his own request.

When they were in a group of girls he was more comfortable. He was able to talk, because being with Noel gave him confidence before these others, and his confidence before the others made him more confident with Noel. The situation improved.

There was one girl, a sharp, pretty blonde named Holly Morgan, with whom he had spent some facetiously sentimental hours the day before, and in order to show Noel that he had been able to take care of himself before her return he made a point of talking aside to Holly Morgan. Holly was not responsive. Juan was Noel's property, and though Holly liked him, she did not like him nearly well enough to annoy Noel.

"What time do you want me for dinner, Noel?" she asked.

"Eight o'clock," said Noel. "Billy Harper'll call for you."

Juan felt a twinge of disappointment. He had thought that he and Noel were to be alone for dinner; that afterwards they would have a long talk on the dark veranda and he would kiss her lips as he had upon that never-to-be-forgotten Montana night, and give her his DKE pin to wear. Perhaps the others would leave early—he had told Holly Morgan of his love for Noel; she should have sense enough to know.

At twilight Noel dropped him at Miss Chandler's gate, lingered for a moment with the engine cut off. The promise of the evening—the first lights in the houses along the bay, the sound of a remote piano, the little coolness in the wind—swung them both up suddenly into that paradise which Juan, drunk with ecstasy and terror, had been unable to evoke.

"Are you glad to see me?" she whispered.

"Am I glad?" The words trembled on his tongue. Miserably he struggled to bend his emotion into a phrase, a look, a gesture, but his mind chilled at the thought that nothing, nothing, nothing could express what he felt in his heart.

"You embarrass me," he said wretchedly. "I don't know what to say." Noel waited, attuned to what she expected, sympathetic, but too young quite to see that behind the mask of egotism, of moody childishness, which the intensity of Juan's devotion compelled him to wear, there was a tremendous emotion.

"Don't be embarrassed," Noel said. She was listening to the music now a tune they had danced to in the Adirondacks. The wings of a trance folded about her and the inscrutable someone who waited always in the middle distance loomed down over her with passionate words and dark romantic eyes. Almost mechanically, she started the engine and slipped the gear into first.

"At eight o'clock," she said, almost abstractedly. "Good-bye, Juan." The car moved off down the road. At the corner she turned and waved her hand and Juan waved back, happier than he had ever been in his life, his soul dissolved to a sweet gas that buoyed up his body like a balloon. Then the roadster was out of sight and, all unaware, he had lost her.

II

Cousin Cora's chauffeur took him to Noel's door. The other male guest, Billy Harper, was, he discovered, the young man with the bright brown eyes whom he had met that afternoon. Juan was afraid of him; he was on such familiar, facetious terms with the two girls—towards Noel his attitude seemed almost irreverent—that Juan was slighted during the conversation at dinner. They talked of the Adirondacks and they all seemed to know the group who had been there. Noel and Holly spoke of boys at Cambridge and New Haven and of how wonderful it was that they were going to school in New York this whiter. Juan meant to invite Noel to the autumn dance at his college, but he thought that he had better wait and do it in a letter, later on. He was glad when dinner was over.

The girls went upstairs. Juan and Billy Harper smoked.

"She certainly is attractive," broke out Juan suddenly, his repression bursting into words.

"Who? Noel?"

"Yes."

"She's a nice girl," agreed Harper gravely.

Juan fingered the DKE pin in his pocket.

"She's wonderful," he said. "I like Holly Morgan pretty well—I was handing her a sort of line yesterday afternoon—but Noel's really the most attractive girl I ever knew."

Harper looked at him curiously, but Juan, released from the enforced and artificial smile of dinner, continued enthusiastically: "Of course it's silly to fool with two girls. I mean, you've got to be careful not to get in too deep."

Billy Harper didn't answer. Noel and Holly came downstairs. Holly suggested bridge, but Juan didn't play bridge, so they sat talking by the fire. In some fashion Noel and Billy Harper became involved in a conversation about dates and friends, and Juan began boasting to Holly Morgan, who sat beside him on the sofa.

"You must come to a prom at college," he said suddenly. "Why don't you? It's a small college, but we have the best bunch in our house and the proms are fun."

"I'd love it."

"You'd only have to meet the people in our house."

"What's that?

"DKE." He drew the pin from his pocket. "See?"

Holly examined it, laughed and handed it back.

"I wanted to go to Yale," he went on, "but my family always go to the same place."

"I love Yale," said Holly.

"Yes," he agreed vaguely, half hearing her, his mind moving between himself and Noel. "You must come up. I'll write you about it."

Time passed. Holly played the piano. Noel took a ukulele from the top of the piano, strummed it and hummed. Billy Harper turned the pages of the music. Juan listened, restless, unamused. Then they sauntered out into the dark garden, and finding himself beside Noel at last, Juan walked her quickly ahead until they were alone.

"Noel," he whispered, "here's my Deke pin. I want you to have it."

She looked at him expressionlessly.

"I saw you offering it to Holly Morgan," she said.

"Noel," he cried in alarm, "I wasn't offering it to her. I just showed it to her. Why, Noel, do you think—"

"You invited her to the prom."

"I didn't. I was just being nice to her."

The others were close behind. She took the Deke pin quickly and put her finger to his lips in a facile gesture of caress.

He did not realize that she had not been really angry about the pin or the prom, and that his unfortunate egotism was forfeiting her interest.

At eleven o'clock Holly said she must go, and Billy Harper drove his car to the front door.

"I'm going to stay a few minutes if you don't mind," said Juan, standing in the door with Noel. "I can walk home."

Holly and Billy Harper drove away. Noel and Juan strolled back into the drawing-room, where she avoided the couch and sat down in a chair.

"Let's go out on the veranda," suggested Juan uncertainly.

"Why?"

"Please, Noel."

Unwillingly she obeyed. They sat side by side on a canvas settee and he put his arm around her.

"Kiss me," he whispered. She had never seemed so desirable to him before.

"No."

"Why not?"

"I don't want to. I don't kiss people any more."

"But—me?" he demanded incredulously.

"I've kissed too many people. I'll have nothing left if I keep on kissing people."

"But you'll kiss me, Noel?"

"Why?"

He could not even say, "Because I love you." But he could say it, he knew that he could say it, when she was in his arms.

"If I kiss you once, will you go home?"

"Why, do you want me to go home?"

"I'm tired. I was travelling last night and I can never sleep on a train. Can you? I can never—"

Her tendency to leave the subject willingly made him frantic.

"Then kiss me once," he insisted.

"You promise?"

"You kiss me first."

"No, Juan, you promise first."

"Don't you want to kiss me?"

"Oh-h-h!" she groaned.

With gathering anxiety Juan promised and took her in his arms. For one moment at the touch of her lips, the feeling of her, of Noel, close to him, he forgot the evening, forgot himself—rather became the inspired, romantic self that she had known. But it was too late. Her hands were on his shoulders, pushing him away.

"You promised."

"Noel—"

She got up. Confused and unsatisfied, he followed her to the door.

"Noel—"

"Good night, Juan."

As they stood on the doorstep her eyes rose over the line of dark trees towards the ripe harvest moon. Some glowing thing would happen to her soon, she thought, her mind far away. Something that would dominate her, snatch her up out of life, helpless, ecstatic, exalted.

"Good night, Noel. Noel, please—"

"Good night, Juan. Remember we're going swimming tomorrow. It's wonderful to see you again. Good night."

She closed the door.

III

Towards morning he awoke from a broken sleep, wondering if she had not kissed him because of the three spots on his cheek. He turned on the light and looked at them. Two were almost invisible. He went into the bathroom, doused all three with the black ointment and crept back into bed. Cousin Cora greeted him stiffly at breakfast next morning.

"You kept your great-uncle awake last night," she said. "He heard you moving around in your room."

"I only moved twice," he said unhappily. "I'm terribly sorry."

"He has to have his sleep, you know. We all have to be more considerate when there's someone sick. Young people don't always think of that. And he was so unusually well when you came."

It was Sunday, and they were to go swimming at Holly Morgan's house, where a crowd always collected on the bright easy beach. Noel called for him, but they arrived before any of his half-humble remarks about the night before had managed to attract her attention. He spoke to those he knew and was introduced to others, made ill at ease again by their cheerful familiarity with one another, by the correct informality of their clothes. He was sure they noticed that he had worn only one suit during his visit to Culpepper Bay, varying it with white flannel trousers. Both pairs of trousers were out of press now, and after keeping his greatuncle awake he had not felt like bothering Cousin Cora about it at breakfast.

Again he tried to talk to Holly, with the vague idea of making Noel jealous, but Holly was busy and she eluded him. It was ten minutes before he extricated himself from a conversation with the obnoxious Miss Holyoke. At the moment he managed this he perceived to his horror that Noel was gone.

When he last saw her she had been engaged in a light but somehow intent conversation with the tall well-dressed stranger she had met yesterday. Now she wasn't in sight. Miserable and horribly alone, he strolled up and down the beach, trying to look as if he were having a good time, seeming to watch the bathers, but keeping a sharp eye out for Noel. He felt that his self-conscious perambulations were attracting unbearable attention and sat down unhappily on a sand dune beside Billy Harper. But Billy Harper was neither cordial nor communicative, and after a minute hailed a man across the beach and went to talk to him.

Juan was desperate. When, suddenly, he spied Noel coming down from the house with the tall man, he stood up with a jerk, convinced that his features were working wildly. She waved at him.

"A buckle came off my shoe," she called. "I went to have it put on. I thought you'd gone in swimming."

He stood perfectly still, not trusting his voice to answer. He understood that she was through with him; there was someone else. Immediately he wanted above all things to be away. As they came nearer, the tall man glanced at him negligently and resumed his vivacious, intimate conversation with Noel. A group suddenly closed around them.

Keeping the group in the corner of his eye, Juan began to move carefully and steadily towards the gate that led to the road. He started when the casual voice of a man behind him said, "Going?" and he answered, "Got to," with what purported to be a reluctant nod. Once behind the shelter of the parked cars, he began to run, slowed down as several chauffeurs looked at him curiously. It was a mile and a half to the Chandler house and the day was broiling, but he walked fast lest Noel, leaving the party—"With that man," he thought bitterly—should overtake him trudging along the road. That would be more than he could bear.

There was the sound of a car behind him. Immediately Juan left the road and sought concealment behind a convenient hedge. It was no one from the party, but thereafter he kept an eye out for available cover, walking fast, or even running, over unpromising open spaces.

He was within sight of his cousin's house when it happened. Hot and dishevelled, he had scarcely flattened himself against the back of a tree when Noel's roadster, with the tall man at the wheel, flashed by down the road. Juan stepped out and looked after them. Then, blind with sweat and misery, he continued on towards home.

IV

At luncheon, Cousin Cora looked at him closely.

"What's the trouble?" she inquired. "Did something go wrong at the beach this morning?"

"Why, no," he exclaimed in simulated astonishment. "What made you think that?"

"You have such a funny look. I thought perhaps you'd had some trouble with the little Garneau girl."

He hated her.

"No, not at all."

"You don't want to get any idea in your head about her," said Cousin Cora.

"What do you mean?" He knew with a start what she meant.

"Any ideas about Noel Garneau. You've got your own way to make." Juan's face burned. He was unable to answer. "I say that in all kindness. You're not in any position to think anything serious about Noel Garneau."

Her implications cut deeper than her words. Oh, he had seen well enough that he was not essentially of Noel's sort, that being nice in Akron wasn't enough at Culpepper Bay. He had that realization that comes to all boys in his position that for every advantage—that was what his mother called this visit to Cousin Cora's—he paid a harrowing price in self-esteem. But a world so hard as to admit such an intolerable state of affairs was beyond his comprehension. His mind rejected it all completely, as it had rejected the dictionary name for the three spots on his face. He wanted to let go, to vanish, to be home. He determined to go home tomorrow, but after this heart-rending conversation he decided to put off the announcement until tonight.

That afternoon he took a detective story from the library and retired upstairs to read on his bed. He finished the book by four o'clock and came down to change it for another. Cousin Cora was on the veranda arranging three tables for tea.

"I thought you were at the club," she exclaimed in surprise. "I thought you'd gone up to the club."

"I'm tired," he said. "I thought I'd read."

"Tired!" she exclaimed. "A boy your age! You ought to be out in the open air playing golf—that's why you have that spot on your cheek—" Juan winced; his experiments with the black salve had irritated it to a sharp redness—"instead of lying around reading on a day like this."

"I haven't any clubs," said Juan hurriedly.

"Mr Holyoke told you you could use his brother's clubs. He spoke to the caddie master. Run on now. You'll find lots of young people up there who want to play. I'll begin to think you're not having a good time."

In agony Juan saw himself dubbing about the course alone—seeing Noel coming under his eye. He never wanted to see Noel again except out in Montana—some bright day, when she would come saying, "Juan, I never knew—never understood what your love was."

Suddenly he remembered that Noel had gone into Boston for the afternoon. She would not be there. The horror of playing alone suddenly vanished.

The caddie master looked at him disapprovingly as he displayed his guest card, and Juan nervously bought a half-dozen balls at a dollar each in an effort to neutralize the imagined hostility. On the first tee he glanced around. It was after four and there was no one in sight except two old men practising drives from the top of a little hill. As he addressed his ball he heard someone come up on the tee behind him and he breathed easier at the sharp crack that sent his ball a hundred and fifty yards down the fairway.

"Playing alone?"

He looked around. A stout man of fifty, with a huge face, high forehead, long wide upper lip and great undershot jaw, was taking a driver from a bulging bag. "Why—yes."

"Mind if I go round with you?"

"Not at all."

Juan greeted the suggestion with a certain gloomy relief. They were evenly matched, the older man's steady short shots keeping pace with Juan's occasional brilliancy. Not until the seventh hole did the conversation rise above the fragmentary boasting and formalized praise which forms the small talk of golf.

"Haven't seen you around before."

"I'm just visiting here," Juan explained, "staying with my cousin, Miss Chandler."

"Oh yes—know Miss Chandler very well. Nice old snob."

"What?" inquired Juan.

"Nice old snob, I said. No offence...Your honour, I think." Not for several holes did Juan venture to comment on his partner's remark.

"What do you mean when you say she's a nice old snob?" he inquired with interest.

"Oh, it's an old quarrel between Miss Chandler and me," answered the older man brusquely.

"She's an old friend of my wife's. When we were married and came out to Culpepper Bay for the summer, she tried to freeze us out. Said my wife had no business marrying me. I was an outsider."

"What did you do?"

"We just let her alone. She came round, but naturally I never had much love for her. She even tried to put her oar in before we were married." He laughed. "Cora Chandler of Boston—how she used to boss the girls around in those days! At twenty-five she had the sharpest tongue in Back Bay. They were old people there, you know—Emerson and Whittier to dinner and all that. My wife belonged to that crowd too. I was from the Middle West...Oh, too bad. I should have stopped talking. That makes me two up again."

Suddenly Juan wanted to present his case to this man—not quite as it was, but adorned with a dignity and significance it did not so far possess. It began to round out in his mind as the sempiternal struggle of the poor young man against a snobbish, purse-proud world. This new aspect was comforting, and he put out of his mind the less pleasant realization that, superficially at least, money hadn't entered into it. He knew in his heart that it was his unfortunate egotism that had repelled Noel, his embarrassment, his absurd attempt to make her jealous with Holly. Only indirectly was his poverty concerned; under different circumstances it might have given a touch of romance.

"I know exactly how you must have felt," he broke out suddenly as they walked toward the tenth tee. "I haven't any money and I'm in love with a girl who has—and it seems as if every busybody in the world is determined to keep us apart."

For a moment Juan believed this. His companion looked at him sharply

"Does the girl care about you?" he inquired.

"Yes."

"Well, go after her, young man. All the money in this world hasn't been made by a long shot."

"I'm still in college," said Juan, suddenly taken aback.

"Won't she wait for you?"

"I don't know. You see, the pressure's pretty strong. Her family want her to many a rich man—" His mind visualized the tall well-dressed stranger of this morning and invention soared. "An easterner that's visiting here, and I'm afraid they'll all sweep her off her feet. If it's not this man, it's the next."

His friend considered.

"You can't have everything, you know," he said presently. "I'm the last man to advise a young man to leave college, especially when I don't know anything about him or his abilities; but if it's going to break you up not to get her, you better think about getting to work."

"I've been considering that," said Juan frowning. The idea was ten seconds old in his mind.

"All girls are crazy now, anyhow," broke out the older man. "They begin to think of men at fifteen, and by the time they're seventeen they run off with the chauffeur next door."

"That's true," agreed Juan absently. He was absorbed in the previous suggestion. "The trouble is that I don't live in Boston. If I left college I'd want to be near her, because it might be a few months before I'd be able to support her. And I don't know how I'd go about getting a position in Boston."

"If you're Cora Chandler's cousin, that oughtn't to be difficult. She knows everybody in town. And the girl's family will probably help you out, once you've got her—some of them are fools enough for anything in these crazy days."

"I wouldn't like that."

"Rich girls can't live on air," said the older man grimly.

They played for a while in silence. Suddenly, as they approached a green, Juan's companion turned to him frowning.

"Look here, young man," he said, "I don't know whether you are really thinking of leaving college or whether I've just put the idea in your head. If I have, forget it. Go home and talk it over with your family. Do what they tell you to."

"My father's dead."

"Well, then ask your mother. She's got your best interest at heart."

His attitude had noticeably stiffened, as if he were sorry he had become even faintly involved in Juan's problem. He guessed that there was something solid in the boy, but he suspected his readiness to confide in strangers and his helplessness about getting a job. Something was lacking—not confidence, exactly. "It might be a few months before I was able to support her"—but something stronger, fiercer, more external. When they walked together into the caddie house he shook hands with him and was about to turn away, when impulse impelled him to add one word more.

"If you decide to try Boston come and see me," he said. He pressed a card into Juan's hand.

"Good-bye. Good luck. Remember, a woman's like a street car—"

He walked into the locker room. After paying his caddie, Juan glanced down at the card which he still held in his hand.

"Harold Garneau," it read, "23-7 State Street."

A moment later Juan was walking nervously and hurriedly from the grounds of the Culpepper Club, casting no glance behind.

V

One month later San Juan Chandler arrived in Boston and took an inexpensive room in a small downtown hotel. In his pocket was two hundred dollars in cash and an envelope full of liberty bonds aggregating fifteen hundred dollars more—the whole being a fund which had been started by his father when he was born, to give him his chance in life. Not without argument had he come into possession of this—not without tears had his decision to abandon his last year at college been approved by his mother. He had not told her everything; simply that he had an advantageous offer of a position in Boston; the rest she guessed and was tactfully silent. As a matter of fact, he had neither a position nor a plan, but he was twenty-one now, with the blemishes of youth departed for ever. One thing Juan knew—he was going to marry Noel Garneau. The sting and hurt and shame of that Sunday morning ran through his dreams, stronger than any doubts he might have felt, stronger even than the romantic boyish love for her that had blossomed one dry, still Montana night. That was still there, but locked apart; what had happened later overlay it, muffled it. It was necessary now to his pride, his self-respect, his very existence, that he have her, in order to wipe out his memory of the day on which he had grown three years.

He hadn't seen her since. The following morning he had left Culpepper Bay and gone home.

Yes, he had a wonderful time. Yes, Cousin Cora had been very nice. Nor had he written, though a week later a surprised but somehow flippant and terrible note had come from her, saying how pleasant it was to have seen him again and how bad it was to leave without saying good-bye.

"Holly Morgan sends her best," it concluded, with kind, simulated reproach. "Perhaps she ought to be writing instead of me. I always thought you were fickle, and now I know it."

The poor effort which she had made to hide her indifference made him shiver. He did not add the letter to a certain cherished package tied with blue ribbon, but burned it up in an ash tray—a tragic gesture which almost set his mother's house on fire.

So he began his life in Boston, and the story of his first year there is a fairy tale too immoral to be told. It is the story of one of those mad, illogical successes upon whose substantial foundations ninety-nine failures are later reared. Though he worked hard, he deserved no special credit for it—no credit, that is, commensurate with the reward he received. He ran into a man who had a scheme, a preposterous scheme, for the cold storage of sea food which he had been trying to finance for several years. Juan's inexperience allowed him to be responsive and he invested twelve hundred dollars. In his first year this appalling indiscretion paid him 400 per cent. His partner attempted to buy him out, but they reached a compromise and Juan kept his shares.

The inner sense of his own destiny which had never deserted him whispered that he was going to be a rich man. But at the end of that year an event took place which made him think that it didn't matter after all.

He had seen Noel Garneau twice—once entering a theatre and once riding through a Boston street in the back of her limousine, looking, he thought afterwards, bored and pale and tired. At the time he had thought nothing; an overwhelming emotion had seized his heart, held it helpless, suspended, as though it were in the grasp of material fingers. He had shrunk back hastily under the awning of a shop and waited trembling, horrified, ecstatic, until she went by. She did not know he was in Boston—he did not want her to know until he was ready. He followed her every move in the society columns of the papers. She was at school, at home for Christmas, at Hot Springs for Easter, coming out in the fall. Then she was a debutante, and every day he read of her at dinners and dances and assemblies and balls and charity functions and theatricals of the Junior League. A dozen blurred newspaper unlikenesses of her filled a drawer of his desk. And still he waited. Let Noel have her fling.

When he had been sixteen months in Boston, and when Noel's first season was dying away in the hum of the massed departure for Florida, Juan decided to wait no longer. So on a raw, damp February day, when children in rubber boots were building darns in the snow-filled gutters, a blond, handsome, well-dressed young man walked up the steps of the Garneau's Boston house and handed his card to the maid. With his heart beating loud, he went into a drawing-room and sat down.

A sound of a dress on the stairs, light feet in the hall, an exclamation—Noel!

"Why, Juan," she exclaimed, surprised, pleased, polite, "I didn't know you were in Boston. It's so good to see you. I thought you'd thrown me over for ever."

In a moment he found voice—it was easier now than it had been. Whether or not she was aware of the change, he was a nobody no longer. There was something solid behind him that would prevent him ever again from behaving like a self-centred child.

He explained that he might settle in Boston, and allowed her to guess that he had done extremely well; and, though it cost him a twinge of pain, he spoke humourously of their last meeting, implying that he had left the swimming party on an impulse of anger at her. He could not confess that the impulse had been one of shame. She laughed. Suddenly he grew curiously happy.

Half an hour passed. The fire glowed in the hearth. The day darkened outside and the room moved into that shadowy twilight, that weather of indoors, which is like a breathless starshine. He had been standing; now he sat down beside her on the couch.

"Noel—"

Footsteps sounded lightly through the hall as the maid went through to the front door. Noel reached up quickly and turned up the electric lamp on the table behind her head.

"I didn't realize how dark it was growing," she said rather quickly, he thought. Then the maid stood in the doorway.

"Mr Templeton," she announced.

"Oh, yes," agreed Noel.

Mr Templeton, with a Harvard-Oxford drawl, mature, very much at home, looked at him with just a flicker of surprise, nodded, mumbled a bare politeness and took an easy position in front of the fire. He exchanged several remarks with Noel which indicated a certain familiarity with her movements.

Then a short silence fell. Juan rose.

"I want to see you soon," he said. "I'll phone, shall I, and you tell me when I can call?"

She walked with him to the door.

"So good to talk to you again," she told him cordially. "Remember, I want to see a lot of you, Juan."

When he left he was happier than he had been for two years. He ate dinner alone at a restaurant, almost singing to himself; and then, wild with elation, walked along the waterfront till midnight. He awoke thinking of her, wanting to tell people that what had been lost was found again. There had been more between them than the mere words said—Noel's sitting with him in the half-darkness, her slight but perceptible nervousness as she came with him to the door.

Two days later he opened the Transcript to the society page and read down to the third item. There his eyes stopped, became like china eyes:

Mr and Mrs Harold Garneau announce the engagement of their daughter Noel to Mr Brooks Fish Templeton. Mr Templeton graduated from Harvard in the class of 1912 and is a partner in—

VI

At three o'clock that afternoon Juan rang the Garneaus' doorbell and was shown into the hall. From somewhere upstairs he heard girls' voices, and another murmur came from the drawing-room on the right, where he had talked to Noel only the week before.

"Can you show me into some room that isn't being used?" he demanded tensely of the maid. "I'm an old friend—it's very important—I've got to see Miss Noel alone."

He waited in a small den at the back of the hall. Ten minutes passed—ten minutes more; he began to be afraid she wasn't coming. At the end of half an hour the door bounced open and Noel came hurriedly in.

"Juan!" she cried happily. "This is wonderful! I might have known you'd be the first to come." Her expression changed as she saw his face, and she hesitated. "But why were you shown in here?" she went on quickly. "You must come and meet everyone. I'm rushing around today like a chicken without a head."

"Noel!" he said thickly.

"What?"

Her hand was on the door knob. She turned, startled.

"Noel, I haven't come to congratulate you," Juan said, his face white and his voice harsh with his effort at self-control. "I've come to tell you you're making an awful mistake."

"Why—Juan!"

"And you know it," he went on. "You know no one loves you as I love you, Noel. I want you to marry me." She laughed nervously.

"Why, Juan, that's silly! I don't understand your talking like this. I'm engaged to another man."

"Noel, will you come here and sit down?"

"I can't, Juan—there're a dozen people outside. I've got to see them. It wouldn't be polite. Another time, Juan. If you come another time I'd love to talk to you."

"Now!" The word was stark, unyielding, almost savage. She hesitated.

"Ten minutes," he said.

"I've really got to go, Juan."

She sat down uncertainly, glancing at the door. Sitting beside her, Juan told her simply and directly everything that had happened to him since they had met, a year and a half before. He told her of his family, his Cousin Cora, of his inner humiliation at Culpepper Bay. Then he told her of his coming to Boston and of his success, and how at last, having something to bring her, he had come only to find he was too late. He kept back nothing. In his voice, as in his mind, there was no pretence now, no selfconsciousness, but only a sincere and overmastering emotion. He had no defence for what he was doing, he said, save this—that he had somehow gained the right to present his case, to have her know how much his devotion had inspired him, to have her look once, if only in passing, upon the fact that for two years he had loved her faithfully and well.

When Juan finished, Noel was crying. It was terrible, she said, to tell her all this—just when she had decided about her life. It hadn't been easy, yet it was done now, and she was really going to marry this other man. But she had never heard anything like this before—it upset her. She was—oh, so terribly sorry, but there was no use. If he had cared so much he might have let her know before. But how could he let her know? He had had nothing to offer her except the fact that one summer night out West they had been overwhelmingly drawn together.

"And you love me now," he said in a low voice. "You wouldn't cry, Noel, if you didn't love me. You wouldn't care."

"I'm—I'm sorry for you."

"It's more than that. You loved me the other day. You wanted me to sit beside you in the dark. Didn't I feel it—didn't I know? There's something between us, Noel—a sort of pull. Something you always do to me and I to you—except that one sad time. Oh, Noel, don't you know how it breaks my heart to see you sitting there two feet away from me, to want to put my arms around you and know you've made a senseless promise to another man?" There was a knock outside the door.

"Noel!"

She raised her head, putting a handkerchief quickly to her eyes.

"Yes?"

"It's Brooks. May I come in?" Without waiting for an answer, Templeton opened the door and stood looking at them curiously. "Excuse me," he said. He nodded brusquely at Juan. "Noel, there are lots of people here—"

"In a minute," she said lifelessly.

"Aren't you well?"

"Yes."

He came into the room, frowning.

"What's been upsetting you, dear?" He glanced quickly at Juan, who stood up, his eyes blurred with tears. A menacing note crept into Templeton's voice. "I hope no one's been upsetting you."

For answer, Noel flopped down over a hill of pillows and sobbed aloud. "Noel—" Templeton sat beside her, and put his arm on her shoulder—"Noel." He turned again to Juan, "I think it would be best if you left us alone, Mr—" the name escaped his memory. "Noel's a little tired."

"I won't go," said Juan.

"Please wait outside then. We'll see you later."

"I won't wait outside. I want to speak to Noel. It was you who interrupted."

"And I have a perfect right to interrupt." His face reddened angrily. "Just who the devil are you, anyhow?"

"My name is Chandler."

"Well, Mr Chandler, you're in the way here—is that plain? Your presence here is an intrusion and a presumption."

"We look at it in different ways."

They glared at each other angrily. After a moment Templeton raised Noel to a sitting posture.

"I'm going to take you upstairs, dear," he said. "This has been a strain today. If you lie down till dinnertime—"

He helped her to her feet. Not looking at Juan, and still dabbing her face with her handkerchief, Noel suffered herself to be persuaded into the hall. Templeton turned in the doorway.

"The maid will give you your hat and coat, Mr Chandler."

"I'll wait right here," said Juan.

VII

He was still there at half past six, when, following a quick knock, a large broad bulk which Juan recognized as Mr Harold Garneau came into the room.

"Good evening, sir," said Mr Garneau, annoyed and peremptory. "Just what can I do for you?" He came closer and a flicker of recognition passed over his face.

"Oh!" he muttered.

"Good evening, sir," said Juan.

"It's you, is it?" Mr Garneau appeared to hesitate. "Brooks Templeton said that you were—that you insisted on seeing Noel—" he coughed—"that you refused to go home."

"I want to see Noel, if you don't mind."

"What for?"

"That's between Noel and me, Mr Garneau."

"Mr Templeton and I are quite entitled to represent Noel in this case," said Mr Garneau patiently.

"She has just made the statement before her mother and me that she doesn't want to see you again. Isn't that plain enough?"

"I don't believe it," said Juan stubbornly. "I'm not in the habit of lying."

"I beg your pardon. I meant—"

"I don't want to discuss this unfortunate business with you," broke out Garneau contemptuously. "I just want you to leave right now—and come back."

"Why do you call it an unfortunate business?" inquired Juan coolly. "Good night, Mr Chandler."

"You call it an unfortunate business because Noel's broken her engagement."

"You are presumptuous, sir!" cried the older man. "Unbearably sumptuous."

"Mr Garneau, you yourself were once kind enough to tell me—"

"I don't give a damn what I told you!" cried Garneau. "You get out of here now!" "Very well, I have no choice. I wish you to be good enough to tell Noel that I'll be back tomorrow afternoon." Juan nodded, went into the hall and took his hat and coat from a chair. Upstairs, he heard running footsteps and a door opened and closed—not before he had caught the sound of impassioned voices and a short broken sob. He hesitated. Then he continued on along the hall towards the front door. Through a portiere of the dining-room he caught sight of a man-servant laying the service for dinner.

He rang the bell the next afternoon at the same hour. This time the butler, evidently instructed, answered the door.

Miss Noel was not at home. Could he leave a note? It was no use; Miss Noel was not in the city. Incredulous but anxious, Juan took a taxicab to Harold Garneau's office. "Mr Garneau can't see you. If you like, he will speak to you for a moment on the phone."

Juan nodded. The clerk touched a button on the waiting-room switchboard and handed an instrument to Juan.

"This is San Juan Chandler speaking. They told me at your residence that Noel had gone away. Is that true?"

"Yes." The monosyllable was short and cold. "She's gone away for a rest. Won't be back for several months. Anything else?" "Did she leave any word for me?"

"No! She hates the sight of you."

"What's her address?"

"That doesn't happen to be your affair. Good morning."

Juan went back to his apartment and mused over the situation. Noel had been spirited out of town—that was the only expression he knew for it. And undoubtedly her engagement to Templeton was at least temporarily broken. He had toppled it over within an hour. He must see her again—that was the immediate necessity. But where? She was certainly with friends, and probably with relatives. That latter was the first clue to follow—he must find out the names of the relatives she had most frequently visited before.

He phoned Holly Morgan. She was in the south and not expected back Boston till May. Then he called the society editor of the Boston Transcript. After a short wait, a polite, attentive, feminine voice conversed with him on the wire.

"This is Mr San Juan Chandler," he said, trying to intimate by his voice that he was a distinguished leader of cotillions in the Back Bay. "I want to get some information, if you please, about the family of Mr Harold Garneau."

"Why don't you apply directly to Mr Garneau?" advised the society editor, not without suspicion.

"I'm not on speaking terms with Mr Garneau."

A pause; then—"Well, really, we can't be responsible for giving out information in such a peculiar way."

"But there can't be any secret about who Mr and Mrs Garneau's relations are!" protested Juan in exasperation.

"But how can we be sure that you—"

He hung up the receiver. Two other papers gave no better results, a third was willing, but ignorant. It seemed absurd, almost like a conspiracy, that in a city where the Garneaus were so well known he could not obtain the desired names. It was as if everything had tightened up against his arrival on the scene. After a day of fruitless and embarrassing inquiries in stores, where his questions were looked upon with the suspicion that he might be compiling a sucker list, and of poring through back numbers of the Social Register, he saw that there was but one resource—that was Cousin Cora. Next morning he took the three-hour ride to Culpepper Bay.

It was the first time he had seen her for a year and a half, since the disastrous termination of his summer visit. She was offended—that he knew—especially since she had heard from his mother of the unexpected success. She greeted him coldly and reproachfully; but she told him what he wanted to know, because Juan asked his questions while she was still startled and surprised by his visit. He left Culpepper Bay with the information that Mrs Garneau had one sister, the famous Mrs Morton Poindexter, with whom Noel was on terms of great intimacy. Juan took the midnight train for New York.

Morton Poindexters' telephone number was not in the New York book, and Information refused to divulge it; but Juan procured it reference to the Social Register. He called the house from his "Miss Noel Garneau—is she in the city?" he inquired, according to hi plan. If the name was not immediately familiar, the servant would rent that he had the wrong number.

"Who wants to speak to her, please?"

That was a relief; his heart sank comfortably back into place.

"Oh—a friend."

"No name?"

"No name."

"I'll see."

The servant returned in a moment.

No, Miss Garneau was not there, was not in the city, was not expected.

The phone clicked off suddenly.

Late that afternoon a taxi dropped him in front of the Morton Poindexters' house. It was the most elaborate house that he had ever seen, rising to five storeys on a corner of Fifth Avenue and adorned even with that ghost of a garden which, however minute, is the proudest gesture of money in New York.

He handed no card to the butler, but it occurred to him that he must be expected, for he was shown immediately into the drawing-room. When, after a short wait, Mrs Poindexter entered he experienced for the first time in five days a touch of uncertainty.

Mrs Poindexter was perhaps thirty-five, and of that immaculate fashion which the French describe as bien soignee. The inexpressible loveliness of her face was salted with another quality which for want of a better word might be called dignity. But it was more than dignity, for it wore no rigidity, but instead a softness so adaptable, so elastic, that it would withdraw from any attack which life might bring against it, only to spring back at the proper moment, taut, victorious and complete. San Juan saw that even though his guess was correct as to Noel's being in the house, he was up against a force with which he had no contact before. This woman seemed to be not entirely of America, to possess resources which the American woman lacked or handled ineptly.

She received him with a graciousness which, though it was largely external, seemed to conceal no perturbation underneath. Indeed, her attitude appeared to be perfectly passive, just short of encouraging. It was with an effort that he resisted the inclination to lay his cards on the table. "Good evening." She sat down on a stiff chair in the centre of the room and asked him to take an easy-chair near by. She sat looking at him silently until he spoke.

"Mrs Poindexter, I am very anxious to see Miss Garneau. I telephoned your house this morning and was told that she was not here." Mrs Poindexter nodded. "However, I know she is here," he continued evenly. "And I'm determined to see her. The idea that her father and mother can prevent me from seeing her, as though I had disgraced myself in some way—or that you, Mrs Poindexter, can prevent me from seeing her—" His voice rose a little. "—is preposterous. This is not the year 1500—nor even the year 1910."

He paused. Mrs Poindexter waited for a moment to see if he had finished. Then she said, quietly and unequivocally, "I quite agree with you."

Save for Noel, Juan thought he had never seen anyone so beautiful before.

"Mrs Poindexter," he began again, in a more friendly tone, "I'm sorry to seem rude. I've been called presumptuous in this matter, and perhaps to some extent I am. Perhaps all poor boys who are in love with wealthy girls are presumptuous. But it happens that I am no longer a poor boy, and I have good reason to believe that Noel cares for me."

"I see," said Mrs Poindexter attentively. "But of course I knew nothing about all that."

Juan hesitated, again disarmed by her complaisance. Then a surge of determination went over him.

"Will you let me see her?" he demanded. "Or will you insist on keeping up this farce a little longer?"

Mrs Poindexter looked at him as though considering.

"Why should I let you see her?"

"Simply because I ask you. Just as, when someone says 'Excuse me' you step aside for him in a doorway."

Mrs Poindexter frowned.

"But Noel is concerned in this matter as much as you. And I'm not like person in a crowd. I'm more like a bodyguard, with instructions to let no one pass, even if they say 'Excuse me' in a most appealing voice."

"You have instructions only from her father and mother," said Juan, with rising impatience. "She's the person concerned."

"I'm glad you begin to admit that."

"Of course I admit it," he broke out. "I want you to admit it."

"I do."

"Then what's the point of all this absurd discussion?" he demanded heatedly.

She stood up suddenly. "I bid you good evening, sir."

Taken aback, Juan stood up too. "Why, what's the matter?"

"I will not be spoken to like that," said Mrs Poindexter, still in a low cool voice. "Either you can conduct yourself quietly or you can leave this house at once."

Juan realized that he had taken the wrong tone. The words stung at him and for a moment he had nothing to say—as though he were a scolded boy at school. "This is beside the question," he stammered finally. "I want to talk to Noel."

"Noel doesn't want to talk to you." Suddenly Mrs Poindexter held out a sheet of note paper to him. He opened it. It said:

Aunt Jo: As to what we talked about this afternoon: If that intolerable bore calls, as he will probably do, and begins his presumptuous whining, please speak to him frankly. Tell him I never loved him, that I never at any time claimed to love him and that his persistence is revolting to me. Say that I am old enough to know my own mind and that my greatest wish is never to see him again in this world.

Juan stood there aghast. His universe was suddenly about him. Noel did not care, she had never cared. It was all a preposterous joke on him, played by those to whom the business of life had been such jokes from the beginning. He realized now that fundamentally they were all akin—Cousin Cora, Noel, her father, this cold, lovely woman here—affirming the prerogative of the rich to marry always within their caste, to erect artificial barriers and standards against those who could presume upon a summer's philandering. The scales fell from his eyes and he saw his year and a half of struggle and effort not as progress towards a goal but only as a little race he had run by himself, outside, with no one to beat except himself—no one who cared.

Blindly he looked about for his hat, scarcely realizing it was in the hall. Blindly he stepped back when Mrs Poindexter's hand moved towards him half a foot through the mist and Mrs Poindexter's voice said softly, "I'm sorry." Then he was in the hall, the note still clutched in the hand that struggled through the sleeve of his overcoat, the words which he felt he must somehow say choking through his lips.

"I didn't understand. I regret very much that I've bothered you. It wasn't dear to me how matters stood—between Noel and me—"

His hand was on the door knob.

"I'm sorry, too," said Mrs Poindexter. "I didn't realize from what Noel said that what I had to do would be so hard—Mr Templeton."

"Chandler," he corrected her dully. "My name's Chandler."

She stood dead still; suddenly her face went white.

"What?"

"My name—it's Chandler."

Like a flash she threw herself against the half-open door and it bumped shut. Then in a flash she was at the foot of the staircase.

"Noel!" she cried in a high, clear call. "Noel! Noel! Come down, Noel!" Her lovely voice floated up like a bell through the long high central hall. "Noel! Come down! It's Mr Chandler! It's Chandler!"

THE END



I woke up after a lousy dream, and as soon as the old beezer came alive I went around the yard trying to pick up something interesting, but the wind was too strong.

There was an old biscuit in my dish and if there's anything gloomier than one dead biscuit on a windy morning I don't know about it.

The Brain came downstairs early like she usually does ever since she began staying away all day long. I gave her a rush, and I meant it, too. I'm not one of these diggities that think their boss is a god, even if he's an old nigger that smells like everybody that gave him his clothes—but really anybody would have to hand it to the Brain.

Since I grew up and got the idea that they don't go in much for any perfumes except their own, I never had any trouble with her—except the time I brought her that bone in the middle of the night and she hit me in the eye with it.

I was hoping it was about the right day to go out in the country and swim, but nothing doing—she got into her moving room at the usual time and shoved off, and I had to amuse myself. It wasn't the first time I wished I had something regular to do. My friend across the street was waiting for his chow, which he gets in the morning, so I had a workout with the little squirt next door. He came tearing over, cursing and threatening, because he knew I never hurt him.

"You big, clumsy tub of hair, I could run rings around you, and I'm out to prove it!"

"Yeah?" I said, kind of amused, because he talks as if he meant it, and we went through a routine with a lot of false starts, charges, leg and throat holds, rollaways, and escapes. It was all right, and after, while we were panting plenty, but I don't get much of a workout with him, because he uses up so much time dodging and doing circles. I like a dog to go in and take it. Even a little fellow like him. Once he let a tooth slip and nipped me, and I gave him hell.

"Don't take advantage, or I'll tear your coat off."

"Aw, don't get sore."

"Then don't let that tooth slip again."

While we were resting he said: "What are you doing this morning?"

"What's on your mind? You won't get me out after some cat again. Some dogs never grow up."

"It's no cat."

"Then what is it? Meat—or girls?"

"I'll take you there and you can see for yourself."

"You're generous all of a sudden. How big's the dog that's there now?"

While we waited for my friend we did some barking—or rather the squirt did most of it. These little tykes can yelp all day without getting hoarse. He made some circles around a bunch of kids heading for school, and I had a laugh when he got a kick in the ribs and gave out a real yelp. I only barked a little in the base to stretch my throat—I'm not one of the kind always shooting off their mouth.

After my friend came out we went with the squirt to see what he'd found. Just like I thought, it was nothing—a garbage can with a lid you could nose off. I got a whiff of some perfume, too, that bucked me up for a minute, but it was yesterday's, so my friend and I roughed up the squirt for wasting our time and went off on our own.

We followed a tall lady for a while—no particular reason except she had a parcel with meat in it—we knew we wouldn't get any, but you never can tell. Sometimes I just feel like shutting my nose and just following somebody pretending they're yours, or that they're taking you somewhere. After a couple of streets I picked up a new perfume.

"There's some romance," I said.

"Say you got a nose." He tried for it, but didn't get anything.

"I must be getting old. I can always remember shapes, but I get mixed up on perfume."

"Shucks, it's just the wind," I said, to make him feel all right, but he has got a weak nose. Now me, I got a fine nose, but I'm weak on shapes. In a minute, though, he got it, and we left the lady and started back down the street at a trot. Say we must have followed a mile, both of us getting more and more disgusted.

"What's the use?" my friend said. "Either I'm crazy or we're not following one scent, but about ten."

"I get about twenty."

"What say we quit?"

"Well, we're pretty near now."

We got up on a hill presently and looked down—and, say, I haven't seen so many curs since the dog show.

"Sold," I says, and we started home.

The Brain wasn't there yet, but the Beard was. He got out that damn pole and tried to kid me again, holding it out and jabbering—a long time ago I figured out that his object is to see if I'm fool enough to jump over it. But I don't bite, just walk round it. Then he tried the trick they all do—held my paws and tried to balance me up on the end of my spine. I never could figure out the point of that one.

He started the music-box, that tune that makes my ear hum and starts me howling—so I lammed it out and down the street. A dog passed me carrying a newspaper looking all pleased with himself—but the one time I tried that racket I forgot what it was I was carrying and started to bury it, and when the Beard saw me, was he sore!

Pretty soon I saw my friend coming down the street. He was a fine big dog. He stopped and visited for a minute, with a child he knew, and then he saw me, and came running in my direction. What happened next I couldn't see. It was noon, and there were lots of moving rooms at the cross street—the first thing I knew was that one of them had stopped and then another, and that several people had gotten out. I hurried over with some men.

It was my friend, lying on his side and bleeding out of his mouth; his eyes were open, but his breathing was wrong. Everybody was excited, and they pulled him up on the lawn: by and by his little boy and girl ran out of their house and came over and began to cry. I and another dog that knew him well went up to him, and I wanted to lick him, but when I came really close he snarled, "Scram!" and got half up on his haunches. He thought I was going to eat him just because he was down.

The little boy said, "Get away, you!" and it made me feel bad because I've never eaten a dog in my life, and would not unless I was very hungry. But of course, I went away so as not to worry him, and waited until they carried him away on a blanket. After that we sniffed at the blood in the street and one dog licked it.

In the front yard I howled. I don't know why—then I went to look for the Brain. When I didn't find her I began to figure that maybe something had happened to her, too, and she wouldn't be back any more. I went up on the porch and waited, but she didn't come, so I scratched on the screen and went in and howled a little at the Beard, who gave me a head scratch.

Presently I went to the door, and there was the Brain, getting out of her moving room—I made a rush for her anyhow, and put my nose in her hand and almost tripped her going upstairs. It was good to know she was home. She gave me dinner—the ground beef again and biscuit and milk and a good bone. I picked out the meat first; then I drank the milk and licked the biscuits, but didn't eat them; then I polished my teeth on the bone and buried it shallow—I must have a hundred bones around here, and I don't know why I save them. I never find them again unless accidentally, but I just can't stand leaving them around.

Afterwards I started to go over and see my friend, but there was nobody around except the little girl sitting in the swing and crying.

THE END



I.

The little girl with dark blue eyes and last summer's golden tan rang the doorbell of the Appletons' house a second time, then turned to the Negress behind her.

"I know there's somebody in, Hazeldawn, because I can hear them. Just leave the suitcase and you can go back to Mrs. Martin's."

"You sure, now, these people expect you?"

"Well, Mrs. Martin said she telephoned both places before she fixed things up; so if it wasn't the Sidneys', this must be where I'm expected. Somebody has to take me in," she added wryly. The little girl's name was Dolly Haines and her age was thirteen.

The door was suddenly answered by a youth whom Dolly had never seen before. Startled by the strange face, Dolly turned back to Hazeldawn: "Don't go yet. There may be some mistake."

"The Appletons don't seem to be around," the boy said. "There was a maid awhile ago, but she doesn't seem to be around either." Seeing her hesitate, and experiencing a quick response to her beauty, he added, "But come in. Glad to have you. I been making myself at home for two hours."

He was fifteen, tall without being gangling, ruddy-cheeked and full of laughter and loose in his clothes. Liking him immediately, sophistication flowed into Dolly. She said to the Negress: "Thanks oodles, Hazeldawn, Tell the postman about the mail—and bring me my laundry when it's ready."

The boy carried her bag and Dolly followed. They sat on the sofa in the living room, at home within five minutes.

Clarke Cresswell turned on the radio. "I'm beginning to think I own this place," he said. "Have you been here before?"

"This'll be the third time—if they take me in. I've been visiting around like this since father got sick last April, and I'm tired of it."

"Don't I understand!" the boy agreed darkly. "My parents were drowned in China when I was two, and I was shipped home by registered mail. I've been a guest ever since. But I'm not visiting the Appletons," Clarke went on; "I'm only here for dinner. They've got measles at my prep school, so I'm visiting my aunt, Miss Grace Terhune."

The name made Dolly sit up. "Why, she's the assistant headmistress of my school!"

"Don't blame me."

She wouldn't have blamed him for anything.

"Let's light a fire," he suggested, and she agreed that a fire would be nice.

They sat before it and discussed what makes a girl popular and such matters until a maid called Dolly to the phone. It was Mrs. Appleton:

"I'm so sorry, Dolly. We've been delayed. We ran over a pig near Annapolis and we thought it was a man. It looked just like a man...Have Evelyn cook supper for you and Clarke right away."

Dolly looked at herself in the hall mirror before she went back into the library. She had never been happy in just this way before, and she wanted to see what she looked like. Returning to the fireside, she said, "Go on."

"What were we talking about?" Clarke asked.

II.

Next day there was an invitation to a Halloween party and a letter from her father:

You're always regretting the lack of relatives. Well, now you've got one. Cousin Charlie Craig (uncle to you!) is on his way back home after ten years in Europe. His house is at 2008 St. Paul Street. Go call on him—he writes me that he'll be delighted either to put you up or dress you down while I'm away. He's peculiar, but I think you'll like him.

The news was interesting, but it was overshadowed by the more vivid presence in the city of Clarke Cresswell. Or rather his specter, for Dolly didn't see him again all that week. At last she inquired around school whether any of the girls had met him. Her eagerness was communicated to her friends. Overnight he became a sort of legend: "Has any one met Clarke Cresswell?"

When Saturday arrived, Dolly thumbed through the telephone book. In a moment the fact that an uncle was in town became the most important thing in the world. For Miss Grace Terhune, Clarke's aunt, lived only two doors away from him.

She had been considering a shopping trip to the five-and-ten, but now it was plain that her duty was to call on her uncle.

St. Paul Street was in the old residential section. On summer days the passer-by could glance through the tall windows at family portraits that had hung undisturbed for a hundred years.

But today the blinds on 2008 were drawn and there was such a long silence after Dolly rang the bell that she nearly gave up. Then the door opened a little way and a birdlike young woman cooed, "What is it?"

"I'm Dolly Haines. I came to see my Uncle Charlie."

The tiny woman scrutinized her, and Dolly thought she was very pretty with her doll's hair and china-blue eyes. "Who sent you?" the woman asked.

"My father. He wanted me to call on Uncle Charlie because I've never met him and he thought I ought to."

The woman hesitated. Then she said, "Well, I'll see. You come in."

Dolly stepped into the hall and the door closed behind her. Inside it was very dim. Rectangles of cheesecloth indicated paintings on the wall, and the same material protected clocks, busts, lamps, and books.

"I didn't mean to call so soon," said Dolly. "I know Uncle Charlie just got home."

"How did you know?"

"Father told me." Dolly was glad, in view of the woman's inhospitable attitude, that she had brought her father's letter. "This'll tell who I am."

The woman took the letter and held it to a bulb of dim orange in the hall. Then she said, "Wait a minute, little girl, right where you are," and flew up the long stairs. Then a door opened and closed above.

As she waited, Dolly's mind began to turn on the house two doors farther on. Her reverie was interrupted by a man coming downstairs. He was tall and handsome, with a blond hairline mustache; he held out a friendly hand and said, "Hello there! Bit dark, what?"

"Are you my Uncle Charlie?"

"What? No; name's Redfern—Major Redfern. Sorry to say Charlie's not up to much today. Touch of liver...Do you live around here?"

"I used to live with father. But he got arthritis and had to go to New Mexico." Dolly rambled on for a moment, even though she had still to be asked to sit down.

Major Redfern interrupted her suddenly: "You'll soon be a débutante, won't you?"

"Me? Oh, not me—not for a long time. But I know a lot of débutantes who went to my school last year."

"Did they, now? Who? I have letters of introduction to some débutantes, but I seem to have mislaid them."

Dolly began naming débutantes she knew. Major Redfern interrupted:

"Duckney? That'll be the daughter of L.P. Duckney, won't it? The one who's having a big party Monday night?"

"I suppose so. I sit behind her in church."

He laid down the hat and stick he carried. "Forgot something upstairs," he said.

"If Uncle Charlie is sick, tell him never mind," Dolly called after him. "I can come another time."

"No, no. Sit tight. He wants to see you."

Presently the little woman fluttered down, Major Redfern after her. The woman was more friendly now; she introduced herself as Miss Willie Shugrue, adding, "Your uncle can't see you today, but he sent his love."

"My father's been sick too, so I can sympathize."

"I'm the trained nurse," volunteered Miss Willie. "But I—"

Major Redfern interrupted abruptly: "I'll do the talking." Then, to Dolly, "Always welcome here in Charlie's house, I know. Maybe you'd like to pay us a little visit."

"I couldn't exactly leave these people I'm visiting right now," Dolly said. "I'd be glad to come later, though." Dolly felt that the call had run its course. "Good-by. Tell Uncle Charlie I hope he feels better tomorrow."

"Well—I may see you in church tomorrow," said the major. "What church do you go to, by the way?"

Dolly told him.

Once the door had closed, her uncle's household was far behind her. Did she dare ask Mrs. Appleton, she wondered, to invite Clarke to luncheon? Could a guest ask such a favor? If not, she would probably never see Clarke again, and at that dismal thought a wave of revolt swept over her. After all, Mrs. Appleton had been her mother's best friend. With her lips moving in rehearsal, she went slowly upstairs toward Mrs. Appleton's room.

Then, just outside the closed door, she stopped—her name had suddenly twisted through the keyhole.

"Dolly is here because she had no other place to go."

"But I don't see why we have to be the ones, mother. Does her father expect her to visit all the rest of her life?"

"That doesn't sound like you, Lila."

"Well, I can't help it. I'd counted on having these girls for a visit, and now Dolly's got the guest room. Don't tell me that charity begins at home!"

Dolly tiptoed to her room, packed her suitcase hurriedly, dashed off a note to Mrs. Appleton explaining that her Uncle Charlie wanted her to visit there for a week, and crept unobserved from the house.

III.

In the morning she walked to church with Major Redfern. She had passed a curious evening, with the major beating years of dust out of a bed and Miss Willie flitting about, not at all like the trained nurse who had taken care of her father last spring.

"Dashed unlucky about those letters of introduction," said the major as they walked along. "Of course I came down to look after your Uncle Charlie, but I planned to have a bit of amusement, too. And now I can't find the things. I say, be a good fellow and introduce me to the thingumbob girl if we run into her."

Dolly was glad to be of service. As the crowd rolled into church she spotted Angela in the vestibule and introduced major. Angela, good-natured and full of her current importance, was more than charmed.

"How long will you be here, Major Redfern?"

"Couldn't say. Been taking care of Dolly's uncle and haven't had a chance to see the city. Seems a bit dead to an outsider, you know."

"You mustn't be an outsider. We take a certain pride in our hospitality."

During the service Dolly divided the congregation into quadrants and scanned each sector for the sight of a tall young form, but to no avail, so with regret she followed the major and Angela down the aisle.

"Of course you must come," the young lady was saying. "There's no time to send you a formal invitation, but I'll just write 'Monday evening' on my calling card and give it to you right now."

As they emerged into the sunshine it occurred to Dolly that in spite of being handsome the major had a sort of trigger face; if the nose pressed down only a little more it might touch his mouth and precipitate an explosion. He's a fast worker, she thought. Like Clarke: Clarke was a fast worker, too. But where was he? Back at school? She must know—right off.

Her impatience must have been apparent, for as they walked away the major said, "Not polite to leave any one so quickly. Really ought to consider manners, what?"

"I'm sorry."

"That's America," said the major tolerantly. "This little Duckney—she's the type, now. Not a brain in her head. Just an easy clink, that's all."

"What's a clink?" inquired Dolly.

"Eh?" He looked at her sharply. "Oh, that's just an expression."

Now they were approaching Miss Terhune's house...But what was that upon the door—that rectangle of pink? She came close enough to read the one word: Measles.

The major must have seen the dismay in her face. "What's trouble?"

"I just forgot—I got to get something at the drugstore."

"Well, cheerio. By the way, I wouldn't mention your Uncle Charlie there. He doesn't want it known that he's ill."

In the drugstore she telephoned Miss Terhune's house and asked for Clarke Cresswell.

"I saw that sign on your house—"

"I hoped nobody would."

"I'm staying with my uncle in the same row as you," she ran on hurriedly. "So I just called up."

"I'm not in bed; I loaf around and play the radio. Say, listen: have you got a funny skylight—like a box, sort of—on top of your house?"

"Have we? It's right in the ceiling outside my door."

"Well, after dinner, you come on out of your skylight and you'll see me in mine. You won't catch any measles."

"My uncle wouldn't like it," she said perversely. "And anyhow I've got to make a Halloween costume. Good-by."

Dolly walked home thoughtfully. As the door closed her into the gloomy front hall, the feeling of desertion came back. Meeting Miss Willie on her way upstairs, she said, "Is my uncle better? Couldn't I see him today?"

"Not today. He's not well enough."

"He knows I'm here?"

"Yes; he wants you to make yourself at home."

After dinner she set to work on her costume while the major smoked and Miss Willie looked on.

"Where's your party going to be?" she asked Dolly.

"Just around the corner."

"Some friends?"

"Of course," said Dolly. "A girl I've known all my life."

"Isn't that jolly!" said the major, turning to Miss Willie. "Dolly and I will both be stepping out tomorrow night. Beastly shame you have to stay home with Uncle Charlie."

Miss Willie didn't answer.

"What's the costume?"

"Sort of black thing with a mask, like a witch. We're going all around the neighborhood and howl—that sort of thing."

"Are these rich people?" asked Miss Willie.

"Stow it," the major said abruptly.

Looking up at him, Dolly decided that she didn't like him, after all. She didn't like him any better than she did Miss Willie. Why did Uncle Charlie keep such people around?

"Do you like your school?" asked Miss Willie quickly.

"Very much. And I've got oodles of English history to study."

Gathering her sawing, she went upstairs. As she passed Uncle Charlie's room she hesitated for a moment, tempted to open the door quietly and at least look in upon the sick man. She was convinced that he was being neglected, for Miss Willie seemed a poor sort of nurse.

But she passed on up to her third-floor room. There was the pillbox skylight, reached by a cute little ladder, and she wondered if Clarke were really waiting for her two roofs away.

On impulse, she brushed her hair before the mirror, climbed the ladder, pushed open a slanting strip of glass, and scrambled to the roof. In the clear autumn air her sense of oppression lifted. She shivered, not from cold, but as if shaking from her what she left below.

On her right was a fire escape leading to an alley, and northward were four old-fashioned skylights projecting from the flat continuous roof. The second would be Miss Terhune's. Dolly's shoes sounded flat on the cemented pebbles as she walked toward it. Framed vividly by the intersecting planes of the parallelepiped, a face stared out at her and shouted, "Can you hear me?"

"Heavens, yes!" She stopped with her back against a chimney.

"I wondered if you could," Clarke said. "I've been yelling ever since I caught sight of you. And I've been sitting on this ladder for almost an hour. Where've you been?"

"I told you I wasn't coming."

"Oh, but that's just like a girl. Honest, though, I did think you weren't coming. I thought I'd come over and give you measles in revenge, and then we'd be quarantined together."

"You look quite dumb in there," Dolly said. "I don't want to be quarantined with you, the way you look."

"You look dumb out there. Which is funniest—you that can't come in, or me that can't come out?"

"The whole roof is kind of dumb, isn't it?"

"Well, why do you live in such a funny old town?"

She was about to say "I don't know" when the fact swept over her that she didn't know. Standing here beside a chimney on a prairie of roofs seemed as logical a location as any she had been in for months.

What Clarke said next was as good as though he had guessed her thoughts: "I was looking at a cloud, and then you stepped out of it."

It was almost too much. And Dolly couldn't say, "Open the skylight and let me come down and have your measles with you." All she could say was, "Good-by. Glad you're looking so well."

"Are you going?"

"I've got to get back."

"Oh, bunk! Your uncle won't mind. My aunt says she used to know him."

For an instant Dolly felt the urge to tell Clarke everything. But he was so beautiful there in his glass prison. She would not let her troubles come even that near to touching him, if she could help it.

IV.

Dolly worked late at lessons, and was rather upset, deep in the evening, when Miss Willie flew up with some drugstore sandwiches and the information that her Uncle Charlie sent his love.

"Has he had the doctor?"

"Of course."

But somehow Dolly was far from reassured.

Next afternoon, after leaving her friends at school with staccato assurances that they would meet at the party, she pondered the advisability of wiring her father. On her way upstairs she heard Miss Willie's voice in the major's room:

"You had studs when we left."

"I have studs now, if I can find them. Cheer up! I can always borrow Uncle Charlie's."

Miss Willie laughed. It was an unpleasant laugh, both shrill and shrunken, like a bird so used to being scared that she never knew whether to start a song or not. Dolly, heartened by her familiar day at school, was once again tempted to try Uncle Charlie's door; but a sudden scuffle in the major's room sent her flying upstairs in a panic.

"What must I do?" she asked herself. "I can't tell anybody, because it's my uncle's house."

On her way downstairs some time later, she heard the major and Miss Willie bickering in the lower hall, and drew back in the shadows. But from the sudden fading of their voices she knew that they had heard her footsteps, so she continued on down.

The major wore a full-dress suit. His stick like a slung gun, the white gleam of his gloves, the thin string of his monocle—all these made Dolly sure he would be a success at Angela Duckney's that evening. And she resented it. She was sorry now that she had ever introduced him to the older girl.

"Ah, the future débutante," remarked the major gallantly. "May I drop you anywhere?"

"Oh, no. I'm just going around the corner."

Throughout the supper and the finding of old friends under black satin dominoes, Dolly was haunted by the image of the Englishman. She had never before known what it was to hate, for her father had thrown a protective screen about the motherless girl.

The Halloweeners, about to start outdoors for the real fun of the evening, stood in a group of two dozen, black-masked, clown-white with flour. Suddenly Dolly wiped the flour from her hand on a bare spot under John Hamilton's ear.

"Hey, quit!" he protested. "Or, if you must act your age, try it on the boyfriend."

"What boy friend?" she asked John.

"Oh, you don't know? Well, everybody else in your school seems to know his name. Clarke Somebody."

"Clarke Cresswell? Why, how—Where is he?"

"Over there, lapping up ice cream."

A tough voice broke out suddenly over the soft young raillery: "All out, now—one by one. Just a formality, boys and girls."

"I think that man's a detective!" John whispered into Dolly's ear. "Something's been stolen, I bet."

She scarcely heard him. As they trooped toward the door she kept looking about for Clarke, hoping to spot him before the mask dropped over her face and obscured her vision. The edge of the mask was tipped at the door and the rough voice said, "O.K., little lady."

She was next to the last one out; the last was a girl clown-white with flour. On the front steps the host stood and whispered something to three men who kept their hands in their pockets. The party hesitated on the sidewalk.

"Go on, go on, children," directed the host suddenly. "What's happened doesn't concern you."

It was just at that moment that, from some person indistinguishable in the darkness, Dolly heard a trill of high birdish laughter.

Miss Willie! Which one of the masked faces was hers—and where, oh, where was Clarke? There! That tall one. She darted toward him and lifted her mask.

"Well!" he exclaimed. "Well, where were you when the crown jewels disappeared? I thought sure you had them."

"I thought sure you had the measles."

"So did the doctor; but that was his mistake. He just thought if everybody in my school had measles I must have them too." In the light of a street lamp he bent to look at her. "You're shaking! What's the matter?"

A sob broke from Dolly. "I'm worried about Uncle Charlie. They won't let me see him."

"Who won't?"

"The friends that are staying with him." Even in her anxiety she forced herself to be no more specific.

"Anything I can do?"

They were tagging a little behind the others. Suddenly she said, "I think he's alone now. I want to see him. Will you duck the crowd and go with me?"

Uncle Charlie's front door was locked and Dolly had no key.

"I've got to see my uncle," she said. "Can't we climb up that fire escape in the alley? It goes right by his room."

Clarke inspected, then reported back: "It's ten feet off the ground. But we can go through my aunt's house and over the roof."

Miss Terhune's house was inky black, but when they came out on the roof cold autumn stars were showing.

"Now tell me what it's all about," Clarke demanded.

It was about her pride, but she could never tell him that. "Aren't the stars nice?" she said. "China eyes."

"Honestly, you're the funniest girl I ever knew! Once I thought you and I had a lot in common, but—"

"How'll we get down to Uncle Charlie's room?" Dolly interrupted.

"The fire escape, of course. We can get down, even if we can't get up."

The night was chilly, but Dolly felt warm. They backed down the iron skeleton, Clarke ahead so that if she slipped she would fall into his arms. On the second landing they faced a dark window.

"It's stuck," whispered Clarke. "I'll try from the top."

That worked, and she scrambled in.

"Can I come in?" Clarke whispered from the fire escape.

"Yes—and turn on the lights!"

The bed sprang into life. It was a great dust-covered heap of blankets and pillows piled a yard high.

There wasn't any Uncle Charlie, then, and never had been. Dolly knew it, plain as plain. "May I come back to your house?" she asked. "And stay all night at Miss Terhune's?"

"You know you can."

"Let's go," she said. "Now!"

"But what about your uncle?"

"I never want to hear of him again. And I don't want you to tell Miss Terhune anything!"

"All right, if you don't want me to. We'll just tell her you got locked out."

"Come on! Hurry!" Dolly had heard the sound of voices and footsteps in the lower hall.

V.

Major Redfern usually tipped the taxi driver, but tonight he only had a brusque "Thanks very much" and a stray thought as to whether the driver would be liable to remember where he had picked up his fare.

For the major had seen a ghost at the exact moment when he had presented Angela Duckney's card at her ball. Even though seen obliquely and halfway across the room, the major had identified it immediately as that of one Hep J. Morrison, who was built on somewhat the same ruthless dimensions as himself. There was no room there for both of them, so the major withdrew precipitately, even neglecting to go down the receiving line.

But he felt sure, as he stood in front of the checkroom, that his business rival had not seen him.

"Yes, my hat. And a cape and a stick," he agreed mildly.

Let there be no ambiguity at this point. The major was a bad man with high hopes, and the Baltimore venture had been among his hopes. But with Hep J. Morrison working the same town there were no more hopes.

Except, of course, the little girl! He considered the possibilities all the way home. Then, turning from the taxicab, he saw a small form on the stoop, shivering in a black domino and with a face so caked with flour that he hardly recognized it.

He opened the door, almost throwing Miss Willie inside. "Now what is it? Where've you been?"

"Look!" Out of her pocket she drew an emerald bracelet. Then from the top of her stocking she produced a platinum-and-diamond wrist watch. "Look at that!" she sang proudly.

"Where did you get this stuff?"

"At the party around the corner. I didn't touch anything else—honest! There wasn't another thing worth taking."

"Once a klep, always a klep," he said. "Look here. We're leaving right away. Hep Morrison was at the ball, so we'll have to try Atlanta. Where's Dolly?"

"She's still with the party. They have no idea who snitched the stuff."

He unwound his white scarf, folded it, and put it in his side pocket. "Soon as we're packed we'll go find that kid and then clear out. Is there anything to drink?"

"There's some gin up in 'Uncle Charlie's room.'"

With that the major and Miss Willie went upstairs.

VI.

Dolly had left her bag behind in that awful house, and the fact haunted her at school next day. She was even more worried when, after her first class, she was summoned to Miss Terhune's study.

"Sit down, Dolly." The teacher leaned forward over her desk and said, "Tell me: Was there any trouble at your uncle's last night? My nephew won't tell me a thing."

"All I want to do is get my bag, Miss Terhune. I left it there, you know. Then I'm going back to the Appletons'. But I certainly appreciate your taking me in last night."

Miss Terhune shifted in her chair. "Dolly, a telegram has just come from your father. He is on his way to Baltimore. And until he arrives you'd better stay right with me. This afternoon I'll have Clarke go with you to get your bag. And if your uncle is there, tell him I'd like to see him."

The door of 2008 was open when they got there, and the front blinds were up. Dolly peered in cautiously. Then she turned to Clarke and said, "There's three men inside. Will you go in with me?"

They were jostled suddenly by an expressman who had been trundling a small truck in the street. "Who you looking for?" he demanded.

"I happen to have left a small suitcase here," said Dolly.

"Well, talk to the man that owns the place."

The children hesitated, but were swept almost literally into the hall ahead of the expressman and his trunk. "Even before they were well inside, a man collared Clarke and marched him toward two other men within. The first was a quiet gray-haired man of fifty in the act of pulling a piece of cloth from a painting; the second was a grim-faced six-footer with a pad in his hand.

"That's not the pair," said the gray-haired man. "Why, these are just kids. What do you want here?"

"They might be working for the couple—" began the tall detective.

But the gray-haired man was looking at Dolly, "Open that other window," he said. She returned his gaze without fear, for he seemed like her own sort at last. And as the light came in he said, "You're Morton Haines' child."

"Are you Uncle Charlie?" Dolly demanded.

The man with the notebook was also surveying Dolly closely. In a low voice he said, "Be careful, Mr. Craig."

"It's all right," said Uncle Charlie. "This is my niece."

Dolly made one of those lightning decisions that sometimes got her in trouble, sometimes stood her in good stead. She would never say anything about what had occurred—never anything at all.

Catching the negative headshake by which she signaled this decision to Clarke, the detective frowned.

But Charlie Craig continued, "It's all right. I'd vouch for her anywhere, with her father's eyes and nose."

"Well, if you're sure, sir."

"Of course I'm sure. I know my kin." He turned to Dolly. "You might introduce your friend."

"This is Clarke Cresswell. He's a nephew of Miss Grace Terhune."

Mr. Craig turned to the detective. "That clinches it. I've known Miss Terhune since she was a foot high. You're my guest here, young lady. I wrote your father I'd be glad to put you up. Where are your things?"

"I brought my suitcase over," said Dolly, lying promptly.

He came close and took her hand. "I want to know you," he said.

"So that's that," the detective said to Mr. Craig. "The man is known as Dodo Gilbert, but he calls himself Lord Dana or George Whilomville or sometimes Major Redfern. And the woman named Birdie or Willie Lukas is an old hand at shoplifting."

"I haven't missed anything here so far. But I'm glad my niece didn't come into this house three days ago!"

They heard the phone ring and Dolly answering it.

"Just a minute," she said; "you want my uncle." She raised her voice: "Somebody wants you, Uncle Charlie." And then, "What? Oh, daddy! When did you get here?"

After she rang off, she gazed at the hall, glowing from newly opened windows. Clarke did not know what the new light in Dolly's eyes was, but it meant she was home at last.

THE END








Already with thee! tender is the night. . .
. . . But here there is no light,
Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown
Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.
--Ode to a Nightingale




TO

GERALD and SARA

MANY FÊTES





BOOK 1



I


On the pleasant shore of the French Riviera, about half way between
Marseilles and the Italian border, stands a large, proud, rose-
colored hotel.  Deferential palms cool its flushed façade, and
before it stretches a short dazzling beach.  Lately it has become a
summer resort of notable and fashionable people; a decade ago it
was almost deserted after its English clientele went north in
April.  Now, many bungalows cluster near it, but when this story
begins only the cupolas of a dozen old villas rotted like water
lilies among the massed pines between Gausse's Hôtel des Étrangers
and Cannes, five miles away.

The hotel and its bright tan prayer rug of a beach were one.  In
the early morning the distant image of Cannes, the pink and cream
of old fortifications, the purple Alp that bounded Italy, were cast
across the water and lay quavering in the ripples and rings sent up
by sea-plants through the clear shallows.  Before eight a man came
down to the beach in a blue bathrobe and with much preliminary
application to his person of the chilly water, and much grunting
and loud breathing, floundered a minute in the sea.  When he had
gone, beach and bay were quiet for an hour.  Merchantmen crawled
westward on the horizon; bus boys shouted in the hotel court; the
dew dried upon the pines.  In another hour the horns of motors
began to blow down from the winding road along the low range of the
Maures, which separates the littoral from true Provençal France.

A mile from the sea, where pines give way to dusty poplars, is an
isolated railroad stop, whence one June morning in 1925 a victoria
brought a woman and her daughter down to Gausse's Hotel.  The
mother's face was of a fading prettiness that would soon be patted
with broken veins; her expression was both tranquil and aware in a
pleasant way.  However, one's eye moved on quickly to her daughter,
who had magic in her pink palms and her cheeks lit to a lovely
flame, like the thrilling flush of children after their cold baths
in the evening.  Her fine forehead sloped gently up to where her
hair, bordering it like an armorial shield, burst into lovelocks
and waves and curlicues of ash blonde and gold.  Her eyes were
bright, big, clear, wet, and shining, the color of her cheeks was
real, breaking close to the surface from the strong young pump of
her heart.  Her body hovered delicately on the last edge of
childhood--she was almost eighteen, nearly complete, but the dew
was still on her.

As sea and sky appeared below them in a thin, hot line the mother
said:

"Something tells me we're not going to like this place."

"I want to go home anyhow," the girl answered.

They both spoke cheerfully but were obviously without direction and
bored by the fact--moreover, just any direction would not do.  They
wanted high excitement, not from the necessity of stimulating jaded
nerves but with the avidity of prize-winning schoolchildren who
deserved their vacations.

"We'll stay three days and then go home.  I'll wire right away for
steamer tickets."

At the hotel the girl made the reservation in idiomatic but rather
flat French, like something remembered.  When they were installed
on the ground floor she walked into the glare of the French windows
and out a few steps onto the stone veranda that ran the length of
the hotel.  When she walked she carried herself like a ballet-
dancer, not slumped down on her hips but held up in the small of
her back.  Out there the hot light clipped close her shadow and she
retreated--it was too bright to see.  Fifty yards away the
Mediterranean yielded up its pigments, moment by moment, to the
brutal sunshine; below the balustrade a faded Buick cooked on the
hotel drive.

Indeed, of all the region only the beach stirred with activity.
Three British nannies sat knitting the slow pattern of Victorian
England, the pattern of the forties, the sixties, and the eighties,
into sweaters and socks, to the tune of gossip as formalized as
incantation; closer to the sea a dozen persons kept house under
striped umbrellas, while their dozen children pursued unintimidated
fish through the shallows or lay naked and glistening with cocoanut
oil out in the sun.

As Rosemary came onto the beach a boy of twelve ran past her and
dashed into the sea with exultant cries.  Feeling the impactive
scrutiny of strange faces, she took off her bathrobe and followed.
She floated face down for a few yards and finding it shallow
staggered to her feet and plodded forward, dragging slim legs like
weights against the resistance of the water.  When it was about
breast high, she glanced back toward shore: a bald man in a monocle
and a pair of tights, his tufted chest thrown out, his brash navel
sucked in, was regarding her attentively.  As Rosemary returned the
gaze the man dislodged the monocle, which went into hiding amid the
facetious whiskers of his chest, and poured himself a glass of
something from a bottle in his hand.

Rosemary laid her face on the water and swam a choppy little four-
beat crawl out to the raft.  The water reached up for her, pulled
her down tenderly out of the heat, seeped in her hair and ran into
the corners of her body.  She turned round and round in it,
embracing it, wallowing in it.  Reaching the raft she was out of
breath, but a tanned woman with very white teeth looked down at
her, and Rosemary, suddenly conscious of the raw whiteness of her
own body, turned on her back and drifted toward shore.  The hairy
man holding the bottle spoke to her as she came out.

"I say--they have sharks out behind the raft."  He was of
indeterminate nationality, but spoke English with a slow Oxford
drawl.  "Yesterday they devoured two British sailors from the
flotte at Golfe Juan."

"Heavens!" exclaimed Rosemary.

"They come in for the refuse from the flotte."

Glazing his eyes to indicate that he had only spoken in order to
warn her, he minced off two steps and poured himself another drink.

Not unpleasantly self-conscious, since there had been a slight sway
of attention toward her during this conversation, Rosemary looked
for a place to sit.  Obviously each family possessed the strip of
sand immediately in front of its umbrella; besides there was much
visiting and talking back and forth--the atmosphere of a community
upon which it would be presumptuous to intrude.  Farther up, where
the beach was strewn with pebbles and dead sea-weed, sat a group
with flesh as white as her own.  They lay under small hand-parasols
instead of beach umbrellas and were obviously less indigenous to
the place.  Between the dark people and the light, Rosemary found
room and spread out her peignoir on the sand.

Lying so, she first heard their voices and felt their feet skirt
her body and their shapes pass between the sun and herself.  The
breath of an inquisitive dog blew warm and nervous on her neck; she
could feel her skin broiling a little in the heat and hear the
small exhausted wa-waa of the expiring waves.  Presently her ear
distinguished individual voices and she became aware that some one
referred to scornfully as "that North guy" had kidnapped a waiter
from a café in Cannes last night in order to saw him in two.  The
sponsor of the story was a white-haired woman in full evening
dress, obviously a relic of the previous evening, for a tiara still
clung to her head and a discouraged orchid expired from her
shoulder.  Rosemary, forming a vague antipathy to her and her
companions, turned away.

Nearest her, on the other side, a young woman lay under a roof of
umbrellas making out a list of things from a book open on the sand.
Her bathing suit was pulled off her shoulders and her back, a
ruddy, orange brown, set off by a string of creamy pearls, shone in
the sun.  Her face was hard and lovely and pitiful.  Her eyes met
Rosemary's but did not see her.  Beyond her was a fine man in a
jockey cap and red-striped tights; then the woman Rosemary had seen
on the raft, and who looked back at her, seeing her; then a man
with a long face and a golden, leonine head, with blue tights and
no hat, talking very seriously to an unmistakably Latin young man
in black tights, both of them picking at little pieces of seaweed
in the sand.  She thought they were mostly Americans, but something
made them unlike the Americans she had known of late.

After a while she realized that the man in the jockey cap was
giving a quiet little performance for this group; he moved gravely
about with a rake, ostensibly removing gravel and meanwhile
developing some esoteric burlesque held in suspension by his grave
face.  Its faintest ramification had become hilarious, until
whatever he said released a burst of laughter.  Even those who,
like herself, were too far away to hear, sent out antennæ of
attention until the only person on the beach not caught up in it
was the young woman with the string of pearls.  Perhaps from
modesty of possession she responded to each salvo of amusement by
bending closer over her list.

The man of the monocle and bottle spoke suddenly out of the sky
above Rosemary.

"You are a ripping swimmer."

She demurred.

"Jolly good.  My name is Campion.  Here is a lady who says she saw
you in Sorrento last week and knows who you are and would so like
to meet you."

Glancing around with concealed annoyance Rosemary saw the untanned
people were waiting.  Reluctantly she got up and went over to them.

"Mrs. Abrams--Mrs. McKisco--Mr. McKisco--Mr. Dumphry--

"We know who you are," spoke up the woman in evening dress.
"You're Rosemary Hoyt and I recognized you in Sorrento and asked
the hotel clerk and we all think you're perfectly marvellous and we
want to know why you're not back in America making another
marvellous moving picture."

They made a superfluous gesture of moving over for her.  The woman
who had recognized her was not a Jewess, despite her name.  She was
one of those elderly "good sports" preserved by an imperviousness
to experience and a good digestion into another generation.

"We wanted to warn you about getting burned the first day," she
continued cheerily, "because YOUR skin is important, but there
seems to be so darn much formality on this beach that we didn't
know whether you'd mind."



II


"We thought maybe you were in the plot," said Mrs. McKisco.  She
was a shabby-eyed, pretty young woman with a disheartening
intensity.  "We don't know who's in the plot and who isn't.  One
man my husband had been particularly nice to turned out to be a
chief character--practically the assistant hero."

"The plot?" inquired Rosemary, half understanding.  "Is there a
plot?"

"My dear, we don't KNOW," said Mrs. Abrams, with a convulsive,
stout woman's chuckle.  "We're not in it.  We're the gallery."

Mr. Dumphry, a tow-headed effeminate young man, remarked:  "Mama
Abrams is a plot in herself," and Campion shook his monocle at him,
saying:  "Now, Royal, don't be too ghastly for words."  Rosemary
looked at them all uncomfortably, wishing her mother had come down
here with her.  She did not like these people, especially in her
immediate comparison of them with those who had interested her at
the other end of the beach.  Her mother's modest but compact social
gift got them out of unwelcome situations swiftly and firmly.  But
Rosemary had been a celebrity for only six months, and sometimes
the French manners of her early adolescence and the democratic
manners of America, these latter superimposed, made a certain
confusion and let her in for just such things.

Mr. McKisco, a scrawny, freckle-and-red man of thirty, did not find
the topic of the "plot" amusing.  He had been staring at the sea--
now after a swift glance at his wife he turned to Rosemary and
demanded aggressively:

"Been here long?"

"Only a day."

"Oh."

Evidently feeling that the subject had been thoroughly changed, he
looked in turn at the others.

"Going to stay all summer?" asked Mrs. McKisco, innocently.  "If
you do you can watch the plot unfold."

"For God's sake, Violet, drop the subject!" exploded her husband.
"Get a new joke, for God's sake!"

Mrs. McKisco swayed toward Mrs. Abrams and breathed audibly:

"He's nervous."

"I'm not nervous," disagreed McKisco.  "It just happens I'm not
nervous at all."

He was burning visibly--a grayish flush had spread over his face,
dissolving all his expressions into a vast ineffectuality.
Suddenly remotely conscious of his condition he got up to go in the
water, followed by his wife, and seizing the opportunity Rosemary
followed.

Mr. McKisco drew a long breath, flung himself into the shallows and
began a stiff-armed batting of the Mediterranean, obviously
intended to suggest a crawl--his breath exhausted he arose and
looked around with an expression of surprise that he was still in
sight of shore.

"I haven't learned to breathe yet.  I never quite understood how
they breathed."  He looked at Rosemary inquiringly.

"I think you breathe out under water," she explained.  "And every
fourth beat you roll your head over for air."

"The breathing's the hardest part for me.  Shall we go to the
raft?"

The man with the leonine head lay stretched out upon the raft,
which tipped back and forth with the motion of the water.  As Mrs.
McKisco reached for it a sudden tilt struck her arm up roughly,
whereupon the man started up and pulled her on board.

"I was afraid it hit you."  His voice was slow and shy; he had one
of the saddest faces Rosemary had ever seen, the high cheekbones of
an Indian, a long upper lip, and enormous deep-set dark golden
eyes.  He had spoken out of the side of his mouth, as if he hoped
his words would reach Mrs. McKisco by a circuitous and unobtrusive
route; in a minute he had shoved off into the water and his long
body lay motionless toward shore.

Rosemary and Mrs. McKisco watched him.  When he had exhausted his
momentum he abruptly bent double, his thin thighs rose above the
surface, and he disappeared totally, leaving scarcely a fleck of
foam behind.

"He's a good swimmer," Rosemary said.

Mrs. McKisco's answer came with surprising violence.

"Well, he's a rotten musician."  She turned to her husband, who
after two unsuccessful attempts had managed to climb on the raft,
and having attained his balance was trying to make some kind of
compensatory flourish, achieving only an extra stagger.  "I was
just saying that Abe North may be a good swimmer but he's a rotten
musician."

"Yes," agreed McKisco, grudgingly.  Obviously he had created his
wife's world, and allowed her few liberties in it.

"Antheil's my man."  Mrs. McKisco turned challengingly to Rosemary,
"Anthiel and Joyce.  I don't suppose you ever hear much about those
sort of people in Hollywood, but my husband wrote the first
criticism of Ulysses that ever appeared in America."

"I wish I had a cigarette," said McKisco calmly.  "That's more
important to me just now."

"He's got insides--don't you think so, Albert?"

Her voice faded off suddenly.  The woman of the pearls had joined
her two children in the water, and now Abe North came up under one
of them like a volcanic island, raising him on his shoulders.  The
child yelled with fear and delight and the woman watched with a
lovely peace, without a smile.

"Is that his wife?" Rosemary asked.

"No, that's Mrs. Diver.  They're not at the hotel."  Her eyes,
photographic, did not move from the woman's face.  After a moment
she turned vehemently to Rosemary.

"Have you been abroad before?"

"Yes--I went to school in Paris."

"Oh!  Well then you probably know that if you want to enjoy
yourself here the thing is to get to know some real French
families.  What do these people get out of it?"  She pointed her
left shoulder toward shore.  "They just stick around with each
other in little cliques.  Of course, we had letters of introduction
and met all the best French artists and writers in Paris.  That
made it very nice."

"I should think so."

"My husband is finishing his first novel, you see."

Rosemary said:  "Oh, he is?"  She was not thinking anything
special, except wondering whether her mother had got to sleep in
this heat.

"It's on the idea of Ulysses," continued Mrs. McKisco.  "Only
instead of taking twenty-four hours my husband takes a hundred
years.  He takes a decayed old French aristocrat and puts him in
contrast with the mechanical age--"

"Oh, for God's sake, Violet, don't go telling everybody the idea,"
protested McKisco.  "I don't want it to get all around before the
book's published."

Rosemary swam back to the shore, where she threw her peignoir over
her already sore shoulders and lay down again in the sun.  The man
with the jockey cap was now going from umbrella to umbrella
carrying a bottle and little glasses in his hands; presently he and
his friends grew livelier and closer together and now they were all
under a single assemblage of umbrellas--she gathered that some one
was leaving and that this was a last drink on the beach.  Even the
children knew that excitement was generating under that umbrella
and turned toward it--and it seemed to Rosemary that it all came
from the man in the jockey cap.

Noon dominated sea and sky--even the white line of Cannes, five
miles off, had faded to a mirage of what was fresh and cool; a
robin-breasted sailing boat pulled in behind it a strand from the
outer, darker sea.  It seemed that there was no life anywhere in
all this expanse of coast except under the filtered sunlight of
those umbrellas, where something went on amid the color and the
murmur.

Campion walked near her, stood a few feet away and Rosemary closed
her eyes, pretending to be asleep; then she half-opened them and
watched two dim, blurred pillars that were legs.  The man tried to
edge his way into a sand-colored cloud, but the cloud floated off
into the vast hot sky.  Rosemary fell really asleep.

She awoke drenched with sweat to find the beach deserted save for
the man in the jockey cap, who was folding a last umbrella.  As
Rosemary lay blinking, he walked nearer and said:

"I was going to wake you before I left.  It's not good to get too
burned right away."

"Thank you."  Rosemary looked down at her crimson legs.

"Heavens!"

She laughed cheerfully, inviting him to talk, but Dick Diver was
already carrying a tent and a beach umbrella up to a waiting car,
so she went into the water to wash off the sweat.  He came back and
gathering up a rake, a shovel, and a sieve, stowed them in a
crevice of a rock.  He glanced up and down the beach to see if he
had left anything.

"Do you know what time it is?" Rosemary asked.

"It's about half-past one."

They faced the seascape together momentarily.

"It's not a bad time," said Dick Diver.  "It's not one of worst
times of the day."

He looked at her and for a moment she lived in the bright blue
worlds of his eyes, eagerly and confidently.  Then he shouldered
his last piece of junk and went up to his car, and Rosemary came
out of the water, shook out her peignoir and walked up to the
hotel.



III


It was almost two when they went into the dining-room.  Back and
forth over the deserted tables a heavy pattern of beams and shadows
swayed with the motion of the pines outside.  Two waiters, piling
plates and talking loud Italian, fell silent when they came in and
brought them a tired version of the table d'hôte luncheon.

"I fell in love on the beach," said Rosemary.

"Who with?"

"First with a whole lot of people who looked nice.  Then with one
man."

"Did you talk to him?"

"Just a little.  Very handsome.  With reddish hair."  She was
eating, ravenously.  "He's married though--it's usually the way."

Her mother was her best friend and had put every last possibility
into the guiding of her, not so rare a thing in the theatrical
profession, but rather special in that Mrs. Elsie Speers was not
recompensing herself for a defeat of her own.  She had no personal
bitterness or resentments about life--twice satisfactorily married
and twice widowed, her cheerful stoicism had each time deepened.
One of her husbands had been a cavalry officer and one an army
doctor, and they both left something to her that she tried to
present intact to Rosemary.  By not sparing Rosemary she had made
her hard--by not sparing her own labor and devotion she had
cultivated an idealism in Rosemary, which at present was directed
toward herself and saw the world through her eyes.  So that while
Rosemary was a "simple" child she was protected by a double sheath
of her mother's armor and her own--she had a mature distrust of the
trivial, the facile and the vulgar.  However, with Rosemary's
sudden success in pictures Mrs. Speers felt that it was time she
were spiritually weaned; it would please rather than pain her if
this somewhat bouncing, breathless and exigent idealism would focus
on something except herself.

"Then you like it here?" she asked.

"It might be fun if we knew those people.  There were some other
people, but they weren't nice.  They recognized me--no matter where
we go everybody's seen 'Daddy's Girl.'"

Mrs. Speers waited for the glow of egotism to subside; then she
said in a matter-of-fact way:  "That reminds me, when are you going
to see Earl Brady?"

"I thought we might go this afternoon--if you're rested."

"You go--I'm not going."

"We'll wait till to-morrow then."

"I want you to go alone.  It's only a short way--it isn't as if you
didn't speak French."

"Mother--aren't there some things I don't have to do?"

"Oh, well then go later--but some day before we leave."

"All right, Mother."

After lunch they were both overwhelmed by the sudden flatness that
comes over American travellers in quiet foreign places.  No stimuli
worked upon them, no voices called them from without, no fragments
of their own thoughts came suddenly from the minds of others, and
missing the clamor of Empire they felt that life was not continuing
here.

"Let's only stay three days, Mother," Rosemary said when they were
back in their rooms.  Outside a light wind blew the heat around,
straining it through the trees and sending little hot gusts through
the shutters.

"How about the man you fell in love with on the beach?"

"I don't love anybody but you, Mother, darling."

Rosemary stopped in the lobby and spoke to Gausse père about
trains.  The concierge, lounging in light-brown khaki by the desk,
stared at her rigidly, then suddenly remembered the manners of his
métier.  She took the bus and rode with a pair of obsequious
waiters to the station, embarrassed by their deferential silence,
wanting to urge them:  "Go on, talk, enjoy yourselves.  It doesn't
bother me."

The first-class compartment was stifling; the vivid advertising
cards of the railroad companies--The Pont du Gard at Arles, the
Amphitheatre at Orange, winter sports at Chamonix--were fresher
than the long motionless sea outside.  Unlike American trains that
were absorbed in an intense destiny of their own, and scornful of
people on another world less swift and breathless, this train was
part of the country through which it passed.  Its breath stirred
the dust from the palm leaves, the cinders mingled with the dry
dung in the gardens.  Rosemary was sure she could lean from the
window and pull flowers with her hand.

A dozen cabbies slept in their hacks outside the Cannes station.
Over on the promenade the Casino, the smart shops, and the great
hotels turned blank iron masks to the summer sea.  It was
unbelievable that there could ever have been a "season," and
Rosemary, half in the grip of fashion, became a little self-
conscious, as though she were displaying an unhealthy taste for the
moribund; as though people were wondering why she was here in the
lull between the gaiety of last winter and next winter, while up
north the true world thundered by.



As she came out of a drug store with a bottle of cocoanut oil, a
woman, whom she recognized as Mrs. Diver, crossed her path with
arms full of sofa cushions, and went to a car parked down the
street.  A long, low black dog barked at her, a dozing chauffeur
woke with a start.  She sat in the car, her lovely face set,
controlled, her eyes brave and watchful, looking straight ahead
toward nothing.  Her dress was bright red and her brown legs were
bare.  She had thick, dark, gold hair like a chow's.

With half an hour to wait for her train Rosemary sat down in the
Café des Alliés on the Croisette, where the trees made a green
twilight over the tables and an orchestra wooed an imaginary public
of cosmopolites with the Nice Carnival Song and last year's
American tune.  She had bought Le Temps and The Saturday Evening
Post for her mother, and as she drank her citronade she opened the
latter at the memoirs of a Russian princess, finding the dim
conventions of the nineties realer and nearer than the headlines of
the French paper.  It was the same feeling that had oppressed her
at the hotel--accustomed to seeing the starkest grotesqueries of a
continent heavily underlined as comedy or tragedy, untrained to the
task of separating out the essential for herself, she now began to
feel that French life was empty and stale.  This feeling was
surcharged by listening to the sad tunes of the orchestra,
reminiscent of the melancholy music played for acrobats in
vaudeville.  She was glad to go back to Gausse's Hotel.

Her shoulders were too burned to swim with the next day, so she and
her mother hired a car--after much haggling, for Rosemary had
formed her valuations of money in France--and drove along the
Riviera, the delta of many rivers.  The chauffeur, a Russian Czar
of the period of Ivan the Terrible, was a self-appointed guide, and
the resplendent names--Cannes, Nice, Monte Carlo--began to glow
through their torpid camouflage, whispering of old kings come here
to dine or die, of rajahs tossing Buddha's eyes to English
ballerinas, of Russian princes turning the weeks into Baltic
twilights in the lost caviare days.  Most of all, there was the
scent of the Russians along the coast--their closed book shops and
grocery stores.  Ten years ago, when the season ended in April, the
doors of the Orthodox Church were locked, and the sweet champagnes
they favored were put away until their return.  "We'll be back next
season," they said, but this was premature, for they were never
coming back any more.

It was pleasant to drive back to the hotel in the late afternoon,
above a sea as mysteriously colored as the agates and cornelians of
childhood, green as green milk, blue as laundry water, wine dark.
It was pleasant to pass people eating outside their doors, and to
hear the fierce mechanical pianos behind the vines of country
estaminets.  When they turned off the Corniche d'Or and down to
Gausse's Hotel through the darkening banks of trees, set one behind
another in many greens, the moon already hovered over the ruins of
the aqueducts. . . .

Somewhere in the hills behind the hotel there was a dance, and
Rosemary listened to the music through the ghostly moonshine of her
mosquito net, realizing that there was gaiety too somewhere about,
and she thought of the nice people on the beach.  She thought she
might meet them in the morning, but they obviously formed a self-
sufficient little group, and once their umbrellas, bamboo rugs,
dogs, and children were set out in place the part of the plage was
literally fenced in.  She resolved in any case not to spend her
last two mornings with the other ones.



IV


The matter was solved for her.  The McKiscos were not yet there and
she had scarcely spread her peignoir when two men--the man with the
jockey cap and the tall blonde man, given to sawing waiters in two--
left the group and came down toward her.

"Good morning," said Dick Diver.  He broke down.  "Look--sunburn or
no sunburn, why did you stay away yesterday?  We worried about
you."

She sat up and her happy little laugh welcomed their intrusion.

"We wondered," Dick Diver said, "if you wouldn't come over this
morning.  We go in, we take food and drink, so it's a substantial
invitation."

He seemed kind and charming--his voice promised that he would take
care of her, and that a little later he would open up whole new
worlds for her, unroll an endless succession of magnificent
possibilities.  He managed the introduction so that her name wasn't
mentioned and then let her know easily that everyone knew who she
was but were respecting the completeness of her private life--a
courtesy that Rosemary had not met with save from professional
people since her success.

Nicole Diver, her brown back hanging from her pearls, was looking
through a recipe book for chicken Maryland.  She was about twenty-
four, Rosemary guessed--her face could have been described in terms
of conventional prettiness, but the effect was that it had been
made first on the heroic scale with strong structure and marking,
as if the features and vividness of brow and coloring, everything
we associate with temperament and character had been molded with a
Rodinesque intention, and then chiseled away in the direction of
prettiness to a point where a single slip would have irreparably
diminished its force and quality.  With the mouth the sculptor had
taken desperate chances--it was the cupid's bow of a magazine
cover, yet it shared the distinction of the rest.

"Are you here for a long time?" Nicole asked.  Her voice was low,
almost harsh.

Suddenly Rosemary let the possibility enter her mind that they
might stay another week.

"Not very long," she answered vaguely.  "We've been abroad a long
time--we landed in Sicily in March and we've been slowly working
our way north.  I got pneumonia making a picture last January and
I've been recuperating."

"Mercy!  How did that happen?"

"Well, it was from swimming," Rosemary was rather reluctant at
embarking upon personal revelations.  "One day I happened to have
the grippe and didn't know it, and they were taking a scene where I
dove into a canal in Venice.  It was a very expensive set, so I had
to dive and dive and dive all morning.  Mother had a doctor right
there, but it was no use--I got pneumonia."  She changed the
subject determinedly before they could speak.  "Do you like it
here--this place?"

"They have to like it," said Abe North slowly.  "They invented it."
He turned his noble head slowly so that his eyes rested with
tenderness and affection on the two Divers.

"Oh, did you?"

"This is only the second season that the hotel's been open in
summer," Nicole explained.  "We persuaded Gausse to keep on a cook
and a garçon and a chasseur--it paid its way and this year it's
doing even better."

"But you're not in the hotel."

"We built a house, up at Tarmes."

"The theory is," said Dick, arranging an umbrella to clip a square
of sunlight off Rosemary's shoulder, "that all the northern places,
like Deauville, were picked out by Russians and English who don't
mind the cold, while half of us Americans come from tropical
climates--that's why we're beginning to come here."

The young man of Latin aspect had been turning the pages of The New
York Herald.

"Well, what nationality are these people?" he demanded, suddenly,
and read with a slight French intonation, "'Registered at the Hotel
Palace at Vevey are Mr. Pandely Vlasco, Mme. Bonneasse'--I don't
exaggerate--'Corinna Medonca, Mme. Pasche, Seraphim Tullio, Maria
Amalia Roto Mais, Moises Teubel, Mme. Paragoris, Apostle Alexandre,
Yolanda Yosfuglu and Geneveva de Momus!'  She attracts me most--
Geneveva de Momus.  Almost worth running up to Vevey to take a look
at Geneveva de Momus."

He stood up with sudden restlessness, stretching himself with one
sharp movement.  He was a few years younger than Diver or North.
He was tall and his body was hard but overspare save for the
bunched force gathered in his shoulders and upper arms.  At first
glance he seemed conventionally handsome--but there was a faint
disgust always in his face which marred the full fierce lustre of
his brown eyes.  Yet one remembered them afterward, when one had
forgotten the inability of the mouth to endure boredom and the
young forehead with its furrows of fretful and unprofitable pain.

"We found some fine ones in the news of Americans last week," said
Nicole.  "Mrs. Evelyn Oyster and--what were the others?"

"There was Mr. S. Flesh," said Diver, getting up also.  He took his
rake and began to work seriously at getting small stones out of the
sand.

"Oh, yes--S. Flesh--doesn't he give you the creeps?"

It was quiet alone with Nicole--Rosemary found it even quieter than
with her mother.  Abe North and Barban, the Frenchman, were talking
about Morocco, and Nicole having copied her recipe picked up a
piece of sewing.  Rosemary examined their appurtenances--four large
parasols that made a canopy of shade, a portable bath house for
dressing, a pneumatic rubber horse, new things that Rosemary had
never seen, from the first burst of luxury manufacturing after the
War, and probably in the hands of the first of purchasers.  She had
gathered that they were fashionable people, but though her mother
had brought her up to beware such people as drones, she did not
feel that way here.  Even in their absolute immobility, complete as
that of the morning, she felt a purpose, a working over something,
a direction, an act of creation different from any she had known.
Her immature mind made no speculations upon the nature of their
relation to each other, she was only concerned with their attitude
toward herself--but she perceived the web of some pleasant
interrelation, which she expressed with the thought that they
seemed to have a very good time.

She looked in turn at the three men, temporarily expropriating
them.  All three were personable in different ways; all were of a
special gentleness that she felt was part of their lives, past and
future, not circumstanced by events, not at all like the company
manners of actors, and she detected also a far-reaching delicacy
that was different from the rough and ready good fellowship of
directors, who represented the intellectuals in her life.  Actors
and directors--those were the only men she had ever known, those
and the heterogeneous, indistinguishable mass of college boys,
interested only in love at first sight, whom she had met at the
Yale prom last fall.

These three were different.  Barban was less civilized, more
skeptical and scoffing, his manners were formal, even perfunctory.
Abe North had, under his shyness, a desperate humor that amused but
puzzled her.  Her serious nature distrusted its ability to make a
supreme impression on him.

But Dick Diver--he was all complete there.  Silently she admired
him.  His complexion was reddish and weather-burned, so was his
short hair--a light growth of it rolled down his arms and hands.
His eyes were of a bright, hard blue.  His nose was somewhat
pointed and there was never any doubt at whom he was looking or
talking--and this is a flattering attention, for who looks at us?--
glances fall upon us, curious or disinterested, nothing more.  His
voice, with some faint Irish melody running through it, wooed the
world, yet she felt the layer of hardness in him, of self-control
and of self-discipline, her own virtues.  Oh, she chose him, and
Nicole, lifting her head saw her choose him, heard the little sigh
at the fact that he was already possessed.

Toward noon the McKiscos, Mrs. Abrams, Mr. Dumphry, and Signor
Campion came on the beach.  They had brought a new umbrella that
they set up with side glances toward the Divers, and crept under
with satisfied expressions--all save Mr. McKisco, who remained
derisively without.  In his raking Dick had passed near them and
now he returned to the umbrellas.

"The two young men are reading the Book of Etiquette together," he
said in a low voice.

"Planning to mix wit de quality," said Abe.

Mary North, the very tanned young woman whom Rosemary had
encountered the first day on the raft, came in from swimming and
said with a smile that was a rakish gleam:

"So Mr. and Mrs. Neverquiver have arrived."

"They're this man's friends," Nicole reminded her, indicating Abe.
"Why doesn't he go and speak to them?  Don't you think they're
attractive?"

"I think they're very attractive," Abe agreed.  "I just don't think
they're attractive, that's all."

"Well, I HAVE felt there were too many people on the beach this
summer," Nicole admitted.  "OUR beach that Dick made out of a
pebble pile."  She considered, and then lowering her voice out of
the range of the trio of nannies who sat back under another
umbrella.  "Still, they're preferable to those British last summer
who kept shouting about:  'Isn't the sea blue?  Isn't the sky
white?  Isn't little Nellie's nose red?'"

Rosemary thought she would not like to have Nicole for an enemy.

"But you didn't see the fight," Nicole continued.  "The day before
you came, the married man, the one with the name that sounds like a
substitute for gasoline or butter--"

"McKisco?"

"Yes--well they were having words and she tossed some sand in his
face.  So naturally he sat on top of her and rubbed her face in the
sand.  We were--electrified.  I wanted Dick to interfere."

"I think," said Dick Diver, staring down abstractedly at the straw
mat, "that I'll go over and invite them to dinner."

"No, you won't," Nicole told him quickly.

"I think it would be a very good thing.  They're here--let's adjust
ourselves."

"We're very well adjusted," she insisted, laughing.  "I'm not going
to have MY nose rubbed in the sand.  I'm a mean, hard woman," she
explained to Rosemary, and then raising her voice, "Children, put
on your bathing suits!"

Rosemary felt that this swim would become the typical one of her
life, the one that would always pop up in her memory at the mention
of swimming.  Simultaneously the whole party moved toward the
water, super-ready from the long, forced inaction, passing from the
heat to the cool with the gourmandise of a tingling curry eaten
with chilled white wine.  The Divers' day was spaced like the day
of the older civilizations to yield the utmost from the materials
at hand, and to give all the transitions their full value, and she
did not know that there would be another transition presently from
the utter absorption of the swim to the garrulity of the Provençal
lunch hour.  But again she had the sense that Dick was taking care
of her, and she delighted in responding to the eventual movement as
if it had been an order.

Nicole handed her husband the curious garment on which she had been
working.  He went into the dressing tent and inspired a commotion
by appearing in a moment clad in transparent black lace drawers.
Close inspection revealed that actually they were lined with flesh-
colored cloth.



"Well, if that isn't a pansys trick!" exclaimed Mr. McKisco
contemptuously--then turning quickly to Mr. Dumphry and Mr.
Campion, he added, "Oh, I beg your pardon."

Rosemary bubbled with delight at the trunks.  Her naïveté responded
whole-heartedly to the expensive simplicity of the Divers, unaware
of its complexity and its lack of innocence, unaware that it was
all a selection of quality rather than quantity from the run of the
world's bazaar; and that the simplicity of behavior also, the
nursery-like peace and good will, the emphasis on the simpler
virtues, was part of a desperate bargain with the gods and had been
attained through struggles she could not have guessed at.  At that
moment the Divers represented externally the exact furthermost
evolution of a class, so that most people seemed awkward beside
them--in reality a qualitative change had already set in that was
not at all apparent to Rosemary.

She stood with them as they took sherry and ate crackers.  Dick
Diver looked at her with cold blue eyes; his kind, strong mouth
said thoughtfully and deliberately:

"You're the only girl I've seen for a long time that actually did
look like something blooming."



In her mother's lap afterward Rosemary cried and cried.

"I love him, Mother.  I'm desperately in love with him--I never
knew I could feel that way about anybody.  And he's married and I
like her too--it's just hopeless.  Oh, I love him so!"

"I'm curious to meet him."

"She invited us to dinner Friday."

"If you're in love it ought to make you happy.  You ought to
laugh."

Rosemary looked up and gave a beautiful little shiver of her face
and laughed.  Her mother always had a great influence on her.



V


Rosemary went to Monte Carlo nearly as sulkily as it was possible
for her to be.  She rode up the rugged hill to La Turbie, to an old
Gaumont lot in process of reconstruction, and as she stood by the
grilled entrance waiting for an answer to the message on her card,
she might have been looking into Hollywood.  The bizarre débris of
some recent picture, a decayed street scene in India, a great
cardboard whale, a monstrous tree bearing cherries large as
basketballs, bloomed there by exotic dispensation, autochthonous as
the pale amaranth, mimosa, cork oak or dwarfed pine.  There were a
quick-lunch shack and two barnlike stages and everywhere about the
lot, groups of waiting, hopeful, painted faces.

After ten minutes a young man with hair the color of canary
feathers hurried down to the gate.

"Come in, Miss Hoyt.  Mr. Brady's on the set, but he's very anxious
to see you.  I'm sorry you were kept waiting, but you know some of
these French dames are worse about pushing themselves in--"

The studio manager opened a small door in the blank wall of stage
building and with sudden glad familiarity Rosemary followed him
into half darkness.  Here and there figures spotted the twilight,
turning up ashen faces to her like souls in purgatory watching the
passage of a mortal through.  There were whispers and soft voices
and, apparently from afar, the gentle tremolo of a small organ.
Turning the corner made by some flats, they came upon the white
crackling glow of a stage, where a French actor--his shirt front,
collar, and cuffs tinted a brilliant pink--and an American actress
stood motionless face to face.  They stared at each other with
dogged eyes, as though they had been in the same position for
hours; and still for a long time nothing happened, no one moved.  A
bank of lights went off with a savage hiss, went on again; the
plaintive tap of a hammer begged admission to nowhere in the
distance; a blue face appeared among the blinding lights above,
called something unintelligible into the upper blackness.  Then the
silence was broken by a voice in front of Rosemary.

"Baby, you don't take off the stockings, you can spoil ten more
pairs.  That dress is fifteen pounds."

Stepping backward the speaker ran against Rosemary, whereupon the
studio manager said, "Hey, Earl--Miss Hoyt."

They were meeting for the first time.  Brady was quick and
strenuous.  As he took her hand she saw him look her over from head
to foot, a gesture she recognized and that made her feel at home,
but gave her always a faint feeling of superiority to whoever made
it.  If her person was property she could exercise whatever
advantage was inherent in its ownership.

"I thought you'd be along any day now," Brady said, in a voice that
was just a little too compelling for private life, and that trailed
with it a faintly defiant cockney accent.  "Have a good trip?"

"Yes, but we're glad to be going home."

"No-o-o!" he protested.  "Stay awhile--I want to talk to you.  Let
me tell you that was some picture of yours--that 'Daddy's Girl.'  I
saw it in Paris.  I wired the coast right away to see if you were
signed."

"I just had--I'm sorry."

"God, what a picture!"

Not wanting to smile in silly agreement Rosemary frowned.

"Nobody wants to be thought of forever for just one picture," she
said.

"Sure--that's right.  What're your plans?"

"Mother thought I needed a rest.  When I get back we'll probably
either sign up with First National or keep on with Famous."

"Who's we?"

"My mother.  She decides business matters.  I couldn't do without
her."

Again he looked her over completely, and, as he did, something in
Rosemary went out to him.  It was not liking, not at all the
spontaneous admiration she had felt for the man on the beach this
morning.  It was a click.  He desired her and, so far as her
virginal emotions went, she contemplated a surrender with
equanimity.  Yet she knew she would forget him half an hour after
she left him--like an actor kissed in a picture.

"Where are you staying?" Brady asked.  "Oh, yes, at Gausse's.
Well, my plans are made for this year, too, but that letter I wrote
you still stands.  Rather make a picture with you than any girl
since Connie Talmadge was a kid."

"I feel the same way.  Why don't you come back to Hollywood?"

"I can't stand the damn place.  I'm fine here.  Wait till after
this shot and I'll show you around."

Walking onto the set he began to talk to the French actor in a low,
quiet voice.

Five minutes passed--Brady talked on, while from time to time the
Frenchman shifted his feet and nodded.  Abruptly, Brady broke off,
calling something to the lights that startled them into a humming
glare.  Los Angeles was loud about Rosemary now.  Unappalled she
moved once more through the city of thin partitions, wanting to be
back there.  But she did not want to see Brady in the mood she
sensed he would be in after he had finished and she left the lot
with a spell still upon her.  The Mediterranean world was less
silent now that she knew the studio was there.  She liked the
people on the streets and bought herself a pair of espadrilles on
the way to the train.



Her mother was pleased that she had done so accurately what she was
told to do, but she still wanted to launch her out and away.  Mrs.
Speers was fresh in appearance but she was tired; death beds make
people tired indeed and she had watched beside a couple.



VI


Feeling good from the rosy wine at lunch, Nicole Diver folded her
arms high enough for the artificial camellia on her shoulder to
touch her cheek, and went out into her lovely grassless garden.
The garden was bounded on one side by the house, from which it
flowed and into which it ran, on two sides by the old village, and
on the last by the cliff falling by ledges to the sea.

Along the walls on the village side all was dusty, the wriggling
vines, the lemon and eucalyptus trees, the casual wheel-barrow,
left only a moment since, but already grown into the path,
atrophied and faintly rotten.  Nicole was invariably somewhat
surprised that by turning in the other direction past a bed of
peonies she walked into an area so green and cool that the leaves
and petals were curled with tender damp.

Knotted at her throat she wore a lilac scarf that even in the
achromatic sunshine cast its color up to her face and down around
her moving feet in a lilac shadow.  Her face was hard, almost
stern, save for the soft gleam of piteous doubt that looked from
her green eyes.  Her once fair hair had darkened, but she was
lovelier now at twenty-four than she had been at eighteen, when her
hair was brighter than she.

Following a walk marked by an intangible mist of bloom that
followed the white border stones she came to a space overlooking
the sea where there were lanterns asleep in the fig trees and a big
table and wicker chairs and a great market umbrella from Sienna,
all gathered about an enormous pine, the biggest tree in the
garden.  She paused there a moment, looking absently at a growth of
nasturtiums and iris tangled at its foot, as though sprung from a
careless handful of seeds, listening to the plaints and accusations
of some nursery squabble in the house.  When this died away on the
summer air, she walked on, between kaleidoscopic peonies massed in
pink clouds, black and brown tulips and fragile mauve-stemmed
roses, transparent like sugar flowers in a confectioner's window--
until, as if the scherzo of color could reach no further intensity,
it broke off suddenly in mid-air, and moist steps went down to a
level five feet below.

Here there was a well with the boarding around it dank and slippery
even on the brightest days.  She went up the stairs on the other
side and into the vegetable garden; she walked rather quickly; she
liked to be active, though at times she gave an impression of
repose that was at once static and evocative.  This was because she
knew few words and believed in none, and in the world she was
rather silent, contributing just her share of urbane humor with a
precision that approached meagreness.  But at the moment when
strangers tended to grow uncomfortable in the presence of this
economy she would seize the topic and rush off with it, feverishly
surprised with herself--then bring it back and relinquish it
abruptly, almost timidly, like an obedient retriever, having been
adequate and something more.

As she stood in the fuzzy green light of the vegetable garden, Dick
crossed the path ahead of her going to his work house.  Nicole
waited silently till he had passed; then she went on through lines
of prospective salads to a little menagerie where pigeons and
rabbits and a parrot made a medley of insolent noises at her.
Descending to another ledge she reached a low, curved wall and
looked down seven hundred feet to the Mediterranean Sea.

She stood in the ancient hill village of Tarmes.  The villa and its
grounds were made out of a row of peasant dwellings that abutted on
the cliff--five small houses had been combined to make the house
and four destroyed to make the garden.  The exterior walls were
untouched so that from the road far below it was indistinguishable
from the violet gray mass of the town.

For a moment Nicole stood looking down at the Mediterranean but
there was nothing to do with that, even with her tireless hands.
Presently Dick came out of his one-room house carrying a telescope
and looked east toward Cannes.  In a moment Nicole swam into his
field of vision, whereupon he disappeared into his house and came
out with a megaphone.  He had many light mechanical devices.

"Nicole," he shouted, "I forgot to tell you that as a final
apostolic gesture I invited Mrs. Abrams, the woman with the white
hair."

"I suspected it.  It's an outrage."

The ease with which her reply reached him seemed to belittle his
megaphone, so she raised her voice and called, "Can you hear me?"

"Yes."  He lowered the megaphone and then raised it stubbornly.
"I'm going to invite some more people too.  I'm going to invite the
two young men."

"All right," she agreed placidly.

"I want to give a really BAD party.  I mean it.  I want to give a
party where there's a brawl and seductions and people going home
with their feelings hurt and women passed out in the cabinet de
toilette.  You wait and see."

He went back into his house and Nicole saw that one of his most
characteristic moods was upon him, the excitement that swept
everyone up into it and was inevitably followed by his own form of
melancholy, which he never displayed but at which she guessed.
This excitement about things reached an intensity out of proportion
to their importance, generating a really extraordinary virtuosity
with people.  Save among a few of the tough-minded and perennially
suspicious, he had the power of arousing a fascinated and
uncritical love.  The reaction came when he realized the waste and
extravagance involved.  He sometimes looked back with awe at the
carnivals of affection he had given, as a general might gaze upon a
massacre he had ordered to satisfy an impersonal blood lust.

But to be included in Dick Diver's world for a while was a
remarkable experience: people believed he made special reservations
about them, recognizing the proud uniqueness of their destinies,
buried under the compromises of how many years.  He won everyone
quickly with an exquisite consideration and a politeness that moved
so fast and intuitively that it could be examined only in its
effect.  Then, without caution, lest the first bloom of the
relation wither, he opened the gate to his amusing world.  So long
as they subscribed to it completely, their happiness was his
preoccupation, but at the first flicker of doubt as to its all-
inclusiveness he evaporated before their eyes, leaving little
communicable memory of what he had said or done.

At eight-thirty that evening he came out to meet his first guests,
his coat carried rather ceremoniously, rather promisingly, in his
hand, like a toreador's cape.  It was characteristic that after
greeting Rosemary and her mother he waited for them to speak first,
as if to allow them the reassurance of their own voices in new
surroundings.

To resume Rosemary's point of view it should be said that, under
the spell of the climb to Tarmes and the fresher air, she and her
mother looked about appreciatively.  Just as the personal qualities
of extraordinary people can make themselves plain in an
unaccustomed change of expression, so the intensely calculated
perfection of Villa Diana transpired all at once through such
minute failures as the chance apparition of a maid in the
background or the perversity of a cork.  While the first guests
arrived bringing with them the excitement of the night, the
domestic activity of the day receded past them gently, symbolized
by the Diver children and their governess still at supper on the
terrace.

"What a beautiful garden!" Mrs. Speers exclaimed.

"Nicole's garden," said Dick.  "She won't let it alone--she nags it
all the time, worries about its diseases.  Any day now I expect to
have her come down with Powdery Mildew or Fly Speck, or Late
Blight."  He pointed his forefinger decisively at Rosemary, saying
with a lightness seeming to conceal a paternal interest, "I'm going
to save your reason--I'm going to give you a hat to wear on the
beach."

He turned them from the garden to the terrace, where he poured a
cocktail.  Earl Brady arrived, discovering Rosemary with surprise.
His manner was softer than at the studio, as if his differentness
had been put on at the gate, and Rosemary, comparing him instantly
with Dick Diver, swung sharply toward the latter.  In comparison
Earl Brady seemed faintly gross, faintly ill-bred; once more,
though, she felt an electric response to his person.

He spoke familiarly to the children who were getting up from their
outdoor supper.

"Hello, Lanier, how about a song?  Will you and Topsy sing me a
song?"

"What shall we sing?" agreed the little boy, with the odd chanting
accent of American children brought up in France.

"That song about 'Mon Ami Pierrot.'"

Brother and sister stood side by side without self-consciousness
and their voices soared sweet and shrill upon the evening air.


     "Au clair de la lune
      Mon Ami Pierrot
      Prête-moi ta plume
      Pour écrire un mot
      Ma chandelle est morte
      Je n'ai plus de feu
      Ouvre-moi ta porte
      Pour l'amour de Dieu."


The singing ceased and the children, their faces aglow with the
late sunshine, stood smiling calmly at their success.  Rosemary was
thinking that the Villa Diana was the centre of the world.  On such
a stage some memorable thing was sure to happen.  She lighted up
higher as the gate tinkled open and the rest of the guests arrived
in a body--the McKiscos, Mrs. Abrams, Mr. Dumphry, and Mr. Campion
came up to the terrace.

Rosemary had a sharp feeling of disappointment--she looked quickly
at Dick, as though to ask an explanation of this incongruous
mingling.  But there was nothing unusual in his expression.  He
greeted his new guests with a proud bearing and an obvious
deference to their infinite and unknown possibilities.  She
believed in him so much that presently she accepted the rightness
of the McKiscos' presence as if she had expected to meet them all
along.

"I've met you in Paris," McKisco said to Abe North, who with his
wife had arrived on their heels, "in fact I've met you twice."

"Yes, I remember," Abe said.

"Then where was it?" demanded McKisco, not content to let well
enough alone.

"Why, I think--"  Abe got tired of the game, "I can't remember."

The interchange filled a pause and Rosemary's instinct was that
something tactful should be said by somebody, but Dick made no
attempt to break up the grouping formed by these late arrivals, not
even to disarm Mrs. McKisco of her air of supercilious amusement.
He did not solve this social problem because he knew it was not of
importance at the moment and would solve itself.  He was saving his
newness for a larger effort, waiting a more significant moment for
his guests to be conscious of a good time.

Rosemary stood beside Tommy Barban--he was in a particularly
scornful mood and there seemed to be some special stimulus working
upon him.  He was leaving in the morning.

"Going home?"

"Home?  I have no home.  I am going to a war."

"What war?"

"What war?  Any war.  I haven't seen a paper lately but I suppose
there's a war--there always is."

"Don't you care what you fight for?"

"Not at all--so long as I'm well treated.  When I'm in a rut I come
to see the Divers, because then I know that in a few weeks I'll
want to go to war."

Rosemary stiffened.

"You like the Divers," she reminded him.

"Of course--especially her--but they make me want to go to war."

She considered this, to no avail.  The Divers made her want to stay
near them forever.

"You're half American," she said, as if that should solve the
problem.

"Also I'm half French, and I was educated in England and since I
was eighteen I've worn the uniforms of eight countries.  But I hope
I did not give you the impression that I am not fond of the Divers--
I am, especially of Nicole."

"How could any one help it?" she said simply.

She felt far from him.  The undertone of his words repelled her and
she withdrew her adoration for the Divers from the profanity of his
bitterness.  She was glad he was not next to her at dinner and she
was still thinking of his words "especially her" as they moved
toward the table in the garden.

For a moment now she was beside Dick Diver on the path.  Alongside
his hard, neat brightness everything faded into the surety that he
knew everything.  For a year, which was forever, she had had money
and a certain celebrity and contact with the celebrated, and these
latter had presented themselves merely as powerful enlargements of
the people with whom the doctor's widow and her daughter had
associated in a hôtel-pension in Paris.  Rosemary was a romantic
and her career had not provided many satisfactory opportunities on
that score.  Her mother, with the idea of a career for Rosemary,
would not tolerate any such spurious substitutes as the excitations
available on all sides, and indeed Rosemary was already beyond
that--she was In the movies but not at all At them.  So when she
had seen approval of Dick Diver in her mother's face it meant that
he was "the real thing"; it meant permission to go as far as she
could.

"I was watching you," he said, and she knew he meant it.  "We've
grown very fond of you."

"I fell in love with you the first time I saw you," she said
quietly.  He pretended not to have heard, as if the compliment were
purely formal.

"New friends," he said, as if it were an important point, "can
often have a better time together than old friends."

With that remark, which she did not understand precisely, she found
herself at the table, picked out by slowly emerging lights against
the dark dusk.  A chord of delight struck inside her when she saw
that Dick had taken her mother on his right hand; for herself she
was between Luis Campion and Brady.

Surcharged with her emotion she turned to Brady with the intention
of confiding in him, but at her first mention of Dick a hard-boiled
sparkle in his eyes gave her to understand that he refused the
fatherly office.  In turn she was equally firm when he tried to
monopolize her hand, so they talked shop or rather she listened
while he talked shop, her polite eyes never leaving his face, but
her mind was so definitely elsewhere that she felt he must guess
the fact.  Intermittently she caught the gist of his sentences and
supplied the rest from her subconscious, as one picks up the
striking of a clock in the middle with only the rhythm of the first
uncounted strokes lingering in the mind.



VII


In a pause Rosemary looked away and up the table where Nicole sat
between Tommy Barban and Abe North, her chow's hair foaming and
frothing in the candlelight.  Rosemary listened, caught sharply by
the rich clipped voice in infrequent speech:

"The poor man," Nicole exclaimed.  "Why did you want to saw him in
two?"

"Naturally I wanted to see what was inside a waiter.  Wouldn't you
like to know what was inside a waiter?"

"Old menus," suggested Nicole with a short laugh.  "Pieces of
broken china and tips and pencil stubs."

"Exactly--but the thing was to prove it scientifically.  And of
course doing it with that musical saw would have eliminated any
sordidness."

"Did you intend to play the saw while you performed the operation?"
Tommy inquired.

"We didn't get quite that far.  We were alarmed by the screams.  We
thought he might rupture something."

"All sounds very peculiar to me," said Nicole.  "Any musician
that'll use another musician's saw to--"

They had been at table half an hour and a perceptible change had
set in--person by person had given up something, a preoccupation,
an anxiety, a suspicion, and now they were only their best selves
and the Divers' guests.  Not to have been friendly and interested
would have seemed to reflect on the Divers, so now they were all
trying, and seeing this, Rosemary liked everyone--except McKisco,
who had contrived to be the unassimilated member of the party.
This was less from ill will than from his determination to sustain
with wine the good spirits he had enjoyed on his arrival.  Lying
back in his place between Earl Brady, to whom he had addressed
several withering remarks about the movies, and Mrs. Abrams, to
whom he said nothing, he stared at Dick Diver with an expression of
devastating irony, the effect being occasionally interrupted by his
attempts to engage Dick in a cater-cornered conversation across the
table.

"Aren't you a friend of Van Buren Denby?" he would say.

"I don't believe I know him."

"I thought you were a friend of his," he persisted irritably.

When the subject of Mr. Denby fell of its own weight, he essayed
other equally irrelative themes, but each time the very deference
of Dick's attention seemed to paralyze him, and after a moment's
stark pause the conversation that he had interrupted would go on
without him.  He tried breaking into other dialogues, but it was
like continually shaking hands with a glove from which the hand had
been withdrawn--so finally, with a resigned air of being among
children, he devoted his attention entirely to the champagne.

Rosemary's glance moved at intervals around the table, eager for
the others' enjoyment, as if they were her future stepchildren.  A
gracious table light, emanating from a bowl of spicy pinks, fell
upon Mrs. Abrams' face, cooked to a turn in Veuve Cliquot, full of
vigor, tolerance, adolescent good will; next to her sat Mr. Royal
Dumphry, his girl's comeliness less startling in the pleasure world
of evening.  Then Violet McKisco, whose prettiness had been piped
to the surface of her, so that she ceased her struggle to make
tangible to herself her shadowy position as the wife of an
arriviste who had not arrived.

Then came Dick, with his arms full of the slack he had taken up
from others, deeply merged in his own party.

Then her mother, forever perfect.

Then Barban talking to her mother with an urbane fluency that made
Rosemary like him again.  Then Nicole.  Rosemary saw her suddenly
in a new way and found her one of the most beautiful people she had
ever known.  Her face, the face of a saint, a viking Madonna, shone
through the faint motes that snowed across the candlelight, drew
down its flush from the wine-colored lanterns in the pine.  She was
still as still.

Abe North was talking to her about his moral code:  "Of course I've
got one," he insisted, "--a man can't live without a moral code.
Mine is that I'm against the burning of witches.  Whenever they
burn a witch I get all hot under the collar."  Rosemary knew from
Brady that he was a musician who after a brilliant and precocious
start had composed nothing for seven years.

Next was Campion, managing somehow to restrain his most blatant
effeminacy, and even to visit upon those near him a certain
disinterested motherliness.  Then Mary North with a face so merry
that it was impossible not to smile back into the white mirrors of
her teeth--the whole area around her parted lips was a lovely
little circle of delight.

Finally Brady, whose heartiness became, moment by moment, a social
thing instead of a crude assertion and reassertion of his own
mental health, and his preservation of it by a detachment from the
frailties of others.

Rosemary, as dewy with belief as a child from one of Mrs. Burnett's
vicious tracts, had a conviction of homecoming, of a return from
the derisive and salacious improvisations of the frontier.  There
were fireflies riding on the dark air and a dog baying on some low
and far-away ledge of the cliff.  The table seemed to have risen a
little toward the sky like a mechanical dancing platform, giving
the people around it a sense of being alone with each other in the
dark universe, nourished by its only food, warmed by its only
lights.  And, as if a curious hushed laugh from Mrs. McKisco were a
signal that such a detachment from the world had been attained, the
two Divers began suddenly to warm and glow and expand, as if to
make up to their guests, already so subtly assured of their
importance, so flattered with politeness, for anything they might
still miss from that country well left behind.  Just for a moment
they seemed to speak to every one at the table, singly and
together, assuring them of their friendliness, their affection.
And for a moment the faces turned up toward them were like the
faces of poor children at a Christmas tree.  Then abruptly the
table broke up--the moment when the guests had been daringly lifted
above conviviality into the rarer atmosphere of sentiment, was over
before it could be irreverently breathed, before they had half
realized it was there.

But the diffused magic of the hot sweet South had withdrawn into
them--the soft-pawed night and the ghostly wash of the Mediterranean
far below--the magic left these things and melted into the two
Divers and became part of them.  Rosemary watched Nicole pressing
upon her mother a yellow evening bag she had admired, saying, "I
think things ought to belong to the people that like them"--and
then sweeping into it all the yellow articles she could find, a
pencil, a lipstick, a little note book, "because they all go
together."

Nicole disappeared and presently Rosemary noticed that Dick was no
longer there; the guests distributed themselves in the garden or
drifted in toward the terrace.

"Do you want," Violet McKisco asked Rosemary, "to go to the
bathroom?"

Not at that precise moment.

"I want," insisted Mrs. McKisco, "to go to the bathroom."  As a
frank outspoken woman she walked toward the house, dragging her
secret after her, while Rosemary looked after with reprobation.
Earl Brady proposed that they walk down to the sea wall but she
felt that this was her time to have a share of Dick Diver when he
reappeared, so she stalled, listening to McKisco quarrel with
Barban.

"Why do you want to fight the Soviets?" McKisco said.  "The
greatest experiment ever made by humanity?  And the Riff?  It seems
to me it would be more heroic to fight on the just side."

"How do you find out which it is?" asked Barban dryly.

"Why--usually everybody intelligent knows."

"Are you a Communist?"

"I'm a Socialist," said McKisco, "I sympathize with Russia."

"Well, I'm a soldier," Barban answered pleasantly.  "My business is
to kill people.  I fought against the Riff because I am a European,
and I have fought the Communists because they want to take my
property from me."

"Of all the narrow-minded excuses," McKisco looked around to
establish a derisive liaison with some one else, but without
success.  He had no idea what he was up against in Barban, neither
of the simplicity of the other man's bag of ideas nor of the
complexity of his training.  McKisco knew what ideas were, and as
his mind grew he was able to recognize and sort an increasing
number of them--but faced by a man whom he considered "dumb," one
in whom he found no ideas he could recognize as such, and yet to
whom he could not feel personally superior, he jumped at the
conclusion that Barban was the end product of an archaic world, and
as such, worthless.  McKisco's contacts with the princely classes
in America had impressed upon him their uncertain and fumbling
snobbery, their delight in ignorance and their deliberate rudeness,
all lifted from the English with no regard paid to factors that
make English philistinism and rudeness purposeful, and applied in a
land where a little knowledge and civility buy more than they do
anywhere else--an attitude which reached its apogee in the "Harvard
manner" of about 1900.  He thought that this Barban was of that
type, and being drunk rashly forgot that he was in awe of him--this
led up to the trouble in which he presently found himself.

Feeling vaguely ashamed for McKisco, Rosemary waited, placid but
inwardly on fire, for Dick Diver's return.  From her chair at the
deserted table with Barban, McKisco, and Abe she looked up along
the path edged with shadowy myrtle and fern to the stone terrace,
and falling in love with her mother's profile against a lighted
door, was about to go there when Mrs. McKisco came hurrying down
from the house.

She exuded excitement.  In the very silence with which she pulled
out a chair and sat down, her eyes staring, her mouth working a
little, they all recognized a person crop-full of news, and her
husband's "What's the matter, Vi?" came naturally, as all eyes
turned toward her.

"My dear--" she said at large, and then addressed Rosemary, "my
dear--it's nothing.  I really can't say a word."

"You're among friends," said Abe.

"Well, upstairs I came upon a scene, my dears--"

Shaking her head cryptically she broke off just in time, for Tommy
arose and addressed her politely but sharply:

"It's inadvisable to comment on what goes on in this house."



VIII


Violet breathed loud and hard once and with an effort brought
another expression into her face.

Dick came finally and with a sure instinct he separated Barban and
the McKiscos and became excessively ignorant and inquisitive about
literature with McKisco--thus giving the latter the moment of
superiority which he required.  The others helped him carry lamps
up--who would not be pleased at carrying lamps helpfully through
the darkness?  Rosemary helped, meanwhile responding patiently to
Royal Dumphry's inexhaustible curiosity about Hollywood.

Now--she was thinking--I've earned a time alone with him.  He must
know that because his laws are like the laws Mother taught me.

Rosemary was right--presently he detached her from the company on
the terrace, and they were alone together, borne away from the
house toward the seaside wall with what were less steps than
irregularly spaced intervals through some of which she was pulled,
through others blown.

They looked out over the Mediterranean.  Far below, the last
excursion boat from the Isles des Lerins floated across the bay
like a Fourth-of-July balloon foot-loose in the heavens.  Between
the black isles it floated, softly parting the dark tide.

"I understand why you speak as you do of your mother," he said.
"Her attitude toward you is very fine, I think.  She has a sort of
wisdom that's rare in America."

"Mother is perfect," she prayed.

"I was talking to her about a plan I have--she told me that how
long you both stayed in France depended on you."

On YOU, Rosemary all but said aloud.

"So since things are over down here--"

"Over?" she inquired.

"Well, this is over--this part of the summer is over.  Last week
Nicole's sister left, to-morrow Tommy Barban leaves, Monday Abe and
Mary North are leaving.  Maybe we'll have more fun this summer but
this particular fun is over.  I want it to die violently instead of
fading out sentimentally--that's why I gave this party.  What I'm
coming to is--Nicole and I are going up to Paris to see Abe North
off for America--I wonder if you'd like to go with us."

"What did Mother say?"

"She seemed to think it would be fine.  She doesn't want to go
herself.  She wants you to go alone."

"I haven't seen Paris since I've been grown," said Rosemary.  "I'd
love to see it with you."

"That's nice of you."  Did she imagine that his voice was suddenly
metallic?  "Of course we've been excited about you from the moment
you came on the beach.  That vitality, we were sure it was
professional--especially Nicole was.  It'd never use itself up on
any one person or group."

Her instinct cried out to her that he was passing her along slowly
toward Nicole and she put her own brakes on, saying with an equal
harness:

"I wanted to know all of you too--especially you.  I told you I
fell in love with you the first time I saw you."

She was right going at it that way.  But the space between heaven
and earth had cooled his mind, destroyed the impulsiveness that had
led him to bring her here, and made him aware of the too obvious
appeal, the struggle with an unrehearsed scene and unfamiliar
words.

He tried now to make her want to go back to the house and it was
difficult, and he did not quite want to lose her.  She felt only
the draft blowing as he joked with her good-humoredly.

"You don't know what you want.  You go and ask your mother what you
want."

She was stricken.  She touched him, feeling the smooth cloth of his
dark coat like a chasuble.  She seemed about to fall to her knees--
from that position she delivered her last shot.

"I think you're the most wonderful person I ever met--except my
mother."

"You have romantic eyes."

His laughter swept them on up toward the terrace where he delivered
her to Nicole. . . .

Too soon it had become time to go and the Divers helped them all to
go quickly.  In the Divers' big Isotta there would be Tommy Barban
and his baggage--he was spending the night at the hotel to catch an
early train--with Mrs. Abrams, the McKiscos and Campion.  Earl
Brady was going to drop Rosemary and her mother on his way to Monte
Carlo, and Royal Dumphry rode with them because the Divers' car was
crowded.  Down in the garden lanterns still glowed over the table
where they had dined, as the Divers stood side by side in the gate,
Nicole blooming away and filling the night with graciousness, and
Dick bidding good-by to everyone by name.  To Rosemary it seemed
very poignant to drive away and leave them in their house.  Again
she wondered what Mrs. McKisco had seen in the bathroom.



IX


It was a limpid black night, hung as in a basket from a single dull
star.  The horn of the car ahead was muffled by the resistance of
the thick air.  Brady's chauffeur drove slowly; the tail-light of
the other car appeared from time to time at turnings--then not at
all.  But after ten minutes it came into sight again, drawn up at
the side of the road.  Brady's chauffeur slowed up behind but
immediately it began to roll forward slowly and they passed it.  In
the instant they passed it they heard a blur of voices from behind
the reticence of the limousine and saw that the Divers' chauffeur
was grinning.  Then they went on, going fast through the
alternating banks of darkness and thin night, descending at last in
a series of roller-coaster swoops, to the great bulk of Gausse's
hotel.

Rosemary dozed for three hours and then lay awake, suspended in the
moonshine.  Cloaked by the erotic darkness she exhausted the future
quickly, with all the eventualities that might lead up to a kiss,
but with the kiss itself as blurred as a kiss in pictures.  She
changed position in bed deliberately, the first sign of insomnia
she had ever had, and tried to think with her mother's mind about
the question.  In this process she was often acute beyond her
experience, with remembered things from old conversations that had
gone into her half-heard.

Rosemary had been brought up with the idea of work.  Mrs. Speers
had spent the slim leavings of the men who had widowed her on her
daughter's education, and when she blossomed out at sixteen with
that extraordinary hair, rushed her to Aix-les-Bains and marched
her unannounced into the suite of an American producer who was
recuperating there.  When the producer went to New York they went
too.  Thus Rosemary had passed her entrance examinations.  With the
ensuing success and the promise of comparative stability that
followed, Mrs. Speers had felt free to tacitly imply tonight:

"You were brought up to work--not especially to marry.  Now you've
found your first nut to crack and it's a good nut--go ahead and put
whatever happens down to experience.  Wound yourself or him--
whatever happens it can't spoil you because economically you're a
boy, not a girl."

Rosemary had never done much thinking, save about the
illimitability of her mother's perfections, so this final severance
of the umbilical cord disturbed her sleep.  A false dawn sent the
sky pressing through the tall French windows, and getting up she
walked out on the terrace, warm to her bare feet.  There were
secret noises in the air, an insistent bird achieved an ill-natured
triumph with regularity in the trees above the tennis court;
footfalls followed a round drive in the rear of the hotel, taking
their tone in turn from the dust road, the crushed-stone walk, the
cement steps, and then reversing the process in going away.  Beyond
the inky sea and far up that high, black shadow of a hill lived the
Divers.  She thought of them both together, heard them still
singing faintly a song like rising smoke, like a hymn, very remote
in time and far away.  Their children slept, their gate was shut
for the night.

She went inside and dressing in a light gown and espadrilles went
out her window again and along the continuous terrace toward the
front door, going fast since she found that other private rooms,
exuding sleep, gave upon it.  She stopped at the sight of a figure
seated on the wide white stairway of the formal entrance--then she
saw that it was Luis Campion and that he was weeping.

He was weeping hard and quietly and shaking in the same parts as a
weeping woman.  A scene in a role she had played last year swept
over her irresistibly and advancing she touched him on the
shoulder.  He gave a little yelp before he recognized her.

"What is it?"  Her eyes were level and kind and not slanted into
him with hard curiosity.  "Can I help you?"

"Nobody can help me.  I knew it.  I have only myself to blame.
It's always the same."

"What is it--do you want to tell me?"

He looked at her to see.

"No," he decided.  "When you're older you'll know what people who
love suffer.  The agony.  It's better to be cold and young than to
love.  It's happened to me before but never like this--so
accidental--just when everything was going well."

His face was repulsive in the quickening light.  Not by a flicker
of her personality, a movement of the smallest muscle, did she
betray her sudden disgust with whatever it was.  But Campion's
sensitivity realized it and he changed the subject rather suddenly.

"Abe North is around here somewhere."

"Why, he's staying at the Divers'!"

"Yes, but he's up--don't you know what happened?"

A shutter opened suddenly in a room two stories above and an
English voice spat distinctly:

"Will you kaindlay stup tucking!"

Rosemary and Luis Campion went humbly down the steps and to a bench
beside the road to the beach.

"Then you have no idea what's happened?  My dear, the most
extraordinary thing--"  He was warming up now, hanging on to his
revelation.  "I've never seen a thing come so suddenly--I have
always avoided violent people--they upset me so I sometimes have to
go to bed for days."

He looked at her triumphantly.  She had no idea what he was talking
about.

"My dear," he burst forth, leaning toward her with his whole body
as he touched her on the upper leg, to show it was no mere
irresponsible venture of his hand--he was so sure of himself.
"There's going to be a duel."

"Wh-at?"

"A duel with--we don't know what yet."

"Who's going to duel?"

"I'll tell you from the beginning."  He drew a long breath and then
said, as if it were rather to her discredit but he wouldn't hold it
against her.  "Of course, you were in the other automobile.  Well,
in a way you were lucky--I lost at least two years of my life, it
came so suddenly."

"What came?" she demanded.

"I don't know what began it.  First she began to talk--"

"Who?"

"Violet McKisco."  He lowered his voice as if there were people
under the bench.  "But don't mention the Divers because he made
threats against anybody who mentioned it."

"Who did?"

"Tommy Barban, so don't you say I so much as mentioned them.  None
of us ever found out anyhow what it was Violet had to say because
he kept interrupting her, and then her husband got into it and now,
my dear, we have the duel.  This morning--at five o'clock--in an
hour."  He sighed suddenly thinking of his own griefs.  "I almost
wish it were I.  I might as well be killed now I have nothing to
live for."  He broke off and rocked to and fro with sorrow.

Again the iron shutter parted above and the same British voice
said:

"Rilly, this must stup immejetely."

Simultaneously Abe North, looking somewhat distracted, came out of
the hotel, perceived them against the sky, white over the sea.
Rosemary shook her head warningly before he could speak and they
moved another bench further down the road.  Rosemary saw that Abe
was a little tight.

"What are YOU doing up?" he demanded.

"I just got up."  She started to laugh, but remembering the voice
above, she restrained herself.

"Plagued by the nightingale," Abe suggested, and repeated,
"probably plagued by the nightingale.  Has this sewing-circle
member told you what happened?"

Campion said with dignity:

"I only know what I heard with my own ears."

He got up and walked swiftly away; Abe sat down beside Rosemary.

"Why did you treat him so badly?"

"Did I?" he asked surprised.  "He's been weeping around here all
morning."

"Well, maybe he's sad about something."

"Maybe he is."

"What about a duel?  Who's going to duel?  I thought there was
something strange in that car.  Is it true?"

"It certainly is coo-coo but it seems to be true."



X


The trouble began at the time Earl Brady's car passed the Divers'
car stopped on the road--Abe's account melted impersonally into the
thronged night--Violet McKisco was telling Mrs. Abrams something
she had found out about the Divers--she had gone upstairs in their
house and she had come upon something there which had made a great
impression on her.  But Tommy is a watch-dog about the Divers.  As
a matter of fact she is inspiring and formidable--but it's a mutual
thing, and the fact of The Divers together is more important to
their friends than many of them realize.  Of course it's done at a
certain sacrifice--sometimes they seem just rather charming figures
in a ballet, and worth just the attention you give a ballet, but
it's more than that--you'd have to know the story.  Anyhow Tommy is
one of those men that Dick's passed along to Nicole and when Mrs.
McKisco kept hinting at her story, he called them on it.  He said:

"Mrs. McKisco, please don't talk further about Mrs. Diver."

"I wasn't talking to you," she objected.

"I think it's better to leave them out."

"Are they so sacred?"

"Leave them out.  Talk about something else."

He was sitting on one of the two little seats beside Campion.
Campion told me the story.

"Well, you're pretty high-handed," Violet came back.

You know how conversations are in cars late at night, some people
murmuring and some not caring, giving up after the party, or bored
or asleep.  Well, none of them knew just what happened until the
car stopped and Barban cried in a voice that shook everybody, a
voice for cavalry.

"Do you want to step out here--we're only a mile from the hotel and
you can walk it or I'll drag you there.  YOU'VE GOT TO SHUT UP AND
SHUT YOUR WIFE UP!"

"You're a bully," said McKisco.  "You know you're stronger
muscularly than I am.  But I'm not afraid of you--what they ought
to have is the code duello--"

There's where he made his mistake because Tommy, being French,
leaned over and clapped him one, and then the chauffeur drove on.
That was where you passed them.  Then the women began.  That was
still the state of things when the car got to the hotel.

Tommy telephoned some man in Cannes to act as second and McKisco
said he wasn't going to be seconded by Campion, who wasn't crazy
for the job anyhow, so he telephoned me not to say anything but to
come right down.  Violet McKisco collapsed and Mrs. Abrams took her
to her room and gave her a bromide whereupon she fell comfortably
asleep on the bed.  When I got there I tried to argue with Tommy
but the latter wouldn't accept anything short of an apology and
McKisco rather spunkily wouldn't give it.



When Abe had finished Rosemary asked thoughtfully:

"Do the Divers know it was about them?"

"No--and they're not ever going to know they had anything to do
with it.  That damn Campion had no business talking to you about
it, but since he did--I told the chauffeur I'd get out the old
musical saw if he opened his mouth about it.  This fight's between
two men--what Tommy needs is a good war."

"I hope the Divers don't find out," Rosemary said.

Abe peered at his watch.

"I've got to go up and see McKisco--do you want to come?--he feels
sort of friendless--I bet he hasn't slept."

Rosemary had a vision of the desperate vigil that high-strung,
badly organized man had probably kept.  After a moment balanced
between pity and repugnance she agreed, and full of morning energy,
bounced upstairs beside Abe.

McKisco was sitting on his bed with his alcoholic combativeness
vanished, in spite of the glass of champagne in his hand.  He
seemed very puny and cross and white.  Evidently he had been
writing and drinking all night.  He stared confusedly at Abe and
Rosemary and asked:

"Is it time?"

"No, not for half an hour."

The table was covered with papers which he assembled with some
difficulty into a long letter; the writing on the last pages was
very large and illegible.  In the delicate light of electric lamps
fading, he scrawled his name at the bottom, crammed it into an
envelope and handed it to Abe.  "For my wife."

"You better souse your head in cold water," Abe suggested.

"You think I'd better?" inquired McKisco doubtfully.  "I don't want
to get too sober."

"Well, you look terrible now."

Obediently McKisco went into the bathroom.

"I'm leaving everything in an awful mess," he called.  "I don't
know how Violet will get back to America.  I don't carry any
insurance.  I never got around to it."

"Don't talk nonsense, you'll be right here eating breakfast in an
hour."

"Sure, I know."  He came back with his hair wet and looked at
Rosemary as if he saw her for the first time.  Suddenly tears stood
in his eyes.  "I never have finished my novel.  That's what makes
me so sore.  You don't like me," he said to Rosemary, "but that
can't be helped.  I'm primarily a literary man."  He made a vague
discouraged sound and shook his head helplessly.  "I've made lots
of mistakes in my life--many of them.  But I've been one of the
most prominent--in some ways--"

He gave this up and puffed at a dead cigarette.

"I do like you," said Rosemary, "but I don't think you ought to
fight a duel."

"Yeah, I should have tried to beat him up, but it's done now.  I've
let myself be drawn into something that I had no right to be.  I
have a very violent temper--"  He looked closely at Abe as if he
expected the statement to be challenged.  Then with an aghast laugh
he raised the cold cigarette butt toward his mouth.  His breathing
quickened.

"The trouble was I suggested the duel--if Violet had only kept her
mouth shut I could have fixed it.  Of course even now I can just
leave, or sit back and laugh at the whole thing--but I don't think
Violet would ever respect me again."

"Yes, she would," said Rosemary.  "She'd respect you more."

"No--you don't know Violet.  She's very hard when she gets an
advantage over you.  We've been married twelve years, we had a
little girl seven years old and she died and after that you know
how it is.  We both played around on the side a little, nothing
serious but drifting apart--she called me a coward out there
tonight."

Troubled, Rosemary didn't answer.

"Well, we'll see there's as little damage done as possible," said
Abe.  He opened the leather case.  "These are Barban's duelling
pistols--I borrowed them so you could get familiar with them.  He
carries them in his suitcase."  He weighed one of the archaic
weapons in his hand.  Rosemary gave an exclamation of uneasiness
and McKisco looked at the pistols anxiously.

"Well--it isn't as if we were going to stand up and pot each other
with forty-fives," he said.

"I don't know," said Abe cruelly; "the idea is you can sight better
along a long barrel."

"How about distance?" asked McKisco.

"I've inquired about that.  If one or the other parties has to be
definitely eliminated they make it eight paces, if they're just
good and sore it's twenty paces, and if it's only to vindicate
their honor it's forty paces.  His second agreed with me to make it
forty."

"That's good."

"There's a wonderful duel in a novel of Pushkin's," recollected
Abe.  "Each man stood on the edge of a precipice, so if he was hit
at all he was done for."

This seemed very remote and academic to McKisco, who stared at him
and said, "What?"

"Do you want to take a quick dip and freshen up?"

"No--no, I couldn t swim."  He sighed.  "I don't see what it's all
about," he said helplessly.  "I don't see why I'm doing it."

It was the first thing he had ever done in his life.  Actually he
was one of those for whom the sensual world does not exist, and
faced with a concrete fact he brought to it a vast surprise.

"We might as well be going," said Abe, seeing him fail a little.

"All right."  He drank off a stiff drink of brandy, put the flask
in his pocket, and said with almost a savage air:  "What'll happen
if I kill him--will they throw me in jail?"

"I'll run you over the Italian border."

He glanced at Rosemary--and then said apologetically to Abe:

"Before we start there's one thing I'd like to see you about
alone."

"I hope neither of you gets hurt," Rosemary said.  "I think it's
very foolish and you ought to try to stop it."



XI


She found Campion downstairs in the deserted lobby.

"I saw you go upstairs," he said excitedly.  "Is he all right?
When is the duel going to be?"

"I don't know."  She resented his speaking of it as a circus, with
McKisco as the tragic clown.

"Will you go with me?" he demanded, with the air of having seats.
"I've hired the hotel car."

"I don't want to go."

"Why not?  I imagine it'll take years off my life but I wouldn't
miss it for worlds.  We could watch it from quite far away."

"Why don't you get Mr. Dumphry to go with you?"

His monocle fell out, with no whiskers to hide in--he drew himself
up.

"I never want to see him again."

"Well, I'm afraid I can't go.  Mother wouldn't like it."

As Rosemary entered her room Mrs. Speers stirred sleepily and
called to her:

"Where've you been?"

"I just couldn't sleep.  You go back to sleep, Mother."

"Come in my room."  Hearing her sit up in bed, Rosemary went in and
told her what had happened.

"Why don't you go and see it?" Mrs. Speers suggested.  "You needn't
go up close and you might be able to help afterwards."

Rosemary did not like the picture of herself looking on and she
demurred, but Mrs. Speer's consciousness was still clogged with
sleep and she was reminded of night calls to death and calamity
when she was the wife of a doctor.  "I like you to go places and do
things on your own initiative without me--you did much harder
things for Rainy's publicity stunts."

Still Rosemary did not see why she should go, but she obeyed the
sure, clear voice that had sent her into the stage entrance of the
Odeon in Paris when she was twelve and greeted her when she came
out again.

She thought she was reprieved when from the steps she saw Abe and
McKisco drive away--but after a moment the hotel car came around
the corner.  Squealing delightedly Luis Campion pulled her in
beside him.

"I hid there because they might not let us come.  I've got my movie
camera, you see."

She laughed helplessly.  He was so terrible that he was no longer
terrible, only dehumanized.

"I wonder why Mrs. McKisco didn't like the Divers?" she said.
"They were very nice to her."

"Oh, it wasn't that.  It was something she saw.  We never did find
exactly what it was because of Barban."

"Then that wasn't what made you so sad."

"Oh, no," he said, his voice breaking, "that was something else
that happened when we got back to the hotel.  But now I don't care--
I wash my hands of it completely."

They followed the other car east along the shore past Juan les
Pins, where the skeleton of the new Casino was rising.  It was past
four and under a blue-gray sky the first fishing boats were
creaking out into a glaucous sea.  Then they turned off the main
road and into the back country.

"It's the golf course," cried Campion, "I'm sure that's where it's
going to be."

He was right.  When Abe's car pulled up ahead of them the east was
crayoned red and yellow, promising a sultry day.  Ordering the
hotel car into a grove of pines Rosemary and Campion kept in the
shadow of a wood and skirted the bleached fairway where Abe and
McKisco were walking up and down, the latter raising his head at
intervals like a rabbit scenting.  Presently there were moving
figures over by a farther tee and the watchers made out Barban and
his French second--the latter carried the box of pistols under his
arm.

Somewhat appalled, McKisco slipped behind Abe and took a long
swallow of brandy.  He walked on choking and would have marched
directly up into the other party, but Abe stopped him and went
forward to talk to the Frenchman.  The sun was over the horizon.

Campion grabbed Rosemary's arm.

"I can't stand it," he squeaked, almost voiceless.  "It's too much.
This will cost me--"

"Let go," Rosemary said peremptorily.  She breathed a frantic
prayer in French.

The principals faced each other, Barban with the sleeve rolled up
from his arm.  His eyes gleamed restlessly in the sun, but his
motion was deliberate as he wiped his palm on the seam of his
trousers.  McKisco, reckless with brandy, pursed his lips in a
whistle and pointed his long nose about nonchalantly, until Abe
stepped forward with a handkerchief in his hand.  The French second
stood with his face turned away.  Rosemary caught her breath in
terrible pity and gritted her teeth with hatred for Barban; then:

"One--two--three!" Abe counted in a strained voice.

They fired at the same moment.  McKisco swayed but recovered
himself.  Both shots had missed.

"Now, that's enough!" cried Abe.

The duellists walked in, and everyone looked at Barban inquiringly.

"I declare myself unsatisfied."

"What?  Sure you're satisfied," said Abe impatiently.  "You just
don't know it."

"Your man refuses another shot?"

"You're damn right, Tommy.  You insisted on this and my client went
through with it."

Tommy laughed scornfully.

"The distance was ridiculous," he said.  "I'm not accustomed to
such farces--your man must remember he's not now in America."

"No use cracking at America," said Abe rather sharply.  And then,
in a more conciliatory tone, "This has gone far enough, Tommy."
They parleyed briskly for a moment--then Barban nodded and bowed
coldly to his late antagonist.

"No shake hand?" suggested the French doctor.

"They already know each other," said Abe.

He turned to McKisco.

"Come on, let's get out."

As they strode off, McKisco, in exultation, gripped his arm.

"Wait a minute!" Abe said.  "Tommy wants his pistol back.  He might
need it again."

McKisco handed it over.

"To hell with him," he said in a tough voice.  "Tell him he can--"

"Shall I tell him you want another shot?"

"Well, I did it," cried McKisco, as they went along.  "And I did it
pretty well, didn't I?  I wasn't yellow."

"You were pretty drunk," said Abe bluntly.

"No, I wasn't."

"All right, then, you weren't."

"Why would it make any difference if I had a drink or so?"

As his confidence mounted he looked resentfully at Abe.

"What difference does that make?" he repeated.

"If you can't see it, there's no use going into it."

"Don't you know everybody was drunk all the time during the war?"

"Well, let's forget it."

But the episode was not quite over.  There were urgent footsteps in
the heather behind them and the doctor drew up alongside.

"Pardon, Messieurs," he panted.  "Voulez-vous regler mes
honorairies? Naturellement c'est pour soins médicaux seulement.  M.
Barban n'a qu'un billet de mille et ne peut pas les régler et
l'autre a laissé son porte-monnaie chez lui."

"Trust a Frenchman to think of that," said Abe, and then to the
doctor.  "Combien?"

"Let me pay this," said McKisco.

"No, I've got it.  We were all in about the same danger."

Abe paid the doctor while McKisco suddenly turned into the bushes
and was sick there.  Then paler than before he strutted on with Abe
toward the car through the now rosy morning.

Campion lay gasping on his back in the shrubbery, the only casualty
of the duel, while Rosemary suddenly hysterical with laughter kept
kicking at him with her espadrille.  She did this persistently
until she roused him--the only matter of importance to her now was
that in a few hours she would see the person whom she still
referred to in her mind as "the Divers" on the beach.



XII


They were at Voisins waiting for Nicole, six of them, Rosemary, the
Norths, Dick Diver and two young French musicians.  They were
looking over the other patrons of the restaurant to see if they had
repose--Dick said no American men had any repose, except himself,
and they were seeking an example to confront him with.  Things
looked black for them--not a man had come into the restaurant for
ten minutes without raising his hand to his face.

"We ought never to have given up waxed mustaches," said Abe.
"Nevertheless Dick isn't the ONLY man with repose--"

"Oh, yes, I am."

"--but he may be the only sober man with repose."

A well-dressed American had come in with two women who swooped and
fluttered unselfconsciously around a table.  Suddenly, he perceived
that he was being watched--whereupon his hand rose spasmodically
and arranged a phantom bulge in his necktie.  In another unseated
party a man endlessly patted his shaven cheek with his palm, and
his companion mechanically raised and lowered the stub of a cold
cigar.  The luckier ones fingered eyeglasses and facial hair, the
unequipped stroked blank mouths, or even pulled desperately at the
lobes of their ears.

A well-known general came in, and Abe, counting on the man's first
year at West Point--that year during which no cadet can resign and
from which none ever recovers--made a bet with Dick of five
dollars.

His hands hanging naturally at his sides, the general waited to be
seated.  Once his arms swung suddenly backward like a jumper's and
Dick said, "Ah!" supposing he had lost control, but the general
recovered and they breathed again--the agony was nearly over, the
garçon was pulling out his chair . . .

With a touch of fury the conqueror shot up his hand and scratched
his gray immaculate head.

"You see," said Dick smugly, "I'm the only one."

Rosemary was quite sure of it and Dick, realizing that he never had
a better audience, made the group into so bright a unit that
Rosemary felt an impatient disregard for all who were not at their
table.  They had been two days in Paris but actually they were
still under the beach umbrella.  When, as at the ball of the Corps
des Pages the night before, the surroundings seemed formidable to
Rosemary, who had yet to attend a Mayfair party in Hollywood, Dick
would bring the scene within range by greeting a few people, a sort
of selection--the Divers seemed to have a large acquaintance, but
it was always as if the person had not seen them for a long, long
time, and was utterly bowled over, "Why, where do you KEEP
yourselves?"--and then re-create the unity of his own party by
destroying the outsiders softly but permanently with an ironic coup
de grâce.  Presently Rosemary seemed to have known those people
herself in some deplorable past, and then got on to them, rejected
them, discarded them.

Their own party was overwhelmingly American and sometimes scarcely
American at all.  It was themselves he gave back to them, blurred
by the compromises of how many years.

Into the dark, smoky restaurant, smelling of the rich raw foods on
the buffet, slid Nicole's sky-blue suit like a stray segment of the
weather outside.  Seeing from their eyes how beautiful she was, she
thanked them with a smile of radiant appreciation.  They were all
very nice people for a while, very courteous and all that.  Then
they grew tired of it and they were funny and bitter, and finally
they made a lot of plans.  They laughed at things that they would
not remember clearly afterward--laughed a lot and the men drank
three bottles of wine.  The trio of women at the table were
representative of the enormous flux of American life.  Nicole was
the granddaughter of a self-made American capitalist and the
granddaughter of a Count of the House of Lippe Weissenfeld.  Mary
North was the daughter of a journeyman paper-hanger and a
descendant of President Tyler.  Rosemary was from the middle of the
middle class, catapulted by her mother onto the uncharted heights
of Hollywood.  Their point of resemblance to each other and their
difference from so many American women, lay in the fact that they
were all happy to exist in a man's world--they preserved their
individuality through men and not by opposition to them.  They
would all three have made alternatively good courtesans or good
wives not by the accident of birth but through the greater accident
of finding their man or not finding him.

So Rosemary found it a pleasant party, that luncheon, nicer in that
there were only seven people, about the limit of a good party.
Perhaps, too, the fact that she was new to their world acted as a
sort of catalytic agent to precipitate out all their old
reservations about one another.  After the table broke up, a waiter
directed Rosemary back into the dark hinterland of all French
restaurants, where she looked up a phone number by a dim orange
bulb, and called Franco-American Films.  Sure, they had a print of
"Daddy's Girl"--it was out for the moment, but they would run it
off later in the week for her at 341 Rue des Saintes Anges--ask for
Mr. Crowder.

The semi-booth gave on the vestiaire and as Rosemary hung up the
receiver she heard two low voices not five feet from her on the
other side of a row of coats.

"--So you love me?"

"Oh, DO I!"

It Was Nicole--Rosemary hesitated in the door of the booth--then
she heard Dick say:

"I want you terribly--let's go to the hotel now."  Nicole gave a
little gasping sigh.  For a moment the words conveyed nothing at
all to Rosemary--but the tone did.  The vast secretiveness of it
vibrated to herself.

"I want you."

"I'll be at the hotel at four."

Rosemary stood breathless as the voices moved away.  She was at
first even astonished--she had seen them in their relation to each
other as people without personal exigencies--as something cooler.
Now a strong current of emotion flowed through her, profound and
unidentified.  She did not know whether she was attracted or
repelled, but only that she was deeply moved.  It made her feel
very alone as she went back into the restaurant, but it was
touching to look in upon, and the passionate gratitude of Nicole's
"Oh, DO I!" echoed in her mind.  The particular mood of the passage
she had witnessed lay ahead of her; but however far she was from it
her stomach told her it was all right--she had none of the aversion
she had felt in the playing of certain love scenes in pictures.

Being far away from it she nevertheless irrevocably participated in
it now, and shopping with Nicole she was much more conscious of the
assignation than Nicole herself.  She looked at Nicole in a new
way, estimating her attractions.  Certainly she was the most
attractive woman Rosemary had ever met--with her hardness, her
devotions and loyalties, and a certain elusiveness, which Rosemary,
thinking now through her mother's middle-class mind, associated
with her attitude about money.  Rosemary spent money she had
earned--she was here in Europe due to the fact that she had gone in
the pool six times that January day with her temperature roving
from 99° in the early morning to 103°, when her mother stopped it.

With Nicole's help Rosemary bought two dresses and two hats and
four pairs of shoes with her money.  Nicole bought from a great
list that ran two pages, and bought the things in the windows
besides.  Everything she liked that she couldn't possibly use
herself, she bought as a present for a friend.  She bought colored
beads, folding beach cushions, artificial flowers, honey, a guest
bed, bags, scarfs, love birds, miniatures for a doll's house and
three yards of some new cloth the color of prawns.  She bought a
dozen bathing suits, a rubber alligator, a travelling chess set of
gold and ivory, big linen handkerchiefs for Abe, two chamois
leather jackets of kingfisher blue and burning bush from Hermes--
bought all these things not a bit like a high-class courtesan
buying underwear and jewels, which were after all professional
equipment and insurance--but with an entirely different point of
view.  Nicole was the product of much ingenuity and toil.  For her
sake trains began their run at Chicago and traversed the round
belly of the continent to California; chicle factories fumed and
link belts grew link by link in factories; men mixed toothpaste in
vats and drew mouthwash out of copper hogsheads; girls canned
tomatoes quickly in August or worked rudely at the Five-and-Tens on
Christmas Eve; half-breed Indians toiled on Brazilian coffee
plantations and dreamers were muscled out of patent rights in new
tractors--these were some of the people who gave a tithe to Nicole,
and as the whole system swayed and thundered onward it lent a
feverish bloom to such processes of hers as wholesale buying, like
the flush of a fireman's face holding his post before a spreading
blaze.  She illustrated very simple principles, containing in
herself her own doom, but illustrated them so accurately that there
was grace in the procedure, and presently Rosemary would try to
imitate it.

It was almost four.  Nicole stood in a shop with a love bird on her
shoulder, and had one of her infrequent outbursts of speech.

"Well, what if you hadn't gone in that pool that day--I sometimes
wonder about such things.  Just before the war we were in Berlin--I
was thirteen, it was just before Mother died.  My sister was going
to a court ball and she had three of the royal princes on her dance
card, all arranged by a chamberlain and everything.  Half an hour
before she was going to start she had a side ache and a high fever.
The doctor said it was appendicitis and she ought to be operated
on.  But Mother had her plans made, so Baby went to the ball and
danced till two with an ice pack strapped on under her evening
dress.  She was operated on at seven o'clock next morning."

It was good to be hard, then; all nice people were hard on
themselves.  But it was four o'clock and Rosemary kept thinking of
Dick waiting for Nicole now at the hotel.  She must go there, she
must not make him wait for her.  She kept thinking, "Why don't you
go?" and then suddenly, "Or let me go if you don't want to."  But
Nicole went to one more place to buy corsages for them both and
sent one to Mary North.  Only then she seemed to remember and with
sudden abstraction she signalled for a taxi.

"Good-by," said Nicole.  "We had fun, didn't we?"

"Loads of fun," said Rosemary.  It was more difficult than she
thought and her whole self protested as Nicole drove away.



XIII


Dick turned the corner of the traverse and continued along the
trench walking on the duckboard.  He came to a periscope, looked
through it a moment; then he got up on the step and peered over the
parapet.  In front of him beneath a dingy sky was Beaumont Hamel;
to his left the tragic hill of Thiepval.  Dick stared at them
through his field glasses, his throat straining with sadness.

He went on along the trench, and found the others waiting for him
in the next traverse.  He was full of excitement and he wanted to
communicate it to them, to make them understand about this, though
actually Abe North had seen battle service and he had not.

"This land here cost twenty lives a foot that summer," he said to
Rosemary.  She looked out obediently at the rather bare green plain
with its low trees of six years' growth.  If Dick had added that
they were now being shelled she would have believed him that
afternoon.  Her love had reached a point where now at last she was
beginning to be unhappy, to be desperate.  She didn't know what to
do--she wanted to talk to her mother.

"There are lots of people dead since and we'll all be dead soon,"
said Abe consolingly.

Rosemary waited tensely for Dick to continue.

"See that little stream--we could walk to it in two minutes.  It
took the British a month to walk to it--a whole empire walking very
slowly, dying in front and pushing forward behind.  And another
empire walked very slowly backward a few inches a day, leaving the
dead like a million bloody rugs.  No Europeans will ever do that
again in this generation."

"Why, they've only just quit over in Turkey," said Abe.  "And in
Morocco--"

"That's different.  This western-front business couldn't be done
again, not for a long time.  The young men think they could do it
but they couldn't.  They could fight the first Marne again but not
this.  This took religion and years of plenty and tremendous
sureties and the exact relation that existed between the classes.
The Russians and Italians weren't any good on this front.  You had
to have a whole-souled sentimental equipment going back further
than you could remember.  You had to remember Christmas, and
postcards of the Crown Prince and his fiancée, and little cafés in
Valence and beer gardens in Unter den Linden and weddings at the
mairie, and going to the Derby, and your grandfather's whiskers."

"General Grant invented this kind of battle at Petersburg in sixty-
five."

"No, he didn't--he just invented mass butchery.  This kind of
battle was invented by Lewis Carroll and Jules Verne and whoever
wrote Undine, and country deacons bowling and marraines in
Marseilles and girls seduced in the back lanes of Wurtemburg and
Westphalia.  Why, this was a love battle--there was a century of
middle-class love spent here.  This was the last love battle."

"You want to hand over this battle to D. H. Lawrence," said Abe.

"All my beautiful lovely safe world blew itself up here with a
great gust of high explosive love," Dick mourned persistently.
"Isn't that true, Rosemary?"

"I don't know," she answered with a grave face.  "You know
everything."

They dropped behind the others.  Suddenly a shower of earth gobs
and pebbles came down on them and Abe yelled from the next
traverse:

"The war spirit's getting into me again.  I have a hundred years of
Ohio love behind me and I'm going to bomb out this trench."  His
head popped up over the embankment.  "You're dead--don't you know
the rules?  That was a grenade."

Rosemary laughed and Dick picked up a retaliatory handful of stones
and then put them down.

"I couldn't kid here," he said rather apologetically.  "The silver
cord is cut and the golden bowl is broken and all that, but an old
romantic like me can't do anything about it."

"I'm romantic too."

They came out of the neat restored trench, and faced a memorial to
the Newfoundland dead.  Reading the inscription Rosemary burst into
sudden tears.  Like most women she liked to be told how she should
feel, and she liked Dick's telling her which things were ludicrous
and which things were sad.  But most of all she wanted him to know
how she loved him, now that the fact was upsetting everything, now
that she was walking over the battlefield in a thrilling dream.

After that they got in their car and started back toward Amiens.  A
thin warm rain was falling on the new scrubby woods and underbrush
and they passed great funeral pyres of sorted duds, shells, bombs,
grenades, and equipment, helmets, bayonets, gun stocks and rotten
leather, abandoned six years in the ground.  And suddenly around a
bend the white caps of a great sea of graves.  Dick asked the
chauffeur to stop.

"There's that girl--and she still has her wreath."

They watched as he got out and went over to the girl, who stood
uncertainly by the gate with a wreath in her hand.  Her taxi
waited.  She was a red-haired girl from Tennessee whom they had met
on the train this morning, come from Knoxville to lay a memorial on
her brother's grave.  There were tears of vexation on her face.

"The War Department must have given me the wrong number," she
whimpered.  "It had another name on it.  I been lookin' for it
since two o'clock, and there's so many graves."

"Then if I were you I'd just lay it on any grave without looking at
the name," Dick advised her.

"You reckon that's what I ought to do?"

"I think that's what he'd have wanted you to do."

It was growing dark and the rain was coming down harder.

She left the wreath on the first grave inside the gate, and
accepted Dick's suggestion that she dismiss her taxi-cab and ride
back to Amiens with them.

Rosemary shed tears again when she heard of the mishap--altogether
it had been a watery day, but she felt that she had learned
something, though exactly what it was she did not know.  Later she
remembered all the hours of the afternoon as happy--one of those
uneventful times that seem at the moment only a link between past
and future pleasure but turn out to have been the pleasure itself.

Amiens was an echoing purple town, still sad with the war, as some
railroad stations were:--the Gare du Nord and Waterloo station in
London.  In the daytime one is deflated by such towns, with their
little trolley cars of twenty years ago crossing the great gray
cobble-stoned squares in front of the cathedral, and the very
weather seems to have a quality of the past, faded weather like
that of old photographs.  But after dark all that is most
satisfactory in French life swims back into the picture--the
sprightly tarts, the men arguing with a hundred Voilàs in the
cafés, the couples drifting, head to head, toward the satisfactory
inexpensiveness of nowhere.  Waiting for the train they sat in a
big arcade, tall enough to release the smoke and chatter and music
upward and obligingly the orchestra launched into "Yes, We Have No
Bananas,"--they clapped, because the leader looked so pleased with
himself.  The Tennessee girl forgot her sorrow and enjoyed herself,
even began flirtations of tropical eye-rollings and pawings, with
Dick and Abe.  They teased her gently.

Then, leaving infinitesimal sections of Wurtemburgers, Prussian
Guards, Chasseurs Alpins, Manchester mill hands and old Etonians to
pursue their eternal dissolution under the warm rain, they took the
train for Paris.  They ate sandwiches of mortadel sausage and bel
paese cheese made up in the station restaurant, and drank
Beaujolais.  Nicole was abstracted, biting her lip restlessly and
reading over the guide-books to the battle-field that Dick had
brought along--indeed, he had made a quick study of the whole
affair, simplifying it always until it bore a faint resemblance to
one of his own parties.



XIV


When they reached Paris Nicole was too tired to go on to the grand
illumination at the Decorative Art Exposition as they had planned.
They left her at the Hotel Roi George, and as she disappeared
between the intersecting planes made by lobby lights of the glass
doors, Rosemary's oppression lifted.  Nicole was a force--not
necessarily well disposed or predictable like her mother--an
incalculable force.  Rosemary was somewhat afraid of her.

At eleven she sat with Dick and the Norths at a houseboat café just
opened on the Seine.  The river shimmered with lights from the
bridges and cradled many cold moons.  On Sundays sometimes when
Rosemary and her mother had lived in Paris they had taken the
little steamer up to Suresnes and talked about plans for the
future.  They had little money but Mrs. Speers was so sure of
Rosemary's beauty and had implanted in her so much ambition, that
she was willing to gamble the money on "advantages"; Rosemary in
turn was to repay her mother when she got her start. . . .

Since reaching Paris Abe North had had a thin vinous fur over him;
his eyes were bloodshot from sun and wine.  Rosemary realized for
the first time that he was always stopping in places to get a
drink, and she wondered how Mary North liked it.  Mary was quiet,
so quiet save for her frequent laughter that Rosemary had learned
little about her.  She liked the straight dark hair brushed back
until it met some sort of natural cascade that took care of it--
from time to time it eased with a jaunty slant over the corner of
her temple, until it was almost in her eye when she tossed her head
and caused it to fall sleek into place once more.

"We'll turn in early to-night, Abe, after this drink."  Mary's
voice was light but it held a little flicker of anxiety.  "You
don't want to be poured on the boat."

"It's pretty late now," Dick said.  "We'd all better go."

The noble dignity of Abe's face took on a certain stubbornness, and
he remarked with determination:

"Oh, no."  He paused gravely.  "Oh, no, not yet.  We'll have
another bottle of champagne."

"No more for me," said Dick.

"It's Rosemary I'm thinking of.  She's a natural alcoholic--keeps a
bottle of gin in the bathroom and all that--her mother told me."

He emptied what was left of the first bottle into Rosemary's glass.
She had made herself quite sick the first day in Paris with quarts
of lemonade; after that she had taken nothing with them but now she
raised the champagne and drank at it.

"But what's this?" exclaimed Dick.  "You told me you didn't drink."

"I didn't say I was never going to."

"What about your mother?"

"I'm just going to drink this one glass."  She felt some necessity
for it.  Dick drank, not too much, but he drank, and perhaps it
would bring her closer to him, be a part of the equipment for what
she had to do.  She drank it quickly, choked and then said,
"Besides, yesterday was my birthday--I was eighteen."

"Why didn't you tell us?" they said indignantly.

"I knew you'd make a fuss over it and go to a lot of trouble."  She
finished the champagne.  "So this is the celebration."

"It most certainly is not," Dick assured her.  "The dinner tomorrow
night is your birthday party and don't forget it.  Eighteen--why
that's a terribly important age."

"I used to think until you're eighteen nothing matters," said Mary.

"That's right," Abe agreed.  "And afterward it's the same way."

"Abe feels that nothing matters till he gets on the boat," said
Mary.  "This time he really has got everything planned out when he
gets to New York."  She spoke as though she were tired of saying
things that no longer had a meaning for her, as if in reality the
course that she and her husband followed, or failed to follow, had
become merely an intention.

"He'll be writing music in America and I'll be working at singing
in Munich, so when we get together again there'll be nothing we
can't do."

"That's wonderful," agreed Rosemary, feeling the champagne.

"Meanwhile, another touch of champagne for Rosemary.  Then she'll
be more able to rationalize the acts of her lymphatic glands.  They
only begin to function at eighteen."

Dick laughed indulgently at Abe, whom he loved, and in whom he had
long lost hope:  "That's medically incorrect and we're going."
Catching the faint patronage Abe said lightly:

"Something tells me I'll have a new score on Broadway long before
you've finished your scientific treatise."

"I hope so," said Dick evenly.  "I hope so.  I may even abandon
what you call my 'scientific treatise.'"

"Oh, Dick!"  Mary's voice was startled, was shocked.  Rosemary had
never before seen Dick's face utterly expressionless; she felt that
this announcement was something momentous and she was inclined to
exclaim with Mary "Oh, Dick!"

But suddenly Dick laughed again, added to his remark "--abandon it
for another one," and got up from the table.

"But Dick, sit down.  I want to know--"

"I'll tell you some time.  Good night, Abe.  Good night, Mary."

"Good night, dear Dick."  Mary smiled as if she were going to be
perfectly happy sitting there on the almost deserted boat.  She was
a brave, hopeful woman and she was following her husband somewhere,
changing herself to this kind of person or that, without being able
to lead him a step out of his path, and sometimes realizing with
discouragement how deep in him the guarded secret of her direction
lay.  And yet an air of luck clung about her, as if she were a sort
of token. . . .



XV


"What is it you are giving up?" demanded Rosemary, facing Dick
earnestly in the taxi.

"Nothing of importance."

"Are you a scientist?"

"I'm a doctor of medicine."

"Oh-h!" she smiled delightedly.  "My father was a doctor too.  Then
why don't you--" she stopped.

"There's no mystery.  I didn't disgrace myself at the height of my
career, and hide away on the Riviera.  I'm just not practising.
You can't tell, I'll probably practise again some day."

Rosemary put up her face quietly to be kissed.  He looked at her
for a moment as if he didn't understand.  Then holding her in the
hollow of his arm he rubbed his cheek against her cheek's softness,
and then looked down at her for another long moment.

"Such a lovely child," he said gravely.

She smiled up at him; her hands playing conventionally with the
lapels of his coat.  "I'm in love with you and Nicole.  Actually
that's my secret--I can't even talk about you to anybody because I
don't want any more people to know how wonderful you are.
Honestly--I love you and Nicole--I do."

--So many times he had heard this--even the formula was the same.

Suddenly she came toward him, her youth vanishing as she passed
inside the focus of his eyes and he had kissed her breathlessly as
if she were any age at all.  Then she lay back against his arm and
sighed.

"I've decided to give you up," she said.

Dick started--had he said anything to imply that she possessed any
part of him?

"But that's very mean," he managed to say lightly, "just when I was
getting interested."

"I've loved you so--"  As if it had been for years.  She was
weeping a little now.  "I've loved you so-o-o."

Then he should have laughed, but he heard himself saying, "Not only
are you beautiful but you are somehow on the grand scale.
Everything you do, like pretending to be in love or pretending to
be shy gets across."

In the dark cave of the taxi, fragrant with the perfume Rosemary
had bought with Nicole, she came close again, clinging to him.  He
kissed her without enjoying it.  He knew that there was passion
there, but there was no shadow of it in her eyes or on her mouth;
there was a faint spray of champagne on her breath.  She clung
nearer desperately and once more he kissed her and was chilled by
the innocence of her kiss, by the glance that at the moment of
contact looked beyond him out into the darkness of the night, the
darkness of the world.  She did not know yet that splendor is
something in the heart; at the moment when she realized that and
melted into the passion of the universe he could take her without
question or regret.

Her room in the hotel was diagonally across from theirs and nearer
the elevator.  When they reached the door she said suddenly:

"I know you don't love me--I don't expect it.  But you said I
should have told you about my birthday.  Well, I did, and now for
my birthday present I want you to come into my room a minute while
I tell you something.  Just one minute."

They went in and he closed the door, and Rosemary stood close to
him, not touching him.  The night had drawn the color from her
face--she was pale as pale now, she was a white carnation left
after a dance.

"When you smile--"  He had recovered his paternal attitude, perhaps
because of Nicole's silent proximity, "I always think I'll see a
gap where you've lost some baby teeth."

But he was too late--she came close up against him with a forlorn
whisper.

"Take me."

"Take you where?"

Astonishment froze him rigid.

"Go on," she whispered.  "Oh, please go on, whatever they do.  I
don't care if I don't like it--I never expected to--I've always
hated to think about it but now I don't.  I want you to."

She was astonished at herself--she had never imagined she could
talk like that.  She was calling on things she had read, seen,
dreamed through a decade of convent hours.  Suddenly she knew too
that it was one of her greatest rôles and she flung herself into it
more passionately.

"This is not as it should be," Dick deliberated.  "Isn't it just
the champagne?  Let's more or less forget it."

"Oh, no, NOW.  I want you to do it now, take me, show me, I'm
absolutely yours and I want to be."

"For one thing, have you thought how much it would hurt Nicole?"

"She won't know--this won't have anything to do with her."

He continued kindly.

"Then there's the fact that I love Nicole."

"But you can love more than just one person, can't you?  Like I
love Mother and I love you--more.  I love you more now."

"--the fourth place you're not in love with me but you might be
afterwards, and that would begin your life with a terrible mess."

"No, I promise I'll never see you again.  I'll get Mother and go to
America right away."

He dismissed this.  He was remembering too vividly the youth and
freshness of her lips.  He took another tone.

"You're just in that mood."

"Oh, please, I don't care even if I had a baby.  I could go into
Mexico like a girl at the studio.  Oh, this is so different from
anything I ever thought--I used to hate it when they kissed me
seriously."  He saw she was still under the impression that it must
happen.  "Some of them had great big teeth, but you're all
different and beautiful.  I want you to do it."

"I believe you think people just kiss some way and you want me to
kiss you."

"Oh, don't tease me--I'm not a baby.  I know you're not in love
with me."  She was suddenly humble and quiet.  "I didn't expect
that much.  I know I must seem just nothing to you."

"Nonsense.  But you seem young to me."  His thoughts added, "--
there'd be so much to teach you."

Rosemary waited, breathing eagerly till Dick said:  "And lastly
things aren't arranged so that this could be as you want."

Her face drooped with dismay and disappointment and Dick said
automatically, "We'll have to simply--"  He stopped himself,
followed her to the bed, sat down beside her while she wept.  He
was suddenly confused, not about the ethics of the matter, for the
impossibility of it was sheerly indicated from all angles but
simply confused, and for a moment his usual grace, the tensile
strength of his balance, was absent.

"I knew you wouldn't," she sobbed.  "It was just a forlorn hope."

He stood up.

"Good night, child.  This is a damn shame.  Let's drop it out of
the picture."  He gave her two lines of hospital patter to go to
sleep on.  "So many people are going to love you and it might be
nice to meet your first love all intact, emotionally too.  That's
an old-fashioned idea, isn't it?"  She looked up at him as he took
a step toward the door; she looked at him without the slightest
idea as to what was in his head, she saw him take another step in
slow motion, turn and look at her again, and she wanted for a
moment to hold him and devour him, wanted his mouth, his ears, his
coat collar, wanted to surround him and engulf him; she saw his
hand fall on the doorknob.  Then she gave up and sank back on the
bed.  When the door closed she got up and went to the mirror, where
she began brushing her hair, sniffling a little.  One hundred and
fifty strokes Rosemary gave it, as usual, then a hundred and fifty
more.  She brushed it until her arm ached, then she changed arms
and went on brushing. . . .



XVI


She woke up cooled and shamed.  The sight of her beauty in the
mirror did not reassure her but only awakened the ache of yesterday
and a letter, forwarded by her mother, from the boy who had taken
her to the Yale prom last fall, which announced his presence in
Paris was no help--all that seemed far away.  She emerged from her
room for the ordeal of meeting the Divers weighted with a double
trouble.  But it was hidden by a sheath as impermeable as Nicole's
when they met and went together to a series of fittings.  It was
consoling, though, when Nicole remarked, apropos of a distraught
saleswoman:  "Most people think everybody feels about them much
more violently than they actually do--they think other people's
opinions of them swing through great arcs of approval or
disapproval."  Yesterday in her expansiveness Rosemary would have
resented that remark--to-day in her desire to minimize what had
happened she welcomed it eagerly.  She admired Nicole for her
beauty and her wisdom, and also for the first time in her life she
was jealous.  Just before leaving Gausse's hotel her mother had
said in that casual tone, which Rosemary knew concealed her most
significant opinions, that Nicole was a great beauty, with the
frank implication that Rosemary was not.  This did not bother
Rosemary, who had only recently been allowed to learn that she was
even personable; so that her prettiness never seemed exactly her
own but rather an acquirement, like her French.  Nevertheless, in
the taxi she looked at Nicole, matching herself against her.  There
were all the potentialities for romantic love in that lovely body
and in the delicate mouth, sometimes tight, sometimes expectantly
half open to the world.  Nicole had been a beauty as a young girl
and she would be a beauty later when her skin stretched tight over
her high cheekbones--the essential structure was there.  She had
been white-Saxon-blonde but she was more beautiful now that her
hair had darkened than when it had been like a cloud and more
beautiful than she.

"We lived there," Rosemary suddenly pointed to a building in the
Rue des Saints-Péres.

"That's strange.  Because when I was twelve Mother and Baby and I
once spent a winter there," and she pointed to a hotel directly
across the street.  The two dingy fronts stared at them, gray
echoes of girlhood.

"We'd just built our Lake Forest house and we were economizing,"
Nicole continued.  "At least Baby and I and the governess
economized and Mother travelled."

"We were economizing too," said Rosemary, realizing that the word
meant different things to them.

"Mother always spoke of it very carefully as a small hotel--"
Nicole gave her quick magnetic little laugh, "--I mean instead of
saying a 'cheap' hotel.  If any swanky friends asked us our address
we'd never say, 'We're in a dingy little hole over in the apache
quarter where we're glad of running water,'--we'd say 'We're in a
small hotel.'  As if all the big ones were too noisy and vulgar for
us.  Of course the friends always saw through us and told everyone
about it, but Mother always said it showed we knew our way around
Europe.  She did, of course: she was born a German citizen.  But
her mother was American, and she was brought up in Chicago, and she
was more American than European."

They were meeting the others in two minutes, and Rosemary
reconstructed herself once more as they got out of the taxi in the
Rue Guynemer, across from the Luxembourg Gardens.  They were
lunching in the Norths' already dismantled apartment high above the
green mass of leaves.  The day seemed different to Rosemary from
the day before--When she saw him face to face their eyes met and
brushed like birds' wings.  After that everything was all right,
everything was wonderful, she knew that he was beginning to fall in
love with her.  She felt wildly happy, felt the warm sap of emotion
being pumped through her body.  A cool, clear confidence deepened
and sang in her.  She scarcely looked at Dick but she knew
everything was all right.

After luncheon the Divers and the Norths and Rosemary went to the
Franco-American Films, to be joined by Collis Clay, her young man
from New Haven, to whom she had telephoned.  He was a Georgian,
with the peculiarly regular, even stencilled ideas of Southerners
who are educated in the North.  Last winter she had thought him
attractive--once they held hands in an automobile going from New
Haven to New York; now he no longer existed for her.

In the projection room she sat between Collis Clay and Dick while
the mechanic mounted the reels of Daddy's Girl and a French
executive fluttered about her trying to talk American slang.  "Yes,
boy," he said when there was trouble with the projector, "I have
not any benenas."  Then the lights went out, there was the sudden
click and a flickering noise and she was alone with Dick at last.
They looked at each other in the half darkness.

"Dear Rosemary," he murmured.  Their shoulders touched.  Nicole
stirred restlessly at the end of the row and Abe coughed
convulsively and blew his nose; then they all settled down and the
picture ran.

There she was--the school girl of a year ago, hair down her back
and rippling out stiffly like the solid hair of a tanagra figure;
there she was--SO young and innocent--the product of her mother's
loving care; there she was--embodying all the immaturity of the
race, cutting a new cardboard paper doll to pass before its empty
harlot's mind.  She remembered how she had felt in that dress,
especially fresh and new under the fresh young silk.

Daddy's girl.  Was it a 'itty-bitty bravekins and did it suffer?
Ooo-ooo-tweet, de tweetest thing, wasn't she dest too tweet?
Before her tiny fist the forces of lust and corruption rolled away;
nay, the very march of destiny stopped; inevitable became evitable,
syllogism, dialectic, all rationality fell away.  Women would
forget the dirty dishes at home and weep, even within the picture
one woman wept so long that she almost stole the film away from
Rosemary.  She wept all over a set that cost a fortune, in a Duncan
Phyfe dining-room, in an aviation port, and during a yacht-race
that was only used in two flashes, in a subway and finally in a
bathroom.  But Rosemary triumphed.  Her fineness of character, her
courage and steadfastness intruded upon by the vulgarity of the
world, and Rosemary showing what it took with a face that had not
yet become mask-like--yet it was actually so moving that the
emotions of the whole row of people went out to her at intervals
during the picture.  There was a break once and the light went on
and after the chatter of applause Dick said to her sincerely:  "I'm
simply astounded.  You're going to be one of the best actresses on
the stage."

Then back to Daddy's Girl: happier days now, and a lovely shot of
Rosemary and her parent united at the last in a father complex so
apparent that Dick winced for all psychologists at the vicious
sentimentality.  The screen vanished, the lights went on, the
moment had come.

"I've arranged one other thing," announced Rosemary to the company
at large, "I've arranged a test for Dick."

"A what?"

"A screen test, they'll take one now."

There was an awful silence--then an irrepressible chortle from the
Norths.  Rosemary watched Dick comprehend what she meant, his face
moving first in an Irish way; simultaneously she realized that she
had made some mistake in the playing of her trump and still she did
not suspect that the card was at fault.

"I don't want a test," said Dick firmly; then, seeing the situation
as a whole, he continued lightly, "Rosemary, I'm disappointed.  The
pictures make a fine career for a woman--but my God, they can't
photograph me.  I'm an old scientist all wrapped up in his private
life."

Nicole and Mary urged him ironically to seize the opportunity; they
teased him, both faintly annoyed at not having been asked for a
sitting.  But Dick closed the subject with a somewhat tart
discussion of actors:  "The strongest guard is placed at the
gateway to nothing," he said.  "Maybe because the condition of
emptiness is too shameful to be divulged."

In the taxi with Dick and Collis Clay--they were dropping Collis,
and Dick was taking Rosemary to a tea from which Nicole and the
Norths had resigned in order to do the things Abe had left undone
till the last--in the taxi Rosemary reproached him.

"I thought if the test turned out to be good I could take it to
California with me.  And then maybe if they liked it you'd come out
and be my leading man in a picture."

He was overwhelmed.  "It was a darn sweet thought, but I'd rather
look at YOU.  You were about the nicest sight I ever looked at."

"That's a great picture," said Collis.  "I've seen it four times.
I know one boy at New Haven who's seen it a dozen times--he went
all the way to Hartford to see it one time.  And when I brought
Rosemary up to New Haven he was so shy he wouldn't meet her.  Can
you beat that?  This little girl knocks them cold."

Dick and Rosemary looked at each other, wanting to be alone, but
Collis failed to understand.

"I'll drop you where you're going," he suggested.  "I'm staying at
the Lutetia."

"We'll drop you," said Dick.

"It'll be easier for me to drop you.  No trouble at all."

"I think it will be better if we drop you."

"But--" began Collis; he grasped the situation at last and began
discussing with Rosemary when he would see her again.

Finally, he was gone, with the shadowy unimportance but the
offensive bulk of the third party.  The car stopped unexpectedly,
unsatisfactorily, at the address Dick had given.  He drew a long
breath.

"Shall we go in?"

"I don't care," Rosemary said.  "I'll do anything you want."

He considered.

"I almost have to go in--she wants to buy some pictures from a
friend of mine who needs the money."

Rosemary smoothed the brief expressive disarray of her hair.

"We'll stay just five minutes," he decided.  "You're not going to
like these people."

She assumed that they were dull and stereotyped people, or gross
and drunken people, or tiresome, insistent people, or any of the
sorts of people that the Divers avoided.  She was entirely
unprepared for the impression that the scene made on her.



XVII


It was a house hewn from the frame of Cardinal de Retz's palace in
the Rue Monsieur, but once inside the door there was nothing of the
past, nor of any present that Rosemary knew.  The outer shell, the
masonry, seemed rather to enclose the future so that it was an
electric-like shock, a definite nervous experience, perverted as a
breakfast of oatmeal and hashish, to cross that threshold, if it
could be so called, into the long hall of blue steel, silver-gilt,
and the myriad facets of many oddly bevelled mirrors.  The effect
was unlike that of any part of the Decorative Arts Exhibition--for
there were people IN it, not in front of it.  Rosemary had the
detached false-and-exalted feeling of being on a set and she
guessed that every one else present had that feeling too.

There were about thirty people, mostly women, and all fashioned by
Louisa M. Alcott or Madame de Ségur; and they functioned on this
set as cautiously, as precisely, as does a human hand picking up
jagged broken glass.  Neither individually nor as a crowd could
they be said to dominate the environment, as one comes to dominate
a work of art he may possess, no matter how esoteric, no one knew
what this room meant because it was evolving into something else,
becoming everything a room was not; to exist in it was as difficult
as walking on a highly polished moving stairway, and no one could
succeed at all save with the aforementioned qualities of a hand
moving among broken glass--which qualities limited and defined the
majority of those present.

These were of two sorts.  There were the Americans and English who
had been dissipating all spring and summer, so that now everything
they did had a purely nervous inspiration.  They were very quiet
and lethargic at certain hours and then they exploded into sudden
quarrels and breakdowns and seductions.  The other class, who might
be called the exploiters, was formed by the sponges, who were
sober, serious people by comparison, with a purpose in life and no
time for fooling.  These kept their balance best in that
environment, and what tone there was, beyond the apartment's novel
organization of light values, came from them.

The Frankenstein took down Dick and Rosemary at a gulp--it
separated them immediately and Rosemary suddenly discovered herself
to be an insincere little person, living all in the upper registers
of her throat and wishing the director would come.  There was
however such a wild beating of wings in the room that she did not
feel her position was more incongruous than any one else's.  In
addition, her training told and after a series of semi-military
turns, shifts, and marches she found herself presumably talking to
a neat, slick girl with a lovely boy's face, but actually absorbed
by a conversation taking place on a sort of gun-metal ladder
diagonally opposite her and four feet away.

There was a trio of young women sitting on the bench.  They were
all tall and slender with small heads groomed like manikins' heads,
and as they talked the heads waved gracefully about above their
dark tailored suits, rather like long-stemmed flowers and rather
like cobras' hoods.

"Oh, they give a good show," said one of them, in a deep rich
voice.  "Practically the best show in Paris--I'd be the last one to
deny that.  But after all--"  She sighed.  "Those phrases he uses
over and over--'Oldest inhabitant gnawed by rodents.'  You laugh
once."

"I prefer people whose lives have more corrugated surfaces," said
the second, "and I don't like her."

"I've never really been able to get very excited about them, or
their entourage either.  Why, for example, the entirely liquid Mr.
North?"

"He's out," said the first girl.  "But you must admit that the
party in question can be one of the most charming human beings you
have ever met."

It was the first hint Rosemary had had that they were talking about
the Divers, and her body grew tense with indignation.  But the girl
talking to her, in the starched blue shirt with the bright blue
eyes and the red cheeks and the very gray suit, a poster of a girl,
had begun to play up.  Desperately she kept sweeping things from
between them, afraid that Rosemary couldn't see her, sweeping them
away until presently there was not so much as a veil of brittle
humor hiding the girl, and with distaste Rosemary saw her plain.

"Couldn't you have lunch, or maybe dinner, or lunch the day after?"
begged the girl.  Rosemary looked about for Dick, finding him with
the hostess, to whom he had been talking since they came in.  Their
eyes met and he nodded slightly, and simultaneously the three cobra
women noticed her; their long necks darted toward her and they
fixed finely critical glances upon her.  She looked back at them
defiantly, acknowledging that she had heard what they said.  Then
she threw off her exigent vis-à-vis with a polite but clipped
parting that she had just learned from Dick, and went over to join
him.  The hostess--she was another tall rich American girl,
promenading insouciantly upon the national prosperity--was asking
Dick innumerable questions about Gausse's Hôtel, whither she
evidently wanted to come, and battering persistently against his
reluctance.  Rosemary's presence reminded her that she had been
recalcitrant as a hostess and glancing about she said:  "Have you
met any one amusing, have you met Mr.--"  Her eyes groped for a
male who might interest Rosemary, but Dick said they must go.  They
left immediately, moving over the brief threshold of the future to
the sudden past of the stone façade without.

"Wasn't it terrible?" he said.

"Terrible," she echoed obediently.

"Rosemary?"

She murmured, "What?" in an awed voice.

"I feel terribly about this."

She was shaken with audibly painful sobs.  "Have you got a
handkerchief?" she faltered.  But there was little time to cry, and
lovers now they fell ravenously on the quick seconds while outside
the taxi windows the green and cream twilight faded, and the fire-
red, gas-blue, ghost-green signs began to shine smokily through the
tranquil rain.  It was nearly six, the streets were in movement,
the bistros gleamed, the Place de la Concorde moved by in pink
majesty as the cab turned north.

They looked at each other at last, murmuring names that were a
spell.  Softly the two names lingered on the air, died away more
slowly than other words, other names, slower than music in the
mind.

"I don't know what came over me last night," Rosemary said.  "That
glass of champagne?  I've never done anything like that before."

"You simply said you loved me."

"I do love you--I can't change that."  It was time for Rosemary to
cry, so she cried a little in her handkerchief.

"I'm afraid I'm in love with you," said Dick, "and that's not the
best thing that could happen."

Again the names--then they lurched together as if the taxi had
swung them.  Her breasts crushed flat against him, her mouth was
all new and warm, owned in common.  They stopped thinking with an
almost painful relief, stopped seeing; they only breathed and
sought each other.  They were both in the gray gentle world of a
mild hangover of fatigue when the nerves relax in bunches like
piano strings, and crackle suddenly like wicker chairs.  Nerves so
raw and tender must surely join other nerves, lips to lips, breast
to breast. . . .

They were still in the happier stage of love.  They were full of
brave illusions about each other, tremendous illusions, so that the
communion of self with self seemed to be on a plane where no other
human relations mattered.  They both seemed to have arrived there
with an extraordinary innocence as though a series of pure
accidents had driven them together, so many accidents that at last
they were forced to conclude that they were for each other.  They
had arrived with clean hands, or so it seemed, after no traffic
with the merely curious and clandestine.

But for Dick that portion of the road was short; the turning came
before they reached the hotel.

"There's nothing to do about it," he said, with a feeling of panic.
"I'm in love with you but it doesn't change what I said last
night."

"That doesn't matter now.  I just wanted to make you love me--if
you love me everything's all right."

"Unfortunately I do.  But Nicole mustn't know--she mustn't suspect
even faintly.  Nicole and I have got to go on together.  In a way
that's more important than just wanting to go on."

"Kiss me once more."

He kissed her, but momentarily he had left her.

"Nicole mustn't suffer--she loves me and I love her--you understand
that."

She did understand--it was the sort of thing she understood well,
not hurting people.  She knew the Divers loved each other because
it had been her primary assumption.  She had thought however that
it was a rather cooled relation, and actually rather like the love
of herself and her mother.  When people have so much for outsiders
didn't it indicate a lack of inner intensity?

"And I mean love," he said, guessing her thoughts.  "Active love--
it's more complicated than I can tell you.  It was responsible for
that crazy duel."

"How did you know about the duel?  I thought we were to keep it
from you."

"Do you think Abe can keep a secret?"  He spoke with incisive
irony.  "Tell a secret over the radio, publish it in a tabloid, but
never tell it to a man who drinks more than three or four a day."

She laughed in agreement, staying close to him.

"So you understand my relations with Nicole are complicated.  She's
not very strong--she looks strong but she isn't.  And this makes
rather a mess."

"Oh, say that later!  But kiss me now--love me now.  I'll love you
and never let Nicole see."

"You darling."

They reached the hotel and Rosemary walked a little behind him, to
admire him, to adore him.  His step was alert as if he had just
come from some great doings and was hurrying on toward others.
Organizer of private gaiety, curator of a richly incrusted
happiness.  His hat was a perfect hat and he carried a heavy stick
and yellow gloves.  She thought what a good time they would all
have being with him to-night.

They walked upstairs--five flights.  At the first landing they
stopped and kissed; she was careful on the next landing, on the
third more careful still.  On the next--there were two more--she
stopped half way and kissed him fleetingly good-by.  At his urgency
she walked down with him to the one below for a minute--and then up
and up.  Finally it was good-by with their hands stretching to
touch along the diagonal of the banister and then the fingers
slipping apart.  Dick went back downstairs to make some
arrangements for the evening--Rosemary ran to her room and wrote a
letter to her mother; she was conscience-stricken because she did
not miss her mother at all.



XVIII


Although the Divers were honestly apathetic to organized fashion,
they were nevertheless too acute to abandon its contemporaneous
rhythm and beat--Dick's parties were all concerned with excitement,
and a chance breath of fresh night air was the more precious for
being experienced in the intervals of the excitement.

The party that night moved with the speed of a slapstick comedy.
They were twelve, they were sixteen, they were quartets in separate
motors bound on a quick Odyssey over Paris.  Everything had been
foreseen.  People joined them as if by magic, accompanied them as
specialists, almost guides, through a phase of the evening, dropped
out and were succeeded by other people, so that it appeared as if
the freshness of each one had been husbanded for them all day.
Rosemary appreciated how different it was from any party in
Hollywood, no matter how splendid in scale.  There was, among many
diversions, the car of the Shah of Persia.  Where Dick had
commandeered this vehicle, what bribery was employed, these were
facts of irrelevance.  Rosemary accepted it as merely a new facet
of the fabulous, which for two years had filled her life.  The car
had been built on a special chassis in America.  Its wheels were of
silver, so was the radiator.  The inside of the body was inlaid
with innumerable brilliants which would be replaced with true gems
by the court jeweller when the car arrived in Teheran the following
week.  There was only one real seat in back, because the Shah must
ride alone, so they took turns riding in it and sitting on the
marten fur that covered the floor.

But always there was Dick.  Rosemary assured the image of her
mother, ever carried with her, that never, never had she known any
one so nice, so thoroughly nice as Dick was that night.  She
compared him with the two Englishmen, whom Abe addressed
conscientiously as "Major Hengest and Mr. Horsa," and with the heir
to a Scandinavian throne and the novelist just back from Russia,
and with Abe, who was desperate and witty, and with Collis Clay,
who joined them somewhere and stayed along--and felt there was no
comparison.  The enthusiasm, the selflessness behind the whole
performance ravished her, the technic of moving many varied types,
each as immobile, as dependent on supplies of attention as an
infantry battalion is dependent on rations, appeared so effortless
that he still had pieces of his own most personal self for
everyone.

--Afterward she remembered the times when she had felt the
happiest.  The first time was when she and Dick danced together and
she felt her beauty sparkling bright against his tall, strong form
as they floated, hovering like people in an amusing dream--he
turned her here and there with such a delicacy of suggestion that
she was like a bright bouquet, a piece of precious cloth being
displayed before fifty eyes.  There was a moment when they were not
dancing at all, simply clinging together.  Some time in the early
morning they were alone, and her damp powdery young body came up
close to him in a crush of tired cloth, and stayed there, crushed
against a background of other people's hats and wraps. . . .

The time she laughed most was later, when six of them, the best of
them, noblest relics of the evening, stood in the dusky front lobby
of the Ritz telling the night concierge that General Pershing was
outside and wanted caviare and champagne.  "He brooks no delay.
Every man, every gun is at his service."  Frantic waiters emerged
from nowhere, a table was set in the lobby, and Abe came in
representing General Pershing while they stood up and mumbled
remembered fragments of war songs at him.  In the waiters' injured
reaction to this anti-climax they found themselves neglected, so
they built a waiter trap--a huge and fantastic device constructed
of all the furniture in the lobby and functioning like one of the
bizarre machines of a Goldberg cartoon.  Abe shook his head
doubtfully at it.

"Perhaps it would be better to steal a musical saw and--"

"That's enough," Mary interrupted.  "When Abe begins bringing up
that it's time to go home."  Anxiously she confided to Rosemary:

"I've got to get Abe home.  His boat train leaves at eleven.  It's
so important--I feel the whole future depends on his catching it,
but whenever I argue with him he does the exact opposite."

"I'll try and persuade him," offered Rosemary.

"Would you?" Mary said doubtfully.  "Maybe you could."

Then Dick came up to Rosemary:

"Nicole and I are going home and we thought you'd want to go with
us."

Her face was pale with fatigue in the false dawn.  Two wan dark
spots in her cheek marked where the color was by day.

"I can't," she said.  "I promised Mary North to stay along with
them--or Abe'll never go to bed.  Maybe you could do something."

"Don't you know you can't do anything about people?" he advised
her.  "If Abe was my room-mate in college, tight for the first
time, it'd be different.  Now there's nothing to do."

"Well, I've got to stay.  He says he'll go to bed if we only come
to the Halles with him," she said, almost defiantly.

He kissed the inside of her elbow quickly.

"Don't let Rosemary go home alone," Nicole called to Mary as they
left.  "We feel responsible to her mother."

--Later Rosemary and the Norths and a manufacturer of dolls' voices
from Newark and ubiquitous Collis and a big splendidly dressed oil
Indian named George T. Horseprotection were riding along on top of
thousands of carrots in a market wagon.  The earth in the carrot
beards was fragrant and sweet in the darkness, and Rosemary was so
high up in the load that she could hardly see the others in the
long shadow between infrequent street lamps.  Their voices came
from far off, as if they were having experiences different from
hers, different and far away, for she was with Dick in her heart,
sorry she had come with the Norths, wishing she was at the hotel
and him asleep across the hall, or that he was here beside her with
the warm darkness streaming down.

"Don't come up," she called to Collis, "the carrots will all roll."
She threw one at Abe who was sitting beside the driver, stiffly
like an old man. . . .

Later she was homeward bound at last in broad daylight, with the
pigeons already breaking over Saint-Sulpice.  All of them began to
laugh spontaneously because they knew it was still last night while
the people in the streets had the delusion that it was bright hot
morning.

"At last I've been on a wild party," thought Rosemary, "but it's no
fun when Dick isn't there."

She felt a little betrayed and sad, but presently a moving object
came into sight.  It was a huge horse-chestnut tree in full bloom
bound for the Champs Élysées, strapped now into a long truck and
simply shaking with laughter--like a lovely person in an
undignified position yet confident none the less of being lovely.
Looking at it with fascination Rosemary identified herself with it,
and laughed cheerfully with it, and everything all at once seemed
gorgeous.



XIX


Abe left from the Gare Saint Lazare at eleven--he stood alone under
the fouled glass dome, relic of the seventies, era of the Crystal
Palace; his hands, of that vague gray color that only twenty-four
hours can produce, were in his coat pockets to conceal the
trembling fingers.  With his hat removed it was plain that only the
top layer of his hair was brushed back--the lower levels were
pointed resolutely sidewise.  He was scarcely recognizable as the
man who had swum upon Gausse's Beach a fortnight ago.

He was early; he looked from left to right with his eyes only; it
would have taken nervous forces out of his control to use any other
part of his body.  New-looking baggage went past him; presently
prospective passengers, with dark little bodies, were calling:
"Jew-uls-HOO-OO!" in dark piercing voices.

At the minute when he wondered whether or not he had time for a
drink at the buffet, and began clutching at the soggy wad of
thousand-franc notes in his pocket, one end of his pendulous glance
came to rest upon the apparition of Nicole at the stairhead.  He
watched her--she was self-revelatory in her little expressions as
people seem to some one waiting for them, who as yet is himself
unobserved.  She was frowning, thinking of her children, less
gloating over them than merely animally counting them--a cat
checking her cubs with a paw.

When she saw Abe, the mood passed out of her face; the glow of the
morning skylight was sad, and Abe made a gloomy figure with dark
circles that showed through the crimson tan under his eyes.  They
sat down on a bench.

"I came because you asked me," said Nicole defensively.  Abe seemed
to have forgotten why he asked her and Nicole was quite content to
look at the travellers passing by.

"That's going to be the belle of your boat--that one with all the
men to say good-by--you see why she bought that dress?"  Nicole
talked faster and faster.  "You see why nobody else would buy it
except the belle of the world cruise?  See?  No?  Wake up!  That's
a story dress--that extra material tells a story and somebody on
world cruise would be lonesome enough to want to hear it."

She bit close her last words; she had talked too much for her; and
Abe found it difficult to gather from her serious set face that she
had spoken at all.  With an effort he drew himself up to a posture
that looked as if he were standing up while he was sitting down.

"The afternoon you took me to that funny ball--you know, St.
Genevieve's--" he began.

"I remember.  It was fun, wasn't it?"

"No fun for me.  I haven't had fun seeing you this time.  I'm tired
of you both, but it doesn't show because you're even more tired of
me--you know what I mean.  If I had any enthusiasm, I'd go on to
new people."

There was a rough nap on Nicole's velvet gloves as she slapped him
back:

"Seems rather foolish to be unpleasant, Abe.  Anyhow you don't mean
that.  I can't see why you've given up about everything."

Abe considered, trying hard not to cough or blow his nose.

"I suppose I got bored; and then it was such a long way to go back
in order to get anywhere."

Often a man can play the helpless child in front of a woman, but he
can almost never bring it off when he feels most like a helpless
child.

"No excuse for it," Nicole said crisply.

Abe was feeling worse every minute--he could think of nothing but
disagreeable and sheerly nervous remarks.  Nicole thought that the
correct attitude for her was to sit staring straight ahead, hands
in her lap.  For a while there was no communication between them--
each was racing away from the other, breathing only insofar as
there was blue space ahead, a sky not seen by the other.  Unlike
lovers they possessed no past; unlike man and wife, they possessed
no future; yet up to this morning Nicole had liked Abe better than
any one except Dick--and he had been heavy, belly-frightened, with
love for her for years.

"Tired of women's worlds," he spoke up suddenly.

"Then why don't you make a world of your own?"

"Tired of friends.  The thing is to have sycophants."

Nicole tried to force the minute hand around on the station clock,
but, "You agree?" he demanded.

"I am a woman and my business is to hold things together."

"My business is to tear them apart."

"When you get drunk you don't tear anything apart except yourself,"
she said, cold now, and frightened and unconfident.  The station
was filling but no one she knew came.  After a moment her eyes fell
gratefully on a tall girl with straw hair like a helmet, who was
dropping letters in the mail slot.

"A girl I have to speak to, Abe.  Abe, wake up!  You fool!"

Patiently Abe followed her with his eyes.  The woman turned in a
startled way to greet Nicole, and Abe recognized her as some one he
had seen around Paris.  He took advantage of Nicole's absence to
cough hard and retchingly into his handkerchief, and to blow his
nose loud.  The morning was warmer and his underwear was soaked
with sweat.  His fingers trembled so violently that it took four
matches to light a cigarette; it seemed absolutely necessary to
make his way into the buffet for a drink, but immediately Nicole
returned.

"That was a mistake," she said with frosty humor.  "After begging
me to come and see her, she gave me a good snubbing.  She looked at
me as if I were rotted."  Excited, she did a little laugh, as with
two fingers high in the scales.  "Let people come to you."

Abe recovered from a cigarette cough and remarked:

"Trouble is when you're sober you don't want to see anybody, and
when you're tight nobody wants to see you."

"Who, me?"  Nicole laughed again; for some reason the late
encounter had cheered her.

"No--me."

"Speak for yourself.  I like people, a lot of people--I like--"

Rosemary and Mary North came in sight, walking slowly and searching
for Abe, and Nicole burst forth grossly with "Hey!  Hi!  Hey!" and
laughed and waved the package of handkerchiefs she had bought for
Abe.

They stood in an uncomfortable little group weighted down by Abe's
gigantic presence: he lay athwart them like the wreck of a galleon,
dominating with his presence his own weakness and self-indulgence,
his narrowness and bitterness.  All of them were conscious of the
solemn dignity that flowed from him, of his achievement,
fragmentary, suggestive and surpassed.  But they were frightened at
his survivant will, once a will to live, now become a will to die.

Dick Diver came and brought with him a fine glowing surface on
which the three women sprang like monkeys with cries of relief,
perching on his shoulders, on the beautiful crown of his hat or the
gold head of his cane.  Now, for a moment, they could disregard the
spectacle of Abe's gigantic obscenity.  Dick saw the situation
quickly and grasped it quietly.  He pulled them out of themselves
into the station, making plain its wonders.  Nearby, some Americans
were saying good-by in voices that mimicked the cadence of water
running into a large old bathtub.  Standing in the station, with
Paris in back of them, it seemed as if they were vicariously
leaning a little over the ocean, already undergoing a sea-change, a
shifting about of atoms to form the essential molecule of a new
people.

So the well-to-do Americans poured through the station onto the
platforms with frank new faces, intelligent, considerate,
thoughtless, thought-for.  An occasional English face among them
seemed sharp and emergent.  When there were enough Americans on the
platform the first impression of their immaculacy and their money
began to fade into a vague racial dusk that hindered and blinded
both them and their observers.

Nicole seized Dick's arm crying, "Look!"  Dick turned in time to
see what took place in half a minute.  At a Pullman entrance two
cars off, a vivid scene detached itself from the tenor of many
farewells.  The young woman with the helmet-like hair to whom
Nicole had spoken made an odd dodging little run away from the man
to whom she was talking and plunged a frantic hand into her purse;
then the sound of two revolver shots cracked the narrow air of the
platform.  Simultaneously the engine whistled sharply and the train
began to move, momentarily dwarfing the shots in significance.  Abe
waved again from his window, oblivious to what had happened.  But
before the crowd closed in, the others had seen the shots take
effect, seen the target sit down upon the platform.

Only after a hundred years did the train stop; Nicole, Mary, and
Rosemary waited on the outskirts while Dick fought his way through.
It was five minutes before he found them again--by this time the
crowd had split into two sections, following, respectively, the man
on a stretcher and the girl walking pale and firm between
distraught gendarmes.

"It was Maria Wallis," Dick said hurriedly.  "The man she shot was
an Englishman--they had an awful time finding out who, because she
shot him through his identification card."  They were walking
quickly from the train, swayed along with the crowd.  "I found out
what poste de police they're taking her to so I'll go there--"

"But her sister lives in Paris," Nicole objected.  "Why not phone
her?  Seems very peculiar nobody thought of that.  She's married to
a Frenchman, and he can do more than we can."

Dick hesitated, shook his head and started off.

"Wait!" Nicole cried after him.  "That's foolish--how can you do
any good--with your French?"

"At least I'll see they don't do anything outrageous to her."

"They're certainly going to hold on to her," Nicole assured him
briskly.  "She DID shoot the man.  The best thing is to phone right
away to Laura--she can do more than we can."

Dick was unconvinced--also he was showing off for Rosemary.

"You wait," said Nicole firmly, and hurried off to a telephone
booth.

"When Nicole takes things into her hands," he said with affectionate
irony, "there is nothing more to be done."

He saw Rosemary for the first time that morning.  They exchanged
glances, trying to recognize the emotions of the day before.  For a
moment each seemed unreal to the other--then the slow warm hum of
love began again.

"You like to help everybody, don't you?" Rosemary said.

"I only pretend to."

"Mother likes to help everybody--of course she can't help as many
people as you do."  She sighed.  "Sometimes I think I'm the most
selfish person in the world."

For the first time the mention of her mother annoyed rather than
amused Dick.  He wanted to sweep away her mother, remove the whole
affair from the nursery footing upon which Rosemary persistently
established it.  But he realized that this impulse was a loss of
control--what would become of Rosemary's urge toward him if, for
even a moment, he relaxed.  He saw, not without panic, that the
affair was sliding to rest; it could not stand still, it must go on
or go back; for the first time it occurred to him that Rosemary had
her hand on the lever more authoritatively than he.

Before he had thought out a course of procedure, Nicole returned.

"I found Laura.  It was the first news she had and her voice kept
fading away and then getting loud again--as if she was fainting and
then pulling herself together.  She said she knew something was
going to happen this morning."

"Maria ought to be with Diaghileff," said Dick in a gentle tone, in
order to bring them back to quietude.  "She has a nice sense of
decor--not to say rhythm.  Will any of us ever see a train pulling
out without hearing a few shots?"

They bumped down the wide steel steps.  "I'm sorry for the poor
man," Nicole said.  "Course that's why she talked so strange to me--
she was getting ready to open fire."

She laughed, Rosemary laughed too, but they were both horrified,
and both of them deeply wanted Dick to make a moral comment on the
matter and not leave it to them.  This wish was not entirely
conscious, especially on the part of Rosemary, who was accustomed
to having shell fragments of such events shriek past her head.  But
a totality of shock had piled up in her too.  For the moment, Dick
was too shaken by the impetus of his newly recognized emotion to
resolve things into the pattern of the holiday, so the women,
missing something, lapsed into a vague unhappiness.

Then, as if nothing had happened, the lives of the Divers and their
friends flowed out into the street.

However, everything had happened--Abe's departure and Mary's
impending departure for Salzburg this afternoon had ended the time
in Paris.  Or perhaps the shots, the concussions that had finished
God knew what dark matter, had terminated it.  The shots had
entered into all their lives: echoes of violence followed them out
onto the pavement where two porters held a post-mortem beside them
as they waited for a taxi.

"Tu as vu le revolver?  Il était très petit, vraie perle--un
jouet."

"Mais, assez puissant!" said the other porter sagely.  "Tu as vu sa
chemise?  Assez de sang pour se croire à la guerre."



XX


In the square, as they came out, a suspended mass of gasoline
exhaust cooked slowly in the July sun.  It was a terrible thing--
unlike pure heat it held no promise of rural escape but suggested
only roads choked with the same foul asthma.  During their
luncheon, outdoors, across from the Luxembourg Gardens, Rosemary
had cramps and felt fretful and full of impatient lassitude--it was
the foretaste of this that had inspired her self-accusation of
selfishness in the station.

Dick had no suspicion of the sharpness of the change; he was
profoundly unhappy and the subsequent increase of egotism tended
momentarily to blind him to what was going on round about him, and
deprive him of the long ground-swell of imagination that he counted
on for his judgments.

After Mary North left them, accompanied by the Italian singing
teacher who had joined them for coffee and was taking her to her
train, Rosemary, too, stood up, bound for an engagement at her
studio: "meet some officials."

"And oh--" she proposed "--if Collis Clay, that Southern boy--if he
comes while you are still sitting here, just tell him I couldn't
wait; tell him to call me to-morrow."

Too insouciant, in reaction from the late disturbance, she had
assumed the privileges of a child--the result being to remind the
Divers of their exclusive love for their own children; Rosemary was
sharply rebuked in a short passage between the women:  "You'd
better leave the message with a waiter," Nicole's voice was stern
and unmodulated, "we're leaving immediately."

Rosemary got it, took it without resentment.

"I'll let it go then.  Good-by, you darlings."

Dick asked for the check; the Divers relaxed, chewing tentatively
on toothpicks.

"Well--" they said together.

He saw a flash of unhappiness on her mouth, so brief that only he
would have noticed, and he could pretend not to have seen.  What
did Nicole think?  Rosemary was one of a dozen people he had
"worked over" in the past years: these had included a French circus
clown, Abe and Mary North, a pair of dancers, a writer, a painter,
a comedienne from the Grand Guignol, a half-crazy pederast from the
Russian Ballet, a promising tenor they had staked to a year in
Milan.  Nicole well knew how seriously these people interpreted his
interest and enthusiasm; but she realized also that, except while
their children were being born, Dick had not spent a night apart
from her since their marriage.  On the other hand, there was a
pleasingness about him that simply had to be used--those who
possessed that pleasingness had to keep their hands in, and go
along attaching people that they had no use to make of.

Now Dick hardened himself and let minutes pass without making any
gesture of confidence, any representation of constantly renewed
surprise that they were one together.

Collis Clay out of the South edged a passage between the closely
packed tables and greeted the Divers cavalierly.  Such salutations
always astonished Dick--acquaintances saying "Hi!" to them, or
speaking only to one of them.  He felt so intensely about people
that in moments of apathy he preferred to remain concealed; that
one could parade a casualness into his presence was a challenge to
the key on which he lived.

Collis, unaware that he was without a wedding garment, heralded his
arrival with:  "I reckon I'm late--the beyed has flown."  Dick had
to wrench something out of himself before he could forgive him for
not having first complimented Nicole.

She left almost immediately and he sat with Collis, finishing the
last of his wine.  He rather liked Collis--he was "post-war"; less
difficult than most of the Southerners he had known at New Haven
a decade previously.  Dick listened with amusement to the
conversation that accompanied the slow, profound stuffing of a
pipe.  In the early afternoon children and nurses were trekking
into the Luxembourg Gardens; it was the first time in months that
Dick had let this part of the day out of his hands.

Suddenly his blood ran cold as he realized the content of Collis's
confidential monologue.

"--she's not so cold as you'd probably think.  I admit I thought
she was cold for a long time.  But she got into a jam with a friend
of mine going from New York to Chicago at Easter--a boy named
Hillis she thought was pretty nutsey at New Haven--she had a
compartment with a cousin of mine but she and Hillis wanted to be
alone, so in the afternoon my cousin came and played cards in our
compartment.  Well, after about two hours we went back and there
was Rosemary and Bill Hillis standing in the vestibule arguing with
the conductor--Rosemary white as a sheet.  Seems they locked the
door and pulled down the blinds and I guess there was some heavy
stuff going on when the conductor came for the tickets and knocked
on the door.  They thought it was us kidding them and wouldn't let
him in at first, and when they did, he was plenty sore.  He asked
Hillis if that was his compartment and whether he and Rosemary were
married that they locked the door, and Hillis lost his temper
trying to explain there was nothing wrong.  He said the conductor
had insulted Rosemary and he wanted him to fight, but that
conductor could have made trouble--and believe me I had an awful
time smoothing it over."

With every detail imagined, with even envy for the pair's community
of misfortune in the vestibule, Dick felt a change taking place
within him.  Only the image of a third person, even a vanished one,
entering into his relation with Rosemary was needed to throw him
off his balance and send through him waves of pain, misery, desire,
desperation.  The vividly pictured hand on Rosemary's cheek, the
quicker breath, the white excitement of the event viewed from
outside, the inviolable secret warmth within.

--Do you mind if I pull down the curtain?

--Please do.  It's too light in here.

Collis Clay was now speaking about fraternity politics at New
Haven, in the same tone, with the same emphasis.  Dick had gathered
that he was in love with Rosemary in some curious way Dick could
not have understood.  The affair with Hillis seemed to have made no
emotional impression on Collis save to give him the joyful
conviction that Rosemary was "human."

"Bones got a wonderful crowd," he said.  "We all did, as a matter
of fact.  New Haven's so big now the sad thing is the men we have
to leave out."

--Do you mind if I pull down the curtain?

--Please do.  It's too light in here.

. . . Dick went over Paris to his bank--writing a check, he looked
along the row of men at the desks deciding to which one he would
present it for an O.K.  As he wrote he engrossed himself in the
material act, examining meticulously the pen, writing laboriously
upon the high glass-topped desk.  Once he raised glazed eyes to
look toward the mail department, then glazed his spirit again by
concentration upon the objects he dealt with.

Still he failed to decide to whom the check should be presented,
which man in the line would guess least of the unhappy predicament
in which he found himself and, also, which one would be least
likely to talk.  There was Perrin, the suave New Yorker, who had
asked him to luncheons at the American Club, there was Casasus, the
Spaniard, with whom he usually discussed a mutual friend in spite
of the fact that the friend had passed out of his life a dozen
years before; there was Muchhause, who always asked him whether he
wanted to draw upon his wife's money or his own.

As he entered the amount on the stub, and drew two lines under it,
he decided to go to Pierce, who was young and for whom he would
have to put on only a small show.  It was often easier to give a
show than to watch one.

He went to the mail desk first--as the woman who served him pushed
up with her bosom a piece of paper that had nearly escaped the
desk, he thought how differently women use their bodies from men.
He took his letters aside to open: There was a bill for seventeen
psychiatric books from a German concern, a bill from Brentano's, a
letter from Buffalo from his father, in a handwriting that year by
year became more indecipherable; there was a card from Tommy Barban
postmarked Fez and bearing a facetious communication; there were
letters from doctors in Zurich, both in German; a disputed bill
from a plasterer in Cannes; a bill from a furniture maker; a letter
from the publisher of a medical journal in Baltimore, miscellaneous
announcements and an invitation to a showing of pictures by an
incipient artist; also there were three letters for Nicole, and a
letter for Rosemary sent in his care.

--Do you mind if I pull down the curtain?

He went toward Pierce but he was engaged with a woman, and Dick saw
with his heels that he would have to present his check to Casasus
at the next desk, who was free.

"How are you, Diver?"  Casasus was genial.  He stood up, his
mustache spreading with his smile.  "We were talking about
Featherstone the other day and I thought of you--he's out in
California now."

Dick widened his eyes and bent forward a little.

"In Cali-FOR-nia?"

"That's what I heard."

Dick held the check poised; to focus the attention of Casasus upon
it he looked toward Pierce's desk, holding the latter for a moment
in a friendly eye-play conditioned by an old joke of three years
before when Pierce had been involved with a Lithuanian countess.
Pierce played up with a grin until Casasus had authorized the check
and had no further recourse to detain Dick, whom he liked, than to
stand up holding his pince-nez and repeat, "Yes, he's in
California."

Meanwhile Dick had seen that Perrin, at the head of the line of
desks, was in conversation with the heavyweight champion of the
world; from a sidesweep of Perrin's eye Dick saw that he was
considering calling him over and introducing him, but that he
finally decided against it.

Cutting across the social mood of Casasus with the intensity he had
accumulated at the glass desk--which is to say he looked hard at
the check, studying it, and then fixed his eyes on grave problems
beyond the first marble pillar to the right of the banker's head
and made a business of shifting the cane, hat, and letters he
carried--he said good-by and went out.  He had long ago purchased
the doorman; his taxi sprang to the curb.

"I want to go to the Films Par Excellence Studio--it's on a little
street in Passy.  Go to the Muette.  I'll direct you from there."

He was rendered so uncertain by the events of the last forty-eight
hours that he was not even sure of what he wanted to do; he paid
off the taxi at the Muette and walked in the direction of the
studio, crossing to the opposite side of the street before he came
to the building.  Dignified in his fine clothes, with their fine
accessories, he was yet swayed and driven as an animal.  Dignity
could come only with an overthrowing of his past, of the effort of
the last six years.  He went briskly around the block with the
fatuousness of one of Tarkington's adolescents, hurrying at the
blind places lest he miss Rosemary's coming out of the studio.  It
was a melancholy neighborhood.  Next door to the place he saw a
sign:  "1000 chemises."  The shirts filled the window, piled,
cravated, stuffed, or draped with shoddy grace on the showcase
floor:  "1000 chemises"--count them!  On either side he read:
"Papeterie," "Pâtisserie," "Solde," "Réclame"--and Constance
Talmadge in "Déjeuner de Soleil," and farther away there were more
sombre announcements:  "Vêtements Ecclésiastiques," "Déclaration de
Décès" and "Pompes Funèbres."  Life and death.

He knew that what he was now doing marked a turning point in his
life--it was out of line with everything that had preceded it--even
out of line with what effect he might hope to produce upon
Rosemary.  Rosemary saw him always as a model of correctness--his
presence walking around this block was an intrusion.  But Dick's
necessity of behaving as he did was a projection of some submerged
reality: he was compelled to walk there, or stand there, his shirt-
sleeve fitting his wrist and his coat sleeve encasing his shirt-
sleeve like a sleeve valve, his collar molded plastically to his
neck, his red hair cut exactly, his hand holding his small
briefcase like a dandy--just as another man once found it necessary
to stand in front of a church in Ferrara, in sackcloth and ashes.
Dick was paying some tribute to things unforgotten, unshriven,
unexpurgated.



XXI


After three-quarters of an hour of standing around, he became
suddenly involved in a human contact.  It was just the sort of
thing that was likely to happen to him when he was in the mood of
not wanting to see any one.  So rigidly did he sometimes guard his
exposed self-consciousness that frequently he defeated his own
purposes; as an actor who underplays a part sets up a craning
forward, a stimulated emotional attention in an audience, and seems
to create in others an ability to bridge the gap he has left open.
Similarly we are seldom sorry for those who need and crave our
pity--we reserve this for those who, by other means, make us
exercise the abstract function of pity.

So Dick might, himself, have analyzed the incident that ensued.  As
he paced the Rue des Saintes-Anges he was spoken to by a thin-faced
American, perhaps thirty, with an air of being scarred and a slight
but sinister smile.  As Dick gave him the light he requested, he
placed him as one of a type of which he had been conscious since
early youth--a type that loafed about tobacco stores with one elbow
on the counter and watched, through heaven knew what small chink of
the mind, the people who came in and out.  Intimate to garages,
where he had vague business conducted in undertones, to barber
shops, to the lobbies of theatres--in such places, at any rate,
Dick placed him.  Sometimes the face bobbed up in one of Tad's more
savage cartoons--in boyhood Dick had often thrown an uneasy glance
at the dim borderland of crime on which he stood.

"How do you like Paris, Buddy?"

Not waiting for an answer the man tried to fit in his footsteps
with Dick's:  "Where you from?" he asked encouragingly.

"From Buffalo."

"I'm from San Antone--but I been over here since the war."

"You in the army?"

"I'LL say I was.  Eighty-fourth Division--ever heard of that
outfit?"

The man walked a little ahead of him and fixed him with eyes that
were practically menacing.

"Staying in Paris awhile, Buddy?  Or just passing through."

"Passing through."

"What hotel you staying at?"

Dick had begun laughing to himself--the party had the intention of
rifling his room that night.  His thoughts were read apparently
without self-consciousness.

"With a build like yours you oughtn't to be afraid of me, Buddy.
There's a lot of bums around just laying for American tourists, but
you needn't be afraid of me."

Becoming bored, Dick stopped walking:  "I just wonder why you've
got so much time to waste."

"I'm in business here in Paris."

"In what line?"

"Selling papers."

The contrast between the formidable manner and the mild profession
was absurd--but the man amended it with:

"Don't worry; I made plenty money last year--ten or twenty francs
for a Sunny Times that cost six."

He produced a newspaper clipping from a rusty wallet and passed it
over to one who had become a fellow stroller--the cartoon showed a
stream of Americans pouring from the gangplank of a liner freighted
with gold.

"Two hundred thousand--spending ten million a summer."

"What you doing out here in Passy?"

His companion looked around cautiously.  "Movies," he said darkly.
"They got an American studio over there.  And they need guys can
speak English.  I'm waiting for a break."

Dick shook him off quickly and firmly.

It had become apparent that Rosemary either had escaped on one of
his early circuits of the block or else had left before he came
into the neighborhood; he went into the bistro on the corner,
bought a lead disk and, squeezed in an alcove between the kitchen
and the foul toilet, he called the Roi George.  He recognized
Cheyne-Stokes tendencies in his respiration--but like everything
the symptom served only to turn him in toward his emotion.  He gave
the number of the hotel; then stood holding the phone and staring
into the café; after a long while a strange little voice said
hello.

"This is Dick--I had to call you."

A pause from her--then bravely, and in key with his emotion:  "I'm
glad you did."

"I came to meet you at your studio--I'm out in Passy across the way
from it.  I thought maybe we'd ride around through the Bois."

"Oh, I only stayed there a minute!  I'm so sorry."  A silence.

"Rosemary."

"Yes, Dick."

"Look, I'm in an extraordinary condition about you.  When a child
can disturb a middle-aged gent--things get difficult."

"You're not middle-aged, Dick--you're the youngest person in the
world."

"Rosemary?"  Silence while he stared at a shelf that held the
humbler poisons of France--bottles of Otard, Rhum St. James, Marie
Brizzard, Punch Orangeade, André Fernet Blanco, Cherry Rochet, and
Armagnac.

"Are you alone?"

--Do you mind if I pull down the curtain?

"Who do you think I'd be with?"

"That's the state I'm in.  I'd like to be with you now."

Silence, then a sigh and an answer.  "I wish you were with me now."

There was the hotel room where she lay behind a telephone number,
and little gusts of music wailed around her--


     "And two--for tea.
      And me for you,
      And you for me
      Alow-own."


There was the remembered dust of powder over her tan--when he
kissed her face it was damp around the corners of her hair; there
was the flash of a white face under his own, the arc of a shoulder.

"It's impossible," he said to himself.  In a minute he was out in
the street marching along toward the Muette, or away from it, his
small brief-case still in his hand, his gold-headed stick held at a
sword-like angle.

Rosemary returned to her desk and finished a letter to her mother.

"--I only saw him for a little while but I thought he was wonderful
looking.  I fell in love with him (Of course I Do Love Dick Best
but you know what I mean).  He really is going to direct the
picture and is leaving immediately for Hollywood, and I think we
ought to leave, too.  Collis Clay has been here.  I like him all
right but have not seen much of him because of the Divers, who
really are divine, about the Nicest People I ever Knew.  I am
feeling not very well to-day and am taking the Medicine, though see
No need for it.  I'm not even Going to Try to tell you All that's
Happened until I see YOU!!!  So when you get this letter WIRE,
WIRE, WIRE!  Are you coming north or shall I come south with the
Divers?"



At six Dick called Nicole.

"Have you any special plans?" he asked.  "Would you like to do
something quiet--dinner at the hotel and then a play?"

"Would you?  I'll do whatever you want.  I phoned Rosemary a while
ago and she's having dinner in her room.  I think this upset all of
us, don't you?"

"It didn't upset me," he objected.  "Darling, unless you're
physically tired let's do something.  Otherwise we'll get south and
spend a week wondering why we didn't see Boucher.  It's better than
brooding--"

This was a blunder and Nicole took him up sharply.

"Brooding about what?"

"About Maria Wallis."

She agreed to go to a play.  It was a tradition between them that
they should never be too tired for anything, and they found it made
the days better on the whole and put the evenings more in order.
When, inevitably, their spirits flagged they shifted the blame to
the weariness and fatigue of others.  Before they went out, as
fine-looking a couple as could be found in Paris, they knocked
softly at Rosemary's door.  There was no answer; judging that she
was asleep they walked into a warm strident Paris night, snatching
a vermouth and bitters in the shadow by Fouquet's bar.



XXII


Nicole awoke late, murmuring something back into her dream before
she parted her long lashes tangled with sleep.  Dick's bed was
empty--only after a minute did she realize that she had been
awakened by a knock at their salon door.

"Entrez!" she called, but there was no answer, and after a moment
she slipped on a dressing-gown and went to open it.  A sergent-de-
ville confronted her courteously and stepped inside the door.

"Mr. Afghan North--he is here?"

"What?  No--he's gone to America."

"When did he leave, Madame?"

"Yesterday morning."

He shook his head and waved his forefinger at her in a quicker
rhythm.

"He was in Paris last night.  He is registered here but his room is
not occupied.  They told me I had better ask at this room."

"Sounds very peculiar to me--we saw him off yesterday morning on
the boat train."

"Be that as it may, he has been seen here this morning.  Even his
carte d'identité has been seen.  And there you are."

"We know nothing about it," she proclaimed in amazement.

He considered.  He was an ill-smelling, handsome man.

"You were not with him at all last night?"

"But no."

"We have arrested a Negro.  We are convinced we have at last
arrested the correct Negro."

"I assure you that I haven't an idea what you're talking about.  If
it's the Mr. Abraham North, the one we know, well, if he was in
Paris last night we weren't aware of it."

The man nodded, sucked his upper lip, convinced but disappointed.

"What happened?" Nicole demanded.

He showed his palms, puffing out his closed mouth.  He had begun to
find her attractive and his eyes flickered at her.

"What do you wish, Madame?  A summer affair.  Mr. Afghan North was
robbed and he made a complaint.  We have arrested the miscreant.
Mr. Afghan should come to identify him and make the proper
charges."

Nicole pulled her dressing-gown closer around her and dismissed him
briskly.  Mystified she took a bath and dressed.  By this time it
was after ten and she called Rosemary but got no answer--then she
phoned the hotel office and found that Abe had indeed registered,
at six-thirty this morning.  His room, however, was still
unoccupied.  Hoping for a word from Dick she waited in the parlor
of the suite; just as she had given up and decided to go out, the
office called and announced:

"Meestaire Crawshow, un nègre."

"On what business?" she demanded.

"He says he knows you and the doctaire.  He says there is a
Meestaire Freeman into prison that is a friend of all the world.
He says there is injustice and he wishes to see Meestaire North
before he himself is arrested."

"We know nothing about it."  Nicole disclaimed the whole business
with a vehement clap of the receiver.  Abe's bizarre reappearance
made it plain to her how fatigued she was with his dissipation.
Dismissing him from her mind she went out, ran into Rosemary at the
dressmaker's, and shopped with her for artificial flowers and all-
colored strings of colored beads on the Rue de Rivoli.  She helped
Rosemary choose a diamond for her mother, and some scarfs and novel
cigarette cases to take home to business associates in California.
For her son she bought Greek and Roman soldiers, a whole army of
them, costing over a thousand francs.  Once again they spent their
money in different ways and again Rosemary admired Nicole's method
of spending.  Nicole was sure that the money she spent was hers--
Rosemary still thought her money was miraculously lent to her and
she must consequently be very careful of it.

It was fun spending money in the sunlight of the foreign city with
healthy bodies under them that sent streams of color up to their
faces; with arms and hands, legs and ankles that they stretched out
confidently, reaching or stepping with the confidence of women
lovely to men.

When they got back to the hotel and found Dick, all bright and new
in the morning, both of them had a moment of complete childish joy.

He had just received a garbled telephone call from Abe who, so it
appeared, had spent the forenoon in hiding.

"It was one of the most extraordinary telephone conversations I've
ever held."

Dick had talked not only to Abe but to a dozen others.  On the
phone these supernumeraries had been typically introduced as: "--
man wants to talk to you is in the teput dome, well he says he was
in it--what is it?

"Hey, somebody, shut-up--anyhow, he was in some shandel-scandal and
he kaa POS-sibly go home.  My own PER-sonal is that--my personal is
he's had a--"  Gulps sounded and thereafter what the party had,
rested with the unknown.

The phone yielded up a supplementary offer:

"I thought it would appeal to you anyhow as a psychologist."  The
vague personality who corresponded to this statement was eventually
hung on to the phone; in the sequence he failed to appeal to Dick,
as a psychologist, or indeed as anything else.  Abe's conversation
flowed on as follows:

"Hello."

"Well?"

"Well, hello."

"Who are you?"

"Well."  There were interpolated snorts of laughter.

"Well, I'll put somebody else on the line."

Sometimes Dick could hear Abe's voice, accompanied by scufflings,
droppings of the receiver, far-away fragments such as, "No, I
don't, Mr. North. . . ."  Then a pert decided voice had said:  "If
you are a friend of Mr. North you will come down and take him
away."

Abe cut in, solemn and ponderous, beating it all down with an
overtone of earth-bound determination.

"Dick, I've launched a race riot in Montmartre.  I'm going over and
get Freeman out of jail.  If a Negro from Copenhagen that makes
shoe polish--hello, can you hear me--well, look, if anybody comes
there--"  Once again the receiver was a chorus of innumerable
melodies.

"Why you back in Paris?" Dick demanded.

"I got as far as Evreux, and I decided to take a plane back so I
could compare it with St. Sulpice.  I mean I don't intend to bring
St. Sulpice back to Paris.  I don't even mean Baroque!  I meant St.
Germain.  For God's sake, wait a minute and I'll put the chasseur
on the wire."

"For God's sake, don't."

"Listen--did Mary get off all right?"

"Yes."

"Dick, I want you to talk with a man I met here this morning, the
son of a naval officer that's been to every doctor in Europe.  Let
me tell you about him--"

Dick had rung off at this point--perhaps that was a piece of
ingratitude for he needed grist for the grinding activity of his
mind.

"Abe used to be so nice," Nicole told Rosemary.  "So nice.  Long
ago--when Dick and I were first married.  If you had known him
then.  He'd come to stay with us for weeks and weeks and we
scarcely knew he was in the house.  Sometimes he'd play--sometimes
he'd be in the library with a muted piano, making love to it by the
hour--Dick, do you remember that maid?  She thought he was a ghost
and sometimes Abe used to meet her in the hall and moo at her, and
it cost us a whole tea service once--but we didn't care."

So much fun--so long ago.  Rosemary envied them their fun,
imagining a life of leisure unlike her own.  She knew little of
leisure but she had the respect for it of those who have never had
it.  She thought of it as a resting, without realizing that the
Divers were as far from relaxing as she was herself.

"What did this to him?" she asked.  "Why does he have to drink?"

Nicole shook her head right and left, disclaiming responsibility
for the matter:  "So many smart men go to pieces nowadays."

"And when haven't they?" Dick asked.  "Smart men play close to the
line because they have to--some of them can't stand it, so they
quit."

"It must lie deeper than that."  Nicole clung to her conversation;
also she was irritated that Dick should contradict her before
Rosemary.  "Artists like--well, like Fernand don't seem to have to
wallow in alcohol.  Why is it just Americans who dissipate?"

There were so many answers to this question that Dick decided to
leave it in the air, to buzz victoriously in Nicole's ears.  He had
become intensely critical of her.  Though he thought she was the
most attractive human creature he had ever seen, though he got from
her everything he needed, he scented battle from afar, and
subconsciously he had been hardening and arming himself, hour
by hour.  He was not given to self-indulgence and he felt
comparatively graceless at this moment of indulging himself,
blinding his eyes with the hope that Nicole guessed at only an
emotional excitement about Rosemary.  He was not sure--last night
at the theatre she had referred pointedly to Rosemary as a child.

The trio lunched downstairs in an atmosphere of carpets and padded
waiters, who did not march at the stomping quick-step of those men
who brought good food to the tables whereon they had recently
dined.  Here there were families of Americans staring around at
families of Americans, and trying to make conversation with one
another.

There was a party at the next table that they could not account
for.  It consisted of an expansive, somewhat secretarial, would-
you-mind-repeating young man, and a score of women.  The women were
neither young nor old nor of any particular social class; yet the
party gave the impression of a unit, held more closely together for
example than a group of wives stalling through a professional
congress of their husbands.  Certainly it was more of a unit than
any conceivable tourist party.

An instinct made Dick suck back the grave derision that formed on
his tongue; he asked the waiter to find out who they were.

"Those are the gold-star muzzers," explained the waiter.

Aloud and in low voices they exclaimed.  Rosemary's eyes filled
with tears.

"Probably the young ones are the wives," said Nicole.

Over his wine Dick looked at them again; in their happy faces, the
dignity that surrounded and pervaded the party, he perceived all
the maturity of an older America.  For a while the sobered women
who had come to mourn for their dead, for something they could not
repair, made the room beautiful.  Momentarily, he sat again on his
father's knee, riding with Moseby while the old loyalties and
devotions fought on around him.  Almost with an effort he turned
back to his two women at the table and faced the whole new world in
which he believed.

--Do you mind if I pull down the curtain?



XXIII


Abe North was still in the Ritz bar, where he had been since nine
in the morning.  When he arrived seeking sanctuary the windows were
open and great beams were busy at pulling up the dust from smoky
carpets and cushions.  Chasseurs tore through the corridors,
liberated and disembodied, moving for the moment in pure space.
The sit-down bar for women, across from the bar proper, seemed very
small--it was hard to imagine what throngs it could accommodate in
the afternoon.

The famous Paul, the concessionaire, had not arrived, but Claude,
who was checking stock, broke off his work with no improper
surprise to make Abe a pick-me-up.  Abe sat on a bench against a
wall.  After two drinks he began to feel better--so much better
that he mounted to the barber's shop and was shaved.  When he
returned to the bar Paul had arrived--in his custom-built motor,
from which he had disembarked correctly at the Boulevard des
Capucines.  Paul liked Abe and came over to talk.

"I was supposed to ship home this morning," Abe said.  "I mean
yesterday morning, or whatever this is."

"Why din you?" asked Paul.

Abe considered, and happened finally to a reason:  "I was reading a
serial in Liberty and the next installment was due here in Paris--
so if I'd sailed I'd have missed it--then I never would have read
it."

"It must be a very good story."

"It's a terr-r-rible story."

Paul arose chuckling and paused, leaning on the back of a chair:

"If you really want to get off, Mr. North, there are friends of
yours going to-morrow on the France--Mister what is this name--and
Slim Pearson.  Mister--I'll think of it--tall with a new beard."

"Yardly," Abe supplied.

"Mr. Yardly.  They're both going on the France."

He was on his way to his duties but Abe tried to detain him:  "If I
didn't have to go by way of Cherbourg.  The baggage went that way."

"Get your baggage in New York," said Paul, receding.

The logic of the suggestion fitted gradually into Abe's pitch--he
grew rather enthusiastic about being cared for, or rather of
prolonging his state of irresponsibility.

Other clients had meanwhile drifted in to the bar: first came a
huge Dane whom Abe had somewhere encountered.  The Dane took a seat
across the room, and Abe guessed he would be there all the day,
drinking, lunching, talking or reading newspapers.  He felt a
desire to out-stay him.  At eleven the college boys began to step
in, stepping gingerly lest they tear one another bag from bag.  It
was about then he had the chasseur telephone to the Divers; by the
time he was in touch with them he was in touch also with other
friends--and his hunch was to put them all on different phones at
once--the result was somewhat general.  From time to time his mind
reverted to the fact that he ought to go over and get Freeman out
of jail, but he shook off all facts as parts of the nightmare.

By one o'clock the bar was jammed; amidst the consequent mixture of
voices the staff of waiters functioned, pinning down their clients
to the facts of drink and money.

"That makes two stingers . . . and one more . . . two martinis and
one . . . nothing for you, Mr. Quarterly . . . that makes three
rounds.  That makes seventy-five francs, Mr. Quarterly.  Mr.
Schaeffer said he had this--you had the last . . . I can only do
what you say . . . thanks vera-much."

In the confusion Abe had lost his seat; now he stood gently swaying
and talking to some of the people with whom he had involved
himself.  A terrier ran a leash around his legs but Abe managed to
extricate himself without upsetting and became the recipient of
profuse apologies.  Presently he was invited to lunch, but
declined.  It was almost Briglith, he explained, and there was
something he had to do at Briglith.  A little later, with the
exquisite manners of the alcoholic that are like the manners of a
prisoner or a family servant, he said good-by to an acquaintance,
and turning around discovered that the bar's great moment was over
as precipitately as it had begun.

Across from him the Dane and his companions had ordered luncheon.
Abe did likewise but scarcely touched it.  Afterwards, he just sat,
happy to live in the past.  The drink made past happy things
contemporary with the present, as if they were still going on,
contemporary even with the future as if they were about to happen
again.

At four the chasseur approached him:

"You wish to see a colored fellow of the name Jules Peterson?"

"God!  How did he find me?"

"I didn't tell him you were present."

"Who did?"  Abe fell over his glasses but recovered himself.

"Says he's already been around to all the American bars and
hotels."

"Tell him I'm not here--"  As the chasseur turned away Abe asked:
"Can he come in here?"

"I'll find out."

Receiving the question Paul glanced over his shoulder; he shook his
head, then seeing Abe he came over.

"I'm sorry; I can't allow it."

Abe got himself up with an effort and went out to the Rue Cambon.



XXIV


With his miniature leather brief-case in his hand Richard Diver
walked from the seventh arrondisement--where he left a note for
Maria Wallis signed "Dicole," the word with which he and Nicole had
signed communications in the first days of love--to his shirt-
makers where the clerks made a fuss over him out of proportion to
the money he spent.  Ashamed at promising so much to these poor
Englishmen, with his fine manners, his air of having the key to
security, ashamed of making a tailor shift an inch of silk on his
arm.  Afterward he went to the bar of the Crillon and drank a small
coffee and two fingers of gin.

As he entered the hotel the halls had seemed unnaturally bright;
when he left he realized that it was because it had already turned
dark outside.  It was a windy four-o'clock night with the leaves on
the Champs Élysées singing and failing, thin and wild.  Dick turned
down the Rue de Rivoli, walking two squares under the arcades to
his bank where there was mail.  Then he took a taxi and started up
the Champs Élysées through the first patter of rain, sitting alone
with his love.

Back at two o'clock in the Roi George corridor the beauty of Nicole
had been to the beauty of Rosemary as the beauty of Leonardo's girl
was to that of the girl of an illustrator.  Dick moved on through
the rain, demoniac and frightened, the passions of many men inside
him and nothing simple that he could see.



Rosemary opened her door full of emotions no one else knew of.  She
was now what is sometimes called a "little wild thing"--by twenty-
four full hours she was not yet unified and she was absorbed in
playing around with chaos; as if her destiny were a picture puzzle--
counting benefits, counting hopes, telling off Dick, Nicole, her
mother, the director she met yesterday, like stops on a string of
beads.

When Dick knocked she had just dressed and been watching the rain,
thinking of some poem, and of full gutters in Beverly Hills.
When she opened the door she saw him as something fixed and Godlike
as he had always been, as older people are to younger, rigid
and unmalleable.  Dick saw her with an inevitable sense of
disappointment.  It took him a moment to respond to the unguarded
sweetness of her smile, her body calculated to a millimeter to
suggest a bud yet guarantee a flower.  He was conscious of the
print of her wet foot on a rug through the bathroom door.

"Miss Television," he said with a lightness he did not feel.  He
put his gloves, his brief-case on the dressing-table, his stick
against the wall.  His chin dominated the lines of pain around his
mouth, forcing them up into his forehead and the corner of his
eyes, like fear that cannot be shown in public.

"Come and sit on my lap close to me," he said softly, "and let me
see about your lovely mouth."

She came over and sat there and while the dripping slowed down
outside--drip--dri-i-ip, she laid her lips to the beautiful cold
image she had created.

Presently she kissed him several times in the mouth, her face
getting big as it came up to him; he had never seen anything so
dazzling as the quality of her skin, and since sometimes beauty
gives back the images of one's best thoughts he thought of his
responsibility about Nicole, and of the responsibility of her being
two doors down across the corridor.

"The rain's over," he said.  "Do you see the sun on the slate?"

Rosemary stood up and leaned down and said her most sincere thing
to him:

"Oh, we're such ACTORS--you and I."

She went to her dresser and the moment that she laid her comb flat
against her hair there was a slow persistent knocking at the door.

They were shocked motionless; the knock was repeated insistently,
and in the sudden realization that the door was not locked Rosemary
finished her hair with one stroke, nodded at Dick who had quickly
jerked the wrinkles out of the bed where they had been sitting, and
started for the door.  Dick said in quite a natural voice, not too
loud:

"--so if you don't feel up to going out, I'll tell Nicole and we'll
have a very quiet last evening."

The precautions were needless for the situation of the parties
outside the door was so harassed as to preclude any but the most
fleeting judgments on matters not pertinent to themselves.
Standing there was Abe, aged by several months in the last twenty-
four hours, and a very frightened, concerned colored man whom Abe
introduced as Mr. Peterson of Stockholm.

"He's in a terrible situation and it's my fault," said Abe.  "We
need some good advice."

"Come in our rooms," said Dick.

Abe insisted that Rosemary come too and they crossed the hall to
the Divers' suite.  Jules Peterson, a small, respectable Negro, on
the suave model that heels the Republican party in the border
States, followed.

It appeared that the latter had been a legal witness to the early
morning dispute in Montparnasse; he had accompanied Abe to the
police station and supported his assertion that a thousand
franc note had been seized out of his hand by a Negro, whose
identification was one of the points of the case.  Abe and Jules
Peterson, accompanied by an agent of police, returned to the bistro
and too hastily identified as the criminal a Negro, who, so it was
established after an hour, had only entered the place after Abe
left.  The police had further complicated the situation by
arresting the prominent Negro restaurateur, Freeman, who had only
drifted through the alcoholic fog at a very early stage and then
vanished.  The true culprit, whose case, as reported by his
friends, was that he had merely commandeered a fifty-franc note to
pay for drinks that Abe had ordered, had only recently and in a
somewhat sinister rôle, reappeared upon the scene.

In brief, Abe had succeeded in the space of an hour in entangling
himself with the personal lives, consciences, and emotions of one
Afro-European and three Afro-Americans inhabiting the French Latin
quarter.  The disentanglement was not even faintly in sight and the
day had passed in an atmosphere of unfamiliar Negro faces bobbing
up in unexpected places and around unexpected corners, and
insistent Negro voices on the phone.

In person, Abe had succeeded in evading all of them, save Jules
Peterson.  Peterson was rather in the position of the friendly
Indian who had helped a white.  The Negroes who suffered from the
betrayal were not so much after Abe as after Peterson, and Peterson
was very much after what protection he might get from Abe.

Up in Stockholm Peterson had failed as a small manufacturer of shoe
polish and now possessed only his formula and sufficient trade
tools to fill a small box; however, his new protector had promised
in the early hours to set him up in business in Versailles.  Abe's
former chauffeur was a shoemaker there and Abe had handed Peterson
two hundred francs on account.

Rosemary listened with distaste to this rigmarole; to appreciate
its grotesquerie required a more robust sense of humor than hers.
The little man with his portable manufactory, his insincere eyes
that, from time to time, rolled white semicircles of panic into
view; the figure of Abe, his face as blurred as the gaunt fine
lines of it would permit--all this was as remote from her as
sickness.

"I ask only a chance in life," said Peterson with the sort of
precise yet distorted intonation peculiar to colonial countries.
"My methods are simple, my formula is so good that I was drove away
from Stockholm, ruined, because I did not care to dispose of it."

Dick regarded him politely--interest formed, dissolved, he turned
to Abe:

"You go to some hotel and go to bed.  After you're all straight Mr.
Peterson will come and see you."

"But don't you appreciate the mess that Peterson's in?" Abe
protested.

"I shall wait in the hall," said Mr. Peterson with delicacy.  "It
is perhaps hard to discuss my problems in front of me."

He withdrew after a short travesty of a French bow; Abe pulled
himself to his feet with the deliberation of a locomotive.

"I don't seem highly popular to-day."

"Popular but not probable," Dick advised him.  "My advice is to
leave this hotel--by way of the bar, if you want.  Go to the
Chambord, or if you'll need a lot of service, go over to the
Majestic."

"Could I annoy you for a drink?"

"There's not a thing up here," Dick lied.

Resignedly Abe shook hands with Rosemary; he composed his face
slowly, holding her hand a long time and forming sentences that did
not emerge.

"You are the most--one of the most--"

She was sorry, and rather revolted at his dirty hands, but she
laughed in a well-bred way, as though it were nothing unusual to
her to watch a man walking in a slow dream.  Often people display a
curious respect for a man drunk, rather like the respect of simple
races for the insane.  Respect rather than fear.  There is
something awe-inspiring in one who has lost all inhibitions, who
will do anything.  Of course we make him pay afterward for his
moment of superiority, his moment of impressiveness.  Abe turned to
Dick with a last appeal.

"If I go to a hotel and get all steamed and curry-combed, and sleep
awhile, and fight off these Senegalese--could I come and spend the
evening by the fireside?"

Dick nodded at him, less in agreement than in mockery and said:
"You have a high opinion of your current capacities."

"I bet if Nicole was here she'd let me come back."

"All right."  Dick went to a trunk tray and brought a box to the
central table; inside were innumerable cardboard letters.

"You can come if you want to play anagrams."

Abe eyed the contents of the box with physical revulsion, as though
he had been asked to eat them like oats.

"What are anagrams?  Haven't I had enough strange--"

"It's a quiet game.  You spell words with them--any word except
alcohol."

"I bet you can spell alcohol," Abe plunged his hand among the
counters.  "Can I come back if I can spell alcohol?"

"You can come back if you want to play anagrams."

Abe shook his head resignedly.

"If you're in that frame of mind there's no use--I'd just be in the
way."  He waved his finger reproachfully at Dick.  "But remember
what George the third said, that if Grant was drunk he wished he
would bite the other generals."

With a last desperate glance at Rosemary from the golden corners of
his eyes, he went out.  To his relief Peterson was no longer in the
corridor.  Feeling lost and homeless he went back to ask Paul the
name of that boat.



XXV


When he had tottered out, Dick and Rosemary embraced fleetingly.
There was a dust of Paris over both of them through which they
scented each other: the rubber guard on Dick's fountain pen, the
faintest odor of warmth from Rosemary's neck and shoulders.  For
another half-minute Dick clung to the situation; Rosemary was first
to return to reality.

"I must go, youngster," she said.

They blinked at each other across a widening space, and Rosemary
made an exit that she had learned young, and on which no director
had ever tried to improve.

She opened the door of her room and went directly to her desk where
she had suddenly remembered leaving her wristwatch.  It was there;
slipping it on she glanced down at the daily letter to her mother,
finishing the last sentence in her mind.  Then, rather gradually,
she realized without turning about that she was not alone in the
room.

In an inhabited room there are refracting objects only half
noticed: varnished wood, more or less polished brass, silver and
ivory, and beyond these a thousand conveyers of light and shadow so
mild that one scarcely thinks of them as that, the tops of picture-
frames, the edges of pencils or ash-trays, of crystal or china
ornaments; the totality of this refraction--appealing to equally
subtle reflexes of the vision as well as to those associational
fragments in the subconscious that we seem to hang on to, as a
glass-fitter keeps the irregularly shaped pieces that may do some
time--this fact might account for what Rosemary afterward
mystically described as "realizing" that there was some one in the
room, before she could determine it.  But when she did realize it
she turned swift in a sort of ballet step and saw that a dead Negro
was stretched upon her bed.

As she cried "aaouu!" and her still unfastened wristwatch banged
against the desk she had the preposterous idea that it was Abe
North.  Then she dashed for the door and across the hall.

Dick was straightening up; he had examined the gloves worn that day
and thrown them into a pile of soiled gloves in a corner of a
trunk.  He had hung up coat and vest and spread his shirt on
another hanger--a trick of his own.  "You'll wear a shirt that's a
little dirty where you won't wear a mussed shirt."  Nicole had come
in and was dumping one of Abe's extraordinary ash-trays into the
waste-basket when Rosemary tore into the room.

"DICK!  DICK!  Come and see!"

Dick jogged across the hall into her room.  He knelt to Peterson's
heart, and felt the pulse--the body was warm, the face, harassed
and indirect in life, was gross and bitter in death; the box of
materials was held under one arm but the shoe that dangled over the
bedside was bare of polish and its sole was worn through.  By
French law Dick had no right to touch the body but he moved the arm
a little to see something--there was a stain on the green coverlet,
there would be faint blood on the blanket beneath.

Dick closed the door and stood thinking; he heard cautious steps in
the corridor and then Nicole calling him by name.  Opening the door
he whispered:  "Bring the couverture and top blanket from one of
our beds--don't let any one see you."  Then, noticing the strained
look on her face, he added quickly, "Look here, you mustn't get
upset over this--it's only some nigger scrap."

"I want it to be over."

The body, as Dick lifted it, was light and ill-nourished.  He held
it so that further hemorrhages from the wound would flow into the
man's clothes.  Laying it beside the bed he stripped off the
coverlet and top blanket and then opening the door an inch,
listened--there was a clank of dishes down the hall followed by a
loud patronizing "Mer-CI, Madame," but the waiter went in the other
direction, toward the service stairway.  Quickly Dick and Nicole
exchanged bundles across the corridor; after spreading this
covering on Rosemary's bed, Dick stood sweating in the warm
twilight, considering.  Certain points had become apparent to him
in the moment following his examination of the body; first, that
Abe's first hostile Indian had tracked the friendly Indian and
discovered him in the corridor, and when the latter had taken
desperate refuge in Rosemary's room, had hunted down and slain him;
second, that if the situation were allowed to develop naturally, no
power on earth could keep the smear off Rosemary--the paint was
scarcely dry on the Arbuckle case.  Her contract was contingent
upon an obligation to continue rigidly and unexceptionally as
"Daddy's Girl."

Automatically Dick made the old motion of turning up his sleeves
though he wore a sleeveless undershirt, and bent over the body.
Getting a purchase on the shoulders of the coat he kicked open the
door with his heel, and dragged the body quickly into a plausible
position in the corridor.  He came back into Rosemary's room and
smoothed back the grain of the plush floor rug.  Then he went to
the phone in his suite and called the manager-owner of the hotel.

"McBeth?--it's Doctor Diver speaking--something very important.
Are we on a more or less private line?"

It was good that he had made the extra effort which had firmly
entrenched him with Mr. McBeth.  Here was one use for all the
pleasingness that Dick had expended over a large area he would
never retrace. . . .

"Going out of the suite we came on a dead Negro . . . in the hall
. . . no, no, he's a civilian.  Wait a minute now--I knew you didn't
want any guests to blunder on the body so I'm phoning you.  Of
course I must ask you to keep my name out of it.  I don't want any
French red tape just because I discovered the man."

What exquisite consideration for the hotel!  Only because Mr.
McBeth, with his own eyes, had seen these traits in Doctor Diver
two nights before, could he credit the story without question.

In a minute Mr. McBeth arrived and in another minute he was joined
by a gendarme.  In the interval he found time to whisper to Dick,
"You can be sure the name of any guest will be protected.  I'm only
too grateful to you for your pains."

Mr. McBeth took an immediate step that may only be imagined, but
that influenced the gendarme so as to make him pull his mustaches
in a frenzy of uneasiness and greed.  He made perfunctory notes and
sent a telephone call to his post.  Meanwhile with a celerity that
Jules Peterson, as a business man, would have quite understood, the
remains were carried into another apartment of one of the most
fashionable hotels in the world.

Dick went back to his salon.

"What HAP-pened?" cried Rosemary.  "Do all the Americans in Paris
just shoot at each other all the time?"

"This seems to be the open season," he answered.  "Where's Nicole?"

"I think she's in the bathroom."

She adored him for saving her--disasters that could have attended
upon the event had passed in prophecy through her mind; and she had
listened in wild worship to his strong, sure, polite voice making
it all right.  But before she reached him in a sway of soul and
body his attention focussed on something else: he went into the
bedroom and toward the bathroom.  And now Rosemary, too, could
hear, louder and louder, a verbal inhumanity that penetrated the
keyholes and the cracks in the doors, swept into the suite and in
the shape of horror took form again.

With the idea that Nicole had fallen in the bathroom and hurt
herself, Rosemary followed Dick.  That was not the condition of
affairs at which she stared before Dick shouldered her back and
brusquely blocked her view.

Nicole knelt beside the tub swaying sidewise and sidewise.  "It's
you!" she cried, "--it's you come to intrude on the only privacy I
have in the world--with your spread with red blood on it.  I'll
wear it for you--I'm not ashamed, though it was such a pity.  On
All Fools Day we had a party on the Zurichsee, and all the fools
were there, and I wanted to come dressed in a spread but they
wouldn't let me--"

"Control yourself!"

"--so I sat in the bathroom and they brought me a domino and said
wear that.  I did.  What else could I do?"

"Control yourself, Nicole!"

"I never expected you to love me--it was too late--only don't come
in the bathroom, the only place I can go for privacy, dragging
spreads with red blood on them and asking me to fix them."

"Control yourself.  Get up--"

Rosemary, back in the salon, heard the bathroom door bang, and
stood trembling: now she knew what Violet McKisco had seen in the
bathroom at Villa Diana.  She answered the ringing phone and almost
cried with relief when she found it was Collis Clay, who had traced
her to the Divers' apartment.  She asked him to come up while she
got her hat, because she was afraid to go into her room alone.




BOOK 2



I


In the spring of 1917, when Doctor Richard Diver first arrived in
Zurich, he was twenty-six years old, a fine age for a man, indeed
the very acme of bachelorhood.  Even in war-time days, it was a
fine age for Dick, who was already too valuable, too much of a
capital investment to be shot off in a gun.  Years later it seemed
to him that even in this sanctuary he did not escape lightly, but
about that he never fully made up his mind--in 1917 he laughed at
the idea, saying apologetically that the war didn't touch him at
all.  Instructions from his local board were that he was to
complete his studies in Zurich and take a degree as he had planned.

Switzerland was an island, washed on one side by the waves of
thunder around Gorizia and on another by the cataracts along the
Somme and the Aisne.  For once there seemed more intriguing
strangers than sick ones in the cantons, but that had to be guessed
at--the men who whispered in the little cafés of Berne and Geneva
were as likely to be diamond salesmen or commercial travellers.
However, no one had missed the long trains of blinded or one-legged
men, or dying trunks, that crossed each other between the bright
lakes of Constance and Neuchâtel.  In the beer-halls and shop-
windows were bright posters presenting the Swiss defending their
frontiers in 1914--with inspiring ferocity young men and old men
glared down from the mountains at phantom French and Germans; the
purpose was to assure the Swiss heart that it had shared the
contagious glory of those days.  As the massacre continued the
posters withered away, and no country was more surprised than its
sister republic when the United States bungled its way into the
war.

Doctor Diver had seen around the edges of the war by that time: he
was an Oxford Rhodes Scholar from Connecticut in 1914.  He returned
home for a final year at Johns Hopkins, and took his degree.  In
1916 he managed to get to Vienna under the impression that, if he
did not make haste, the great Freud would eventually succumb to an
aeroplane bomb.  Even then Vienna was old with death but Dick
managed to get enough coal and oil to sit in his room in the
Damenstiff Strasse and write the pamphlets that he later destroyed,
but that, rewritten, were the backbone of the book he published in
Zurich in 1920.

Most of us have a favorite, a heroic period, in our lives and that
was Dick Diver's.  For one thing he had no idea that he was
charming, that the affection he gave and inspired was anything
unusual among healthy people.  In his last year at New Haven some
one referred to him as "lucky Dick"--the name lingered in his head.

"Lucky Dick, you big stiff," he would whisper to himself, walking
around the last sticks of flame in his room.  "You hit it, my boy.
Nobody knew it was there before you came along."

At the beginning of 1917, when it was becoming difficult to find
coal, Dick burned for fuel almost a hundred textbooks that he had
accumulated; but only, as he laid each one on the fire, with an
assurance chuckling inside him that he was himself a digest of what
was within the book, that he could brief it five years from now, if
it deserved to be briefed.  This went on at any odd hour, if
necessary, with a floor rug over his shoulders, with the fine quiet
of the scholar which is nearest of all things to heavenly peace--
but which, as will presently be told, had to end.

For its temporary continuance he thanked his body that had done the
flying rings at New Haven, and now swam in the winter Danube.  With
Elkins, second secretary at the Embassy, he shared an apartment,
and there were two nice girl visitors--which was that and not too
much of it, nor too much of the Embassy either.  His contact with
Ed Elkins aroused in him a first faint doubt as to the quality of
his mental processes; he could not feel that they were profoundly
different from the thinking of Elkins--Elkins, who would name you
all the quarterbacks in New Haven for thirty years.

"--And Lucky Dick can't be one of these clever men; he must be less
intact, even faintly destroyed.  If life won't do it for him it's
not a substitute to get a disease, or a broken heart, or an
inferiority complex, though it'd be nice to build out some broken
side till it was better than the original structure."

He mocked at his reasoning, calling it specious and "American"--his
criteria of uncerebral phrase-making was that it was American.  He
knew, though, that the price of his intactness was incompleteness.

"The best I can wish you, my child," so said the Fairy Blackstick
in Thackeray's The Rose and the Ring, "is a little misfortune."

In some moods he griped at his own reasoning:  Could I help it that
Pete Livingstone sat in the locker-room Tap Day when everybody
looked all over hell for him?  And I got an election when otherwise
I wouldn't have got Elihu, knowing so few men.  He was good and
right and I ought to have sat in the locker-room instead.  Maybe I
would, if I'd thought I had a chance at an election.  But Mercer
kept coming to my room all those weeks.  I guess I knew I had a
chance all right, all right.  But it would have served me right if
I'd swallowed my pin in the shower and set up a conflict.

After the lectures at the university he used to argue this point
with a young Rumanian intellectual who reassured him:  "There's no
evidence that Goethe ever had a 'conflict' in the modern sense, or
a man like Jung, for instance.  You're not a romantic philosopher--
you're a scientist.  Memory, force, character--especially good
sense.  That's going to be your trouble--judgment about yourself--
once I knew a man who worked two years on the brain of an
armadillo, with the idea that he would sooner or later know more
about the brain of an armadillo than any one.  I kept arguing with
him that he was not really pushing out the extension of the human
range--it was too arbitrary.  And sure enough, when he sent his
work to the medical journal they refused it--they had just accepted
a thesis by another man on the same subject."

Dick got up to Zurich on less Achilles' heels than would be
required to equip a centipede, but with plenty--the illusions of
eternal strength and health, and of the essential goodness of
people; illusions of a nation, the lies of generations of frontier
mothers who had to croon falsely, that there were no wolves outside
the cabin door.  After he took his degree, he received his orders
to join a neurological unit forming in Bar-sur-Aube.

In France, to his disgust, the work was executive rather than
practical.  In compensation he found time to complete the short
textbook and assemble the material for his next venture.  He
returned to Zurich in the spring of 1919 discharged.

The foregoing has the ring of a biography, without the satisfaction
of knowing that the hero, like Grant, lolling in his general store
in Galena, is ready to be called to an intricate destiny.  Moreover
it is confusing to come across a youthful photograph of some one
known in a rounded maturity and gaze with a shock upon a fiery,
wiry, eagle-eyed stranger.  Best to be reassuring--Dick Diver's
moment now began.



II


It was a damp April day, with long diagonal clouds over the
Albishorn and water inert in the low places.  Zurich is not unlike
an American city.  Missing something ever since his arrival two
days before, Dick perceived that it was the sense he had had in
finite French lanes that there was nothing more.  In Zurich there
was a lot besides Zurich--the roofs upled the eyes to tinkling cow
pastures, which in turn modified hilltops further up--so life was a
perpendicular starting off to a postcard heaven.  The Alpine lands,
home of the toy and the funicular, the merry-go-round and the thin
chime, were not a being HERE, as in France with French vines
growing over one's feet on the ground.

In Salzburg once Dick had felt the superimposed quality of a bought
and borrowed century of music; once in the laboratories of the
university in Zurich, delicately poking at the cervical of a brain,
he had felt like a toy-maker rather than like the tornado who had
hurried through the old red buildings of Hopkins, two years before,
unstayed by the irony of the gigantic Christ in the entrance hall.

Yet he had decided to remain another two years in Zurich, for he
did not underestimate the value of toy-making, in infinite
precision, of infinite patience.

To-day he went out to see Franz Gregorovius at Dohmler's clinic on
the Zurichsee.  Franz, resident pathologist at the clinic, a
Vaudois by birth, a few years older than Dick, met him at the tram
stop.  He had a dark and magnificent aspect of Cagliostro about
him, contrasted with holy eyes; he was the third of the
Gregoroviuses--his grandfather had instructed Krapaelin when
psychiatry was just emerging from the darkness of all time.  In
personality he was proud, fiery, and sheeplike--he fancied himself
as a hypnotist.  If the original genius of the family had grown a
little tired, Franz would without doubt become a fine clinician.

On the way to the clinic he said:  "Tell me of your experiences in
the war.  Are you changed like the rest?  You have the same stupid
and unaging American face, except I know you're not stupid, Dick."

"I didn't see any of the war--you must have gathered that from my
letters, Franz."

"That doesn't matter--we have some shell-shocks who merely heard an
air raid from a distance.  We have a few who merely read
newspapers."

"It sounds like nonsense to me."

"Maybe it is, Dick.  But, we're a rich person's clinic--we don't
use the word nonsense.  Frankly, did you come down to see me or to
see that girl?"

They looked sideways at each other; Franz smiled enigmatically.

"Naturally I saw all the first letters," he said in his official
basso.  "When the change began, delicacy prevented me from opening
any more.  Really it had become your case."

"Then she's well?" Dick demanded.

"Perfectly well, I have charge of her, in fact I have charge of the
majority of the English and American patients.  They call me Doctor
Gregory."

"Let me explain about that girl," Dick said.  "I only saw her one
time, that's a fact.  When I came out to say good-by to you just
before I went over to France.  It was the first time I put on my
uniform and I felt very bogus in it--went around saluting private
soldiers and all that."

"Why didn't you wear it to-day?"

"Hey!  I've been discharged three weeks.  Here's the way I happened
to see that girl.  When I left you I walked down toward that
building of yours on the lake to get my bicycle."

"--toward the 'Cedars'?"

"--a wonderful night, you know--moon over that mountain--"

"The Krenzegg."

"--I caught up with a nurse and a young girl.  I didn't think the
girl was a patient; I asked the nurse about tram times and we
walked along.  The girl was about the prettiest thing I ever saw."

"She still is."

"She'd never seen an American uniform and we talked, and I didn't
think anything about it."  He broke off, recognizing a familiar
perspective, and then resumed: "--except, Franz, I'm not as hard-
boiled as you are yet; when I see a beautiful shell like that I
can't help feeling a regret about what's inside it.  That was
absolutely all--till the letters began to come."

"It was the best thing that could have happened to her," said Franz
dramatically, "a transference of the most fortuitous kind.  That's
why I came down to meet you on a very busy day.  I want you to come
into my office and talk a long time before you see her.  In fact, I
sent her into Zurich to do errands."  His voice was tense with
enthusiasm.  "In fact, I sent her without a nurse, with a less
stable patient.  I'm intensely proud of this case, which I handled,
with your accidental assistance."

The car had followed the shore of the Zurichsee into a fertile
region of pasture farms and low hills, steepled with châlets.  The
sun swam out into a blue sea of sky and suddenly it was a Swiss
valley at its best--pleasant sounds and murmurs and a good fresh
smell of health and cheer.

Professor Dohmler's plant consisted of three old buildings and a
pair of new ones, between a slight eminence and the shore of the
lake.  At its founding, ten years before, it had been the first
modern clinic for mental illness; at a casual glance no layman
would recognize it as a refuge for the broken, the incomplete, the
menacing, of this world, though two buildings were surrounded with
vine-softened walls of a deceptive height.  Some men raked straw in
the sunshine; here and there, as they rode into the grounds, the
car passed the white flag of a nurse waving beside a patient on a
path.

After conducting Dick to his office, Franz excused himself for half
an hour.  Left alone Dick wandered about the room and tried to
reconstruct Franz from the litter of his desk, from his books and
the books of and by his father and grandfather; from the Swiss
piety of a huge claret-colored photo of the former on the wall.
There was smoke in the room; pushing open a French window, Dick let
in a cone of sunshine.  Suddenly his thoughts swung to the patient,
the girl.

He had received about fifty letters from her written over a period
of eight months.  The first one was apologetic, explaining that she
had heard from America how girls wrote to soldiers whom they did
not know.  She had obtained the name and address from Doctor
Gregory and she hoped he would not mind if she sometimes sent word
to wish him well, etc., etc.

So far it was easy to recognize the tone--from "Daddy-Long-Legs"
and "Molly-Make-Believe," sprightly and sentimental epistolary
collections enjoying a vogue in the States.  But there the
resemblance ended.

The letters were divided into two classes, of which the first
class, up to about the time of the armistice, was of marked
pathological turn, and of which the second class, running from
thence up to the present, was entirely normal, and displayed a
richly maturing nature.  For these latter letters Dick had come to
wait eagerly in the last dull months at Bar-sur-Aube--yet even from
the first letters he had pieced together more than Franz would have
guessed of the story.


MON CAPITAINE:

I thought when I saw you in your uniform you were so handsome.
Then I thought Je m'en fiche French too and German.  You thought I
was pretty too but I've had that before and a long time I've stood
it.  If you come here again with that attitude base and criminal
and not even faintly what I had been taught to associate with the
role of gentleman then heaven help you.  However you seem quieter
than the others,

(2)

all soft like a big cat.  I have only gotten to like boys who are
rather sissies.  Are you a sissy?  There were some somewhere.

Excuse all this, it is the third letter I have written you and will
send immediately or will never send.  I've thought a lot about
moonlight too, and there are many witnesses I could find if I could
only be out of here.

(3)

They said you were a doctor, but so long as you are a cat it is
different.  My head aches so, so excuse this walking there like an
ordinary with a white cat will explain, I think.  I can speak three
languages, four with English, and am sure I could be useful
interpreting if you arrange such thing in France I'm sure I could
control everything with the belts all bound around everybody like
it was Wednesday.  It is now Saturday and

(4)

you are far away, perhaps killed.

Come back to me some day, for I will be here always on this green
hill.  Unless they will let me write my father, whom I loved
dearly.  Excuse this.  I am not myself today.  I will write when I
feel better.

Cherio

NICOLE WARREN.

Excuse all this.


CAPTAIN DIVER:

I know introspection is not good for a highly nervous state like
mine, but I would like you to know where I stand.  Last year or
whenever it was in Chicago when I got so I couldn't speak to
servants or walk in the street I kept waiting for some one to tell
me.  It was the duty of some one who understood.  The blind must be
led.  Only no one would tell me everything--they would just tell me
half and I was already too muddled to put two and two together.
One man was nice--he was a French officer and he understood.  He
gave me a flower and said it was "plus petite et

(2)

moins entendue."  We were friends.  Then he took it away.  I grew
sicker and there was no one to explain to me.  They had a song
about Joan of Arc that they used to sing at me but that was just
mean--it would just make me cry, for there was nothing the matter
with my head then.  They kept making reference to sports, too, but
I didn't care by that time.  So there was that day I went walking
on Michigan Boulevard on and on for miles and finally they followed
me in an automobile, but I wouldn't get

(3)

in.  Finally they pulled me in and there were nurses.  After that
time I began to realize it all, because I could feel what was
happening in others.  So you see how I stand.  And what good can it
be for me to stay here with the doctors harping constantly in the
things I was here to get over.  So today I have written my father
to come and take me away.  I am glad

(4)

you are so interested in examining people and sending them back.
It must be so much fun.


And again, from another letter:


You might pass up your next examination and write me a letter.
They just sent me some phonograph records in case I should forget
my lesson and I broke them all so the nurse won't speak to me.
They were in English, so that the nurses would not understand.  One
doctor in Chicago said I was bluffing, but what he really meant was
that I was a twin six and he had never seen one before.  But I was
very busy being mad then, so I didn't care what he said, when I am
very busy being mad I don't usually care what they say, not if I
were a million girls.

You told me that night you'd teach me to play.  Well, I think love
is all

(2)

there is or should be.  Anyhow I am glad your interest in
examinations keeps you busy.

Tout à vous,

NICOLE WARREN.


There were other letters among whose helpless cæsuras lurked darker
rhythms.


DEAR CAPTAIN DIVER:

I write to you because there is no one else to whom I can turn and
it seems to me if this farcicle situation is apparent to one as
sick as me it should be apparent to you.  The mental trouble is all
over and besides that I am completely broken and humiliated, if
that was what they wanted.  My family have shamefully neglected me,
there's no use asking them for help or pity.  I have had enough and
it is simply ruining my health and wasting my time pretending that
what is the matter with my

(2)

head is curable.

Here I am in what appears to be a semi-insane-asylum, all because
nobody saw fit to tell me the truth about anything.  If I had only
known what was going on like I know now I could have stood it I
guess for I am pretty strong, but those who should have, did not
see fit to enlighten me.

(3)

And now, when I know and have paid such a price for knowing, they
sit there with their dogs lives and say I should believe what I did
believe.  Especially one does but I know now.

I am lonesome all the time far away from friends and family across
the Atlantic I roam all over the place in a half daze.  If you
could get me a position as interpreter (I know French and German
like a native, fair

(4)

Italian and a little Spanish) or in the Red Cross Ambulance or as a
trained nurse, though I would have to train you would prove a great
blessing.


And again:


Since you will not accept my explanation of what is the matter you
could at least explain to me what you think, because you have a
kind cat's face, and not that funny look that seems to be so
fashionable here.  Dr. Gregory gave me a snapshot of you, not as
handsome as you are in your uniform, but younger looking.


MON CAPITAINE:

It was fine to have your postcard.  I am so glad you take such
interest in disqualifying nurses--oh, I understood your note very
well indeed.  Only I thought from the moment I met you that you
were different.


DEAR CAPITAINE:

I think one thing today and another tomorrow.  That is really all
that's the matter with me, except a crazy defiance and a lack of
proportion.  I would gladly welcome any alienist you might suggest.
Here they lie in their bath tubs and sing Play in Your Own Backyard
as if I had my

(2)

backyard to play in or any hope which I can find by looking either
backward or forward.  They tried it again in the candy store again
and I almost hit the man with the weight, but they held me.

I am not going to write you any more.  I am too unstable.


And then a month with no letters.  And then suddenly the change.


--I am slowly coming back to life . . .

--Today the flowers and the clouds . . .

--The war is over and I scarcely knew there was a war . . .

--How kind you have been!  You must be very wise behind your face
like a white cat, except you don't look like that in the picture
Dr. Gregory gave me . . .

--Today I went to Zurich, how strange a feeling to see a city
again.

--Today we went to Berne, it was so nice with the clocks.

--Today we climbed high enough to find asphodel and edelweiss . . .


After that the letters were fewer, but he answered them all.  There
was one:


I wish someone were in love with me like boys were ages ago before
I was sick.  I suppose it will be years, though, before I could
think of anything like that.


But when Dick's answer was delayed for any reason, there was a
fluttering burst of worry--like a worry of a lover:  "Perhaps I
have bored you," and:  "Afraid I have presumed," and:  "I keep
thinking at night you have been sick."

In actuality Dick was sick with the flu.  When he recovered, all
except the formal part of his correspondence was sacrificed to the
consequent fatigue, and shortly afterward the memory of her became
overlaid by the vivid presence of a Wisconsin telephone girl at
headquarters in Bar-sur-Aube.  She was red-lipped like a poster,
and known obscenely in the messes as "The Switchboard."

Franz came back into his office feeling self-important.  Dick
thought he would probably be a fine clinician, for the sonorous or
staccato cadences by which he disciplined nurse or patient came not
from his nervous system but from a tremendous and harmless vanity.
His true emotions were more ordered and kept to himself.

"Now about the girl, Dick," he said.  "Of course, I want to find
out about you and tell you about myself, but first about the girl,
because I have been waiting to tell you about it so long."

He searched for and found a sheaf of papers in a filing cabinet but
after shuffling through them he found they were in his way and put
them on his desk.  Instead he told Dick the story.



III


About a year and a half before, Doctor Dohmler had some vague
correspondence with an American gentleman living in Lausanne, a Mr.
Devereux Warren, of the Warren family of Chicago.  A meeting was
arranged and one day Mr. Warren arrived at the clinic with his
daughter Nicole, a girl of sixteen.  She was obviously not well and
the nurse who was with her took her to walk about the grounds while
Mr. Warren had his consultation.

Warren was a strikingly handsome man looking less than forty.  He
was a fine American type in every way, tall, broad, well-made--"un
homme très chic," as Doctor Dohmler described him to Franz.  His
large gray eyes were sun-veined from rowing on Lake Geneva, and he
had that special air about him of having known the best of this
world.  The conversation was in German, for it developed that he
had been educated at Göttingen.  He was nervous and obviously very
moved by his errand.

"Doctor Dohmler, my daughter isn't right in the head.  I've had
lots of specialists and nurses for her and she's taken a couple of
rest cures but the thing has grown too big for me and I've been
strongly recommended to come to you."

"Very well," said Doctor Dohmler.  "Suppose you start at the
beginning and tell me everything."

"There isn't any beginning, at least there isn't any insanity in
the family that I know of, on either side.  Nicole's mother died
when she was eleven and I've sort of been father and mother both to
her, with the help of governesses--father and mother both to her."

He was very moved as he said this.  Doctor Dohmler saw that there
were tears in the corners of his eyes and noticed for the first
time that there was whiskey on his breath.

"As a child she was a darling thing--everybody was crazy about her,
everybody that came in contact with her.  She was smart as a whip
and happy as the day is long.  She liked to read or draw or dance
or play the piano--anything.  I used to hear my wife say she was
the only one of our children who never cried at night.  I've got an
older girl, too, and there was a boy that died, but Nicole was--
Nicole was--Nicole--"

He broke off and Doctor Dohmler helped him.

"She was a perfectly normal, bright, happy child."

"Perfectly."

Doctor Dohmler waited.  Mr. Warren shook his head, blew a long
sigh, glanced quickly at Doctor Dohmler and then at the floor
again.

"About eight months ago, or maybe it was six months ago or maybe
ten--I try to figure but I can't remember exactly where we were
when she began to do funny things--crazy things.  Her sister was
the first one to say anything to me about it--because Nicole was
always the same to me," he added rather hastily, as if some one had
accused him of being to blame, "--the same loving little girl.  The
first thing was about a valet."

"Oh, yes," said Doctor Dohmler, nodding his venerable head, as if,
like Sherlock Holmes, he had expected a valet and only a valet to
be introduced at this point.

"I had a valet--been with me for years--Swiss, by the way."  He
looked up for Doctor Dohmler's patriotic approval.  "And she got
some crazy idea about him.  She thought he was making up to her--of
course, at the time I believed her and I let him go, but I know now
it was all nonsense."

"What did she claim he had done?"

"That was the first thing--the doctors couldn't pin her down.  She
just looked at them as if they ought to know what he'd done.  But
she certainly meant he'd made some kind of indecent advances to
her--she didn't leave us in any doubt of that."

"I see."

"Of course, I've read about women getting lonesome and thinking
there's a man under the bed and all that, but why should Nicole get
such an idea?  She could have all the young men she wanted.  We
were in Lake Forest--that's a summer place near Chicago where we
have a place--and she was out all day playing golf or tennis with
boys.  And some of them pretty gone on her at that."

All the time Warren was talking to the dried old package of
Doctor Dohmler, one section of the latter's mind kept thinking
intermittently of Chicago.  Once in his youth he could have gone to
Chicago as fellow and docent at the university, and perhaps become
rich there and owned his own clinic instead of being only a minor
shareholder in a clinic.  But when he had thought of what he
considered his own thin knowledge spread over that whole area, over
all those wheat fields, those endless prairies, he had decided
against it.  But he had read about Chicago in those days, about the
great feudal families of Armour, Palmer, Field, Crane, Warren,
Swift, and McCormick and many others, and since that time not a few
patients had come to him from that stratum of Chicago and New York.

"She got worse," continued Warren.  "She had a fit or something--
the things she said got crazier and crazier.  Her sister wrote some
of them down--"  He handed a much-folded piece of paper to the
doctor.  "Almost always about men going to attack her, men she knew
or men on the street--anybody--"

He told of their alarm and distress, of the horrors families go
through under such circumstances, of the ineffectual efforts they
had made in America, finally of the faith in a change of scene that
had made him run the submarine blockade and bring his daughter to
Switzerland.

"--on a United States cruiser," he specified with a touch of
hauteur.  "It was possible for me to arrange that, by a stroke of
luck.  And, may I add," he smiled apologetically, "that as they
say: money is no object."

"Certainly not," agreed Dohmler dryly.

He was wondering why and about what the man was lying to him.  Or,
if he was wrong about that, what was the falsity that pervaded the
whole room, the handsome figure in tweeds sprawling in his chair
with a sportsman's ease?  That was a tragedy out there, in the
February day, the young bird with wings crushed somehow, and inside
here it was all too thin, thin and wrong.

"I would like--to talk to her--a few minutes now," said Doctor
Dohmler, going into English as if it would bring him closer to
Warren.

Afterward when Warren had left his daughter and returned to
Lausanne, and several days had passed, the doctor and Franz entered
upon Nicole's card:


Diagnostic:  Schizophrénie.  Phase aiguë en décroissance.  La peur
des hommes est un symptôme de la maladie, et n'est point
constitutionnelle. . . .  Le pronostic doit rester réservé.*


* Diagnosis:  Divided Personality.  Acute and down-hill phase of
the illness.  The fear of men is a symptom of the illness and is
not at all constitutional. . . .  The prognosis must be reserved.


And then they waited with increasing interest as the days passed
for Mr. Warren's promised second visit.

It was slow in coming.  After a fortnight Doctor Dohmler wrote.
Confronted with further silence he committed what was for those
days "une folie," and telephoned to the Grand Hotel at Vevey.  He
learned from Mr. Warren's valet that he was at the moment packing
to sail for America.  But reminded that the forty francs Swiss for
the call would show up on the clinic books, the blood of the
Tuileries Guard rose to Doctor Dohmler's aid and Mr. Warren was got
to the phone.

"It is--absolutely necessary--that you come.  Your daughter's
health--all depends.  I can take no responsibility."

"But look here, Doctor, that's just what you're for.  I have a
hurry call to go home!"

Doctor Dohmler had never yet spoken to any one so far away but he
dispatched his ultimatum so firmly into the phone that the agonized
American at the other end yielded.  Half an hour after this second
arrival on the Zurichsee, Warren had broken down, his fine
shoulders shaking with awful sobs inside his easy fitting coat, his
eyes redder than the very sun on Lake Geneva, and they had the
awful story.

"It just happened," he said hoarsely.  "I don't know--I don't know.

"After her mother died when she was little she used to come into my
bed every morning, sometimes she'd sleep in my bed.  I was sorry
for the little thing.  Oh, after that, whenever we went places in
an automobile or a train we used to hold hands.  She used to sing
to me.  We used to say, 'Now let's not pay any attention to anybody
else this afternoon--let's just have each other--for this morning
you're mine.'"  A broken sarcasm came into his voice.  "People used
to say what a wonderful father and daughter we were--they used to
wipe their eyes.  We were just like lovers--and then all at once we
were lovers--and ten minutes after it happened I could have shot
myself--except I guess I'm such a Goddamned degenerate I didn't
have the nerve to do it."

"Then what?" said Doctor Dohmler, thinking again of Chicago and of
a mild pale gentleman with a pince-nez who had looked him over in
Zurich thirty years before.  "Did this thing go on?"

"Oh, no!  She almost--she seemed to freeze up right away.  She'd
just say, 'Never mind, never mind, Daddy.  It doesn't matter.
Never mind.'"

"There were no consequences?"

"No."  He gave one short convulsive sob and blew his nose several
times.  "Except now there're plenty of consequences."

As the story concluded Dohmler sat back in the focal armchair of
the middle class and said to himself sharply, "Peasant!"--it was
one of the few absolute worldly judgments that he had permitted
himself for twenty years.  Then he said:

"I would like for you to go to a hotel in Zurich and spend the
night and come see me in the morning."

"And then what?"

Doctor Dohmler spread his hands wide enough to carry a young pig.

"Chicago," he suggested.



IV


"Then we knew where we stood," said Franz.  "Dohmler told Warren we
would take the case if he would agree to keep away from his
daughter indefinitely, with an absolute minimum of five years.
After Warren's first collapse, he seemed chiefly concerned as to
whether the story would ever leak back to America."

"We mapped out a routine for her and waited.  The prognosis was
bad--as you know, the percentage of cures, even so-called social
cures, is very low at that age."

"Those first letters looked bad," agreed Dick.

"Very bad--very typical.  I hesitated about letting the first one
get out of the clinic.  Then I thought it will be good for Dick to
know we're carrying on here.  It was generous of you to answer
them."

Dick sighed.  "She was such a pretty thing--she enclosed a lot of
snapshots of herself.  And for a month there I didn't have anything
to do.  All I said in my letters was 'Be a good girl and mind the
doctors.'"

"That was enough--it gave her somebody to think of outside.  For a
while she didn't have anybody--only one sister that she doesn't
seem very close to.  Besides, reading her letters helped us here--
they were a measure of her condition."

"I'm glad."

"You see now what happened?  She felt complicity--that's neither
here nor there, except as we want to revalue her ultimate stability
and strength of character.  First came this shock.  Then she went
off to a boarding-school and heard the girls talking--so from sheer
self-protection she developed the idea that she had had no
complicity--and from there it was easy to slide into a phantom
world where all men, the more you liked them and trusted them, the
more evil--"

"Did she ever go into the--horror directly?"

"No, and as a matter of fact when she began to seem normal, about
October, we were in a predicament.  If she had been thirty years
old we would have let her make her own adjustment, but she was so
young we were afraid she might harden with it all twisted inside
her.  So Doctor Dohmler said to her frankly, 'Your duty now is to
yourself.  This doesn't by any account mean the end of anything for
you--your life is just at its beginning,' and so forth and so
forth.  She really has an excellent mind, so he gave her a little
Freud to read, not too much, and she was very interested.  In fact,
we've made rather a pet of her around here.  But she is reticent,"
he added; he hesitated:  "We have wondered if in her recent letters
to you which she mailed herself from Zurich, she has said anything
that would be illuminating about her state of mind and her plans
for the future."

Dick considered.

"Yes and no--I'll bring the letters out here if you want.  She
seems hopeful and normally hungry for life--even rather romantic.
Sometimes she speaks of 'the past' as people speak who have been in
prison.  But you never know whether they refer to the crime or the
imprisonment or the whole experience.  After all I'm only a sort of
stuffed figure in her life."

"Of course, I understand your position exactly, and I express our
gratitude once again.  That was why I wanted to see you before you
see her."

Dick laughed.

"You think she's going to make a flying leap at my person?"

"No, not that.  But I want to ask you to go very gently.  You are
attractive to women, Dick."

"Then God help me!  Well, I'll be gentle and repulsive--I'll chew
garlic whenever I'm going to see her and wear a stubble beard.
I'll drive her to cover."

"Not garlic!" said Franz, taking him seriously.  "You don't want to
compromise your career.  But you're partly joking."

"--and I can limp a little.  And there's no real bathtub where I'm
living, anyhow."

"You're entirely joking," Franz relaxed--or rather assumed the
posture of one relaxed.  "Now tell me about yourself and your
plans?"

"I've only got one, Franz, and that's to be a good psychologist--
maybe to be the greatest one that ever lived."

Franz laughed pleasantly, but he saw that this time Dick wasn't
joking.

"That's very good--and very American," he said.  "It's more
difficult for us."  He got up and went to the French window.  "I
stand here and I see Zurich--there is the steeple of the Gross-
Münster.  In its vault my grandfather is buried.  Across the bridge
from it lies my ancestor Lavater, who would not be buried in any
church.  Nearby is the statue of another ancestor, Heinrich
Pestalozzi, and one of Doctor Alfred Escher.  And over everything
there is always Zwingli--I am continually confronted with a
pantheon of heroes."

"Yes, I see."  Dick got up.  "I was only talking big.  Everything's
just starting over.  Most of the Americans in France are frantic to
get home, but not me--I draw military pay all the rest of the year
if I only attend lectures at the university.  How's that for a
government on the grand scale that knows its future great men?
Then I'm going home for a month and see my father.  Then I'm coming
back--I've been offered a job."

"Where?"

"Your rivals--Gisler's Clinic on Interlacken."

"Don't touch it," Franz advised him.  "They've had a dozen young
men there in a year.  Gisler's a manic-depressive himself, his wife
and her lover run the clinic--of course, you understand that's
confidential."

"How about your old scheme for America?" asked Dick lightly.  "We
were going to New York and start an up-to-date establishment for
billionaires."

"That was students' talk."

Dick dined with Franz and his bride and a small dog with a smell of
burning rubber, in their cottage on the edge of the grounds, He
felt vaguely oppressed, not by the atmosphere of modest
retrenchment, nor by Frau Gregorovius, who might have been
prophesied, but by the sudden contracting of horizons to which
Franz seemed so reconciled.  For him the boundaries of asceticism
were differently marked--he could see it as a means to an end, even
as a carrying on with a glory it would itself supply, but it was
hard to think of deliberately cutting life down to the scale of an
inherited suit.  The domestic gestures of Franz and his wife as
they turned in a cramped space lacked grace and adventure.  The
post-war months in France, and the lavish liquidations taking place
under the ægis of American splendor, had affected Dick's outlook.
Also, men and women had made much of him, and perhaps what had
brought him back to the centre of the great Swiss watch, was an
intuition that this was not too good for a serious man.

He made Kaethe Gregorovius feel charming, meanwhile becoming
increasingly restless at the all-pervading cauliflower--
simultaneously hating himself too for this incipience of he knew
not what superficiality.

"God, am I like the rest after all?"--So he used to think starting
awake at night--"Am I like the rest?"

This was poor material for a socialist but good material for those
who do much of the world's rarest work.  The truth was that for
some months he had been going through that partitioning of the
things of youth wherein it is decided whether or not to die for
what one no longer believes.  In the dead white hours in Zurich
staring into a stranger's pantry across the upshine of a street-
lamp, he used to think that he wanted to be good, he wanted to be
kind, he wanted to be brave and wise, but it was all pretty
difficult.  He wanted to be loved, too, if he could fit it in.



V


The veranda of the central building was illuminated from open
French windows, save where the black shadows of stripling walls and
the fantastic shadows of iron chairs slithered down into a gladiola
bed.  From the figures that shuffled between the rooms Miss Warren
emerged first in glimpses and then sharply when she saw him; as she
crossed the threshold her face caught the room's last light and
brought it outside with her.  She walked to a rhythm--all that week
there had been singing in her ears, summer songs of ardent skies
and wild shade, and with his arrival the singing had become so loud
she could have joined in with it.

"How do you do, Captain," she said, unfastening her eyes from his
with difficulty, as though they had become entangled.  "Shall we
sit out here?"  She stood still, her glance moving about for a
moment.  "It's summer practically."

A woman had followed her out, a dumpy woman in a shawl, and Nicole
presented Dick:  "Señora--"

Franz excused himself and Dick grouped three chairs together.

"The lovely night," the Señora said.

"Muy bella," agreed Nicole; then to Dick, "Are you here for a long
time?"

"I'm in Zurich for a long time, if that's what you mean."

"This is really the first night of real spring," the Señora
suggested.

"To stay?"

"At least till July."

"I'm leaving in June."

"June is a lovely month here," the Señora commented.  "You should
stay for June and then leave in July when it gets really too hot."

"You're going where?" Dick asked Nicole.

"Somewhere with my sister--somewhere exciting, I hope, because I've
lost so much time.  But perhaps they'll think I ought to go to a
quiet place at first--perhaps Como.  Why don't you come to Como?"

"Ah, Como--" began the Señora.

Within the building a trio broke into Suppe's "Light Cavalry."
Nicole took advantage of this to stand up and the impression of her
youth and beauty grew on Dick until it welled up inside him in a
compact paroxysm of emotion.  She smiled, a moving childish smile
that was like all the lost youth in the world.

"The music's too loud to talk against--suppose we walk around.
Buenas noches, Señora."

"G't night--g't night."

They went down two steps to the path--where in a moment a shadow
cut across it.  She took his arm.

"I have some phonograph records my sister sent me from America,"
she said.  "Next time you come here I'll play them for you--I know
a place to put the phonograph where no one can hear."

"That'll be nice."

"Do you know 'Hindustan'?" she asked wistfully.  "I'd never heard
it before, but I like it.  And I've got 'Why Do They Call Them
Babies?' and 'I'm Glad I Can Make You Cry.'  I suppose you've
danced to all those tunes in Paris?"

"I haven't been to Paris."

Her cream-colored dress, alternately blue or gray as they walked,
and her very blonde hair, dazzled Dick--whenever he turned toward
her she was smiling a little, her face lighting up like an angel's
when they came into the range of a roadside arc.  She thanked him
for everything, rather as if he had taken her to some party, and as
Dick became less and less certain of his relation to her, her
confidence increased--there was that excitement about her that
seemed to reflect all the excitement of the world.

"I'm not under any restraint at all," she said.  "I'll play you two
good tunes called 'Wait Till the Cows Come Home' and 'Good-by,
Alexander.'"

He was late the next time, a week later, and Nicole was waiting for
him at a point in the path which he would pass walking from Franz's
house.  Her hair drawn back of her ears brushed her shoulders in
such a way that the face seemed to have just emerged from it, as if
this were the exact moment when she was coming from a wood into
clear moonlight.  The unknown yielded her up; Dick wished she had
no background, that she was just a girl lost with no address save
the night from which she had come.  They went to the cache where
she had left the phonograph, turned a corner by the workshop,
climbed a rock, and sat down behind a low wall, facing miles and
miles of rolling night.

They were in America now, even Franz with his conception of Dick as
an irresistible Lothario would never have guessed that they had
gone so far away.  They were so sorry, dear; they went down to meet
each other in a taxi, honey; they had preferences in smiles and had
met in Hindustan, and shortly afterward they must have quarrelled,
for nobody knew and nobody seemed to care--yet finally one of them
had gone and left the other crying, only to feel blue, to feel sad.

The thin tunes, holding lost times and future hopes in liaison,
twisted upon the Valais night.  In the lulls of the phonograph a
cricket held the scene together with a single note.  By and by
Nicole stopped playing the machine and sang to him.


     "Lay a silver dollar
      On the ground
      And watch it roll
      Because it's round--"


On the pure parting of her lips no breath hovered.  Dick stood up
suddenly.

"What's the matter, you don't like it?"

"Of course I do."

"Our cook at home taught it to me:


     "A woman never knows
      What a good man she's got
      Till after she turns him down . . ."


"You like it?"

She smiled at him, making sure that the smile gathered up
everything inside her and directed it toward him, making him a
profound promise of herself for so little, for the beat of a
response, the assurance of a complimentary vibration in him.
Minute by minute the sweetness drained down into her out of the
willow trees, out of the dark world.

She stood up too, and stumbling over the phonograph, was
momentarily against him, leaning into the hollow of his rounded
shoulder.

"I've got one more record," she said.  "--Have you heard 'So Long,
Letty'?  I suppose you have."

"Honestly, you don't understand--I haven't heard a thing."

Nor known, nor smelt, nor tasted, he might have added; only hot-
cheeked girls in hot secret rooms.  The young maidens he had known
at New Haven in 1914 kissed men, saying "There!", hands at the
man's chest to push him away.  Now there was this scarcely saved
waif of disaster bringing him the essence of a continent. . . .



VI


It was May when he next found her.  The luncheon in Zurich was a
council of caution; obviously the logic of his life tended away
from the girl; yet when a stranger stared at her from a nearby
table, eyes burning disturbingly like an uncharted light, he turned
to the man with an urbane version of intimidation and broke the
regard.

"He was just a peeper," he explained cheerfully.  "He was just
looking at your clothes.  Why do you have so many different
clothes?"

"Sister says we're very rich," she offered humbly.  "Since
Grandmother is dead."

"I forgive you."

He was enough older than Nicole to take pleasure in her youthful
vanities and delights, the way she paused fractionally in front
of the hall mirror on leaving the restaurant, so that the
incorruptible quicksilver could give her back to herself.  He
delighted in her stretching out her hands to new octaves now that
she found herself beautiful and rich.  He tried honestly to divorce
her from any obsession that he had stitched her together--glad to
see her build up happiness and confidence apart from him; the
difficulty was that, eventually, Nicole brought everything to his
feet, gifts of sacrificial ambrosia, of worshipping myrtle.

The first week of summer found Dick re-established in Zurich.  He
had arranged his pamphlets and what work he had done in the Service
into a pattern from which he intended to make his revise of "A
Psychology for Psychiatrists."  He thought he had a publisher; he
had established contact with a poor student who would iron out his
errors in German.  Franz considered it a rash business, but Dick
pointed out the disarming modesty of the theme.

"This is stuff I'll never know so well again," he insisted.  "I
have a hunch it's a thing that only fails to be basic because it's
never had material recognition.  The weakness of this profession is
its attraction for the man a little crippled and broken.  Within
the walls of the profession he compensates by tending toward the
clinical, the 'practical'--he has won his battle without a
struggle.

"On the contrary, you are a good man, Franz, because fate selected
you for your profession before you were born.  You better thank God
you had no 'bent'--I got to be a psychiatrist because there was a
girl at St. Hilda's in Oxford that went to the same lectures.
Maybe I'm getting trite but I don't want to let my current ideas
slide away with a few dozen glasses of beer."

"All right," Franz answered.  "You are an American.  You can do
this without professional harm.  I do not like these generalities.
Soon you will be writing little books called 'Deep Thoughts for the
Layman,' so simplified that they are positively guaranteed not to
cause thinking.  If my father were alive he would look at you and
grunt, Dick.  He would take his napkin and fold it so, and hold his
napkin ring, this very one--" he held it up, a boar's head was
carved in the brown wood--"and he would say, 'Well my impression
is--' then he would look at you and think suddenly 'What is the
use?' then he would stop and grunt again; then we would be at the
end of dinner."

"I am alone to-day," said Dick testily.  "But I may not be alone
to-morrow.  After that I'll fold up my napkin like your father and
grunt."

Franz waited a moment.

"How about our patient?" he asked.

"I don't know."

"Well, you should know about her by now."

"I like her.  She's attractive.  What do you want me to do--take
her up in the edelweiss?"

"No, I thought since you go in for scientific books you might have
an idea."

"--devote my life to her?"

Franz called his wife in the kitchen:  "Du lieber Gott! Bitte,
bringe Dick noch ein Glas-Bier."

"I don't want any more if I've got to see Dohmler."

"We think it's best to have a program.  Four weeks have passed
away--apparently the girl is in love with you.  That's not our
business if we were in the world, but here in the clinic we have a
stake in the matter."

"I'll do whatever Doctor Dohmler says," Dick agreed.

But he had little faith that Dohmler would throw much light on the
matter; he himself was the incalculable element involved.  By no
conscious volition of his own, the thing had drifted into his
hands.  It reminded him of a scene in his childhood when everyone
in the house was looking for the lost key to the silver closet,
Dick knowing he had hid it under the handkerchiefs in his mother's
top drawer; at that time he had experienced a philosophical
detachment, and this was repeated now when he and Franz went
together to Professor Dohmler's office.

The professor, his face beautiful under straight whiskers, like a
vine-overgrown veranda of some fine old house, disarmed him.  Dick
knew some individuals with more talent, but no person of a class
qualitatively superior to Dohmler.

--Six months later he thought the same way when he saw Dohmler
dead, the light out on the veranda, the vines of his whiskers
tickling his stiff white collar, the many battles that had swayed
before the chink-like eyes stilled forever under the frail delicate
lids--

". . . Good morning, sir."  He stood formally, thrown back to the
army.

Professor Dohmler interlaced his tranquil fingers.  Franz spoke in
terms half of liaison officer, half of secretary, till his senior
cut through him in mid-sentence.

"We have gone a certain way," he said mildly.  "It's you, Doctor
Diver, who can best help us now."

Routed out, Dick confessed:  "I'm not so straight on it myself."

"I have nothing to do with your personal reactions," said Dohmler.
"But I have much to do with the fact that this so-called
'transference,'" he darted a short ironic look at Franz which the
latter returned in kind, "must be terminated.  Miss Nicole does
well indeed, but she is in no condition to survive what she might
interpret as a tragedy."

Again Franz began to speak, but Doctor Dohmler motioned him silent.

"I realize that your position has been difficult."

"Yes, it has."

Now the professor sat back and laughed, saying on the last syllable
of his laughter, with his sharp little gray eyes shining through:
"Perhaps you have got sentimentally involved yourself."

Aware that he was being drawn on, Dick, too, laughed.

"She's a pretty girl--anybody responds to that to a certain extent.
I have no intention--"

Again Franz tried to speak--again Dohmler stopped him with a
question directed pointedly at Dick.  "Have you thought of going
away?"

"I can't go away."

Doctor Dohmler turned to Franz:  "Then we can send Miss Warren
away."

"As you think best, Professor Dohmler," Dick conceded.  "It's
certainly a situation."

Professor Dohmler raised himself like a legless man mounting a pair
of crutches.

"But it is a professional situation," he cried quietly.

He sighed himself back into his chair, waiting for the
reverberating thunder to die out about the room.  Dick saw that
Dohmler had reached his climax, and he was not sure that he himself
had survived it.  When the thunder had diminished Franz managed to
get his word in.

"Doctor Diver is a man of fine character," he said.  "I feel he
only has to appreciate the situation in order to deal correctly
with it.  In my opinion Dick can co-operate right here, without any
one going away."

"How do you feel about that?" Professor Dohmler asked Dick.

Dick felt churlish in the face of the situation; at the same time
he realized in the silence after Dohmler's pronouncement that the
state of inanimation could not be indefinitely prolonged; suddenly
he spilled everything.

"I'm half in love with her--the question of marrying her has passed
through my mind."

"Tch!  Tch!" uttered Franz.

"Wait."  Dohmler warned him.  Franz refused to wait:  "What!  And
devote half your life to being doctor and nurse and all--never!  I
know what these cases are.  One time in twenty it's finished in the
first push--better never see her again!"

"What do you think?" Dohmler asked Dick.

"Of course Franz is right."



VII


It was late afternoon when they wound up the discussion as to what
Dick should do, he must be most kind and yet eliminate himself.
When the doctors stood up at last, Dick's eyes fell outside the
window to where a light rain was falling--Nicole was waiting,
expectant, somewhere in that rain.  When, presently, he went out
buttoning his oil-skin at the throat, pulling down the brim of his
hat, he came upon her immediately under the roof of the main
entrance.

"I know a new place we can go," she said.  "When I was ill I didn't
mind sitting inside with the others in the evening--what they said
seemed like everything else.  Naturally now I see them as ill and
it's--it's--"

"You'll be leaving soon."

"Oh, soon.  My sister, Beth, but she's always been called Baby,
she's coming in a few weeks to take me somewhere; after that I'll
be back here for a last month."

"The older sister?"

"Oh, quite a bit older.  She's twenty-four--she's very English.
She lives in London with my father's sister.  She was engaged to an
Englishman but he was killed--I never saw him."

Her face, ivory gold against the blurred sunset that strove through
the rain, had a promise Dick had never seen before: the high cheek-
bones, the faintly wan quality, cool rather than feverish, was
reminiscent of the frame of a promising colt--a creature whose life
did not promise to be only a projection of youth upon a grayer
screen, but instead, a true growing; the face would be handsome in
middle life; it would be handsome in old age: the essential
structure and the economy were there.

"What are you looking at?"

"I was just thinking that you're going to be rather happy."

Nicole was frightened:  "Am I?  All right--things couldn't be worse
than they have been."

In the covered woodshed to which she had led him, she sat cross-
legged upon her golf shoes, her burberry wound about her and her
cheeks stung alive by the damp air.  Gravely she returned his gaze,
taking in his somewhat proud carriage that never quite yielded to
the wooden post against which he leaned; she looked into his face
that always tried to discipline itself into molds of attentive
seriousness, after excursions into joys and mockeries of its own.
That part of him which seemed to fit his reddish Irish coloring she
knew least; she was afraid of it, yet more anxious to explore--this
was his more masculine side: the other part, the trained part, the
consideration in the polite eyes, she expropriated without
question, as most women did.

"At least this institution has been good for languages," said
Nicole.  "I've spoken French with two doctors, and German with the
nurses, and Italian, or something like it, with a couple of scrub-
women and one of the patients, and I've picked up a lot of Spanish
from another."

"That's fine."

He tried to arrange an attitude but no logic seemed forthcoming.

"--Music too.  Hope you didn't think I was only interested in
ragtime.  I practise every day--the last few months I've been
taking a course in Zurich on the history of music.  In fact it was
all that kept me going at times--music and the drawing."  She
leaned suddenly and twisted a loose strip from the sole of her shoe
and then looked up.  "I'd like to draw you just the way you are
now."

It made him sad when she brought out her accomplishments for his
approval.

"I envy you.  At present I don't seem to be interested in anything
except my work."

"Oh, I think that's fine for a man," she said quickly.  "But for a
girl I think she ought to have lots of minor accomplishments and
pass them on to her children."

"I suppose so," said Dick with deliberated indifference.

Nicole sat quiet.  Dick wished she would speak so that he could
play the easy rôle of wet blanket, but now she sat quiet.

"You're all well," he said.  "Try to forget the past; don't overdo
things for a year or so.  Go back to America and be a débutante and
fall in love--and be happy."

"I couldn't fall in love."  Her injured shoe scraped a cocoon of
dust from the log on which she sat.

"Sure you can," Dick insisted.  "Not for a year maybe, but sooner
or later."  Then he added brutally:  "You can have a perfectly
normal life with a houseful of beautiful descendants.  The very
fact that you could make a complete comeback at your age proves
that the precipitating factors were pretty near everything.  Young
woman, you'll be pulling your weight long after your friends are
carried off screaming."

--But there was a look of pain in her eyes as she took the rough
dose, the harsh reminder.

"I know I wouldn't be fit to marry any one for a long time," she
said humbly.

Dick was too upset to say any more.  He looked out into the grain
field trying to recover his hard brassy attitude.

"You'll be all right--everybody here believes in you.  Why, Doctor
Gregory is so proud of you that he'll probably--"

"I hate Doctor Gregory."

"Well, you shouldn't."

Nicole's world had fallen to pieces, but it was only a flimsy and
scarcely created world; beneath it her emotions and instincts
fought on.  Was it an hour ago she had waited by the entrance,
wearing her hope like a corsage at her belt?

. . . Dress stay crisp for him, button stay put, bloom narcissus--
air stay still and sweet.

"It will be nice to have fun again," she fumbled on.  For a moment
she entertained a desperate idea of telling him how rich she was,
what big houses she lived in, that really she was a valuable
property--for a moment she made herself into her grandfather, Sid
Warren, the horse-trader.  But she survived the temptation to
confuse all values and shut these matters into their Victorian
side-chambers--even though there was no home left to her, save
emptiness and pain.

"I have to go back to the clinic.  It's not raining now."

Dick walked beside her, feeling her unhappiness, and wanting to
drink the rain that touched her cheek.

"I have some new records," she said.  "I can hardly wait to play
them.  Do you know--"



After supper that evening, Dick thought, he would finish the break;
also he wanted to kick Franz's bottom for having partially
introduced him to such a sordid business.  He waited in the hall.
His eyes followed a beret, not wet with waiting like Nicole's
beret, but covering a skull recently operated on.  Beneath it human
eyes peered, found him and came over:

"Bonjour, Docteur."

"Bonjour, Monsieur."

"Il fait beau temps."

"Oui, merveilleux."

"Vous êtes ici maintenant?"

"Non, pour la journée seulement."

"Ah, bon.  Alors--au revoir, Monsieur."

Glad at having survived another contact, the wretch in the beret
moved away.  Dick waited.  Presently a nurse came downstairs and
delivered him a message.

"Miss Warren asks to be excused, Doctor.  She wants to lie down.
She wants to have dinner upstairs to-night."

The nurse hung on his response, half expecting him to imply that
Miss Warren's attitude was pathological.

"Oh, I see.  Well--"  He rearranged the flow of his own saliva, the
pulse of his heart.  "I hope she feels better.  Thanks."

He was puzzled and discontent.  At any rate it freed him.

Leaving a note for Franz begging off from supper, he walked through
the countryside to the tram station.  As he reached the platform,
with spring twilight gilding the rails and the glass in the slot
machines, he began to feel that the station, the hospital, was
hovering between being centripetal and centrifugal.  He felt
frightened.  He was glad when the substantial cobble-stones of
Zurich clicked once more under his shoes.

He expected to hear from Nicole next day but there was no word.
Wondering if she was ill, he called the clinic and talked to Franz.

"She came downstairs to luncheon yesterday and to-day," said Franz.
"She seemed a little abstracted and in the clouds.  How did it go
off?"

Dick tried to plunge over the Alpine crevasse between the sexes.

"We didn't get to it--at least I didn't think we did.  I tried to
be distant, but I didn't think enough happened to change her
attitude if it ever went deep."

Perhaps his vanity had been hurt that there was no coup de grâce to
administer.

"From some things she said to her nurse I'm inclined to think she
understood."

"All right."

"It was the best thing that could have happened.  She doesn't seem
over-agitated--only a little in the clouds."

"All right, then."

"Dick, come soon and see me."



VIII


During the next weeks Dick experienced a vast dissatisfaction.  The
pathological origin and mechanistic defeat of the affair left a
flat and metallic taste.  Nicole's emotions had been used unfairly--
what if they turned out to have been his own?  Necessarily he must
absent himself from felicity a while--in dreams he saw her walking
on the clinic path swinging her wide straw hat. . . .

One time he saw her in person; as he walked past the Palace Hotel,
a magnificent Rolls curved into the half-moon entrance.  Small
within its gigantic proportions, and buoyed up by the power of a
hundred superfluous horses, sat Nicole and a young woman whom he
assumed was her sister.  Nicole saw him and momentarily her lips
parted in an expression of fright.  Dick shifted his hat and
passed, yet for a moment the air around him was loud with the
circlings of all the goblins on the Gross-Münster.  He tried to
write the matter out of his mind in a memorandum that went into
detail as to the solemn régime before her; the possibilities of
another "push" of the malady under the stresses which the world
would inevitably supply--in all a memorandum that would have been
convincing to any one save to him who had written it.

The total value of this effort was to make him realize once more
how far his emotions were involved; thenceforth he resolutely
provided antidotes.  One was the telephone girl from Bar-sur-Aube,
now touring Europe from Nice to Coblenz, in a desperate roundup of
the men she had known in her never-to-be-equalled holiday; another
was the making of arrangements to get home on a government
transport in August; a third was a consequent intensification of
work on his proofs for the book that this autumn was to be
presented to the German-speaking world of psychiatry.

Dick had outgrown the book; he wanted now to do more spade work; if
he got an exchange fellowship he could count on plenty of routine.

Meanwhile he had projected a new work:  An Attempt at a Uniform and
Pragmatic Classification of the Neuroses and Psychoses, Based on an
Examination of Fifteen Hundred Pre-Krapælin and Post-Krapælin Cases
as they would be Diagnosed in the Terminology of the Different
Contemporary Schools--and another sonorous paragraph--Together with
a Chronology of Such Subdivisions of Opinion as Have Arisen
Independently.

This title would look monumental in German.*


*Ein Versuch die Neurosen und Psychosen gleichmässig und
pragmatisch zu klassifizieren auf Grund der Untersuchung von
fünfzehn hundert pre-Krapaelin und post-Krapaelin Fällen wie
siz diagnostiziert sein würden in der Terminologie von den
verschiedenen Schulen der Gegenwart--and another sonorous
paragraph--Zusammen mit einer Chronologic solcher Subdivisionen der
Meinung welche unabhängig entstanden sind.


Going into Montreux Dick pedalled slowly, gaping at the Jugenhorn
whenever possible, and blinded by glimpses of the lake through the
alleys of the shore hotels.  He was conscious of the groups of
English, emergent after four years and walking with detective-story
suspicion in their eyes, as though they were about to be assaulted
in this questionable country by German trained-bands.  There were
building and awakening everywhere on this mound of débris formed by
a mountain torrent.  At Berne and at Lausanne on the way south,
Dick had been eagerly asked if there would be Americans this year.
"By August, if not in June?"

He wore leather shorts, an army shirt, mountain shoes.  In his
knapsack were a cotton suit and a change of underwear.  At the
Glion funicular he checked his bicycle and took a small beer on the
terrace of the station buffet, meanwhile watching the little bug
crawl down the eighty-degree slope of the hill.  His ear was full
of dried blood from La Tour de Pelz, where he had sprinted under
the impression that he was a spoiled athlete.  He asked for alcohol
and cleared up the exterior while the funicular slid down port.  He
saw his bicycle embarked, slung his knapsack into the lower
compartment of the car, and followed it in.

Mountain-climbing cars are built on a slant similar to the angle of
a hat-brim of a man who doesn't want to be recognized.  As water
gushed from the chamber under the car, Dick was impressed with the
ingenuity of the whole idea--a complimentary car was now taking on
mountain water at the top and would pull the lightened car up by
gravity, as soon as the brakes were released.  It must have been a
great inspiration.  In the seat across, a couple of British were
discussing the cable itself.

"The ones made in England always last five or six years.  Two years
ago the Germans underbid us, and how long do you think their cable
lasted?"

"How long?"

"A year and ten months.  Then the Swiss sold it to the Italians.
They don't have rigid inspections of cables."

"I can see it would be a terrible thing for Switzerland if a cable
broke."

The conductor shut a door; he telephoned his confrere among the
undulati, and with a jerk the car was pulled upward, heading for a
pinpoint on an emerald hill above.  After it cleared the low roofs,
the skies of Vaud, Valais, Swiss Savoy, and Geneva spread around
the passengers in cyclorama.  On the centre of the lake, cooled by
the piercing current of the Rhône, lay the true centre of the
Western World.  Upon it floated swans like boats and boats like
swans, both lost in the nothingness of the heartless beauty.  It
was a bright day, with sun glittering on the grass beach below and
the white courts of the Kursal.  The figures on the courts threw no
shadows.

When Chillon and the island palace of Salagnon came into view Dick
turned his eyes inward.  The funicular was above the highest houses
of the shore; on both sides a tangle of foliage and flowers
culminated at intervals in masses of color.  It was a rail-side
garden, and in the car was a sign:  Défense de cueillir les fleurs.

Though one must not pick flowers on the way up, the blossoms
trailed in as they passed--Dorothy Perkins roses dragged patiently
through each compartment slowly waggling with the motion of the
funicular, letting go at the last to swing back to their rosy
cluster.  Again and again these branches went through the car.

In the compartment above and in front of Dick's, a group of English
were standing up and exclaiming upon the backdrop of sky, when
suddenly there was a confusion among them--they parted to give
passage to a couple of young people who made apologies and
scrambled over into the rear compartment of the funicular--Dick's
compartment.  The young man was a Latin with the eyes of a stuffed
deer; the girl was Nicole.

The two climbers gasped momentarily from their efforts; as they
settled into seats, laughing and crowding the English to the
corners, Nicole said, "Hel-LO."  She was lovely to look at;
immediately Dick saw that something was different; in a second he
realized it was her fine-spun hair, bobbed like Irene Castle's and
fluffed into curls.  She wore a sweater of powder blue and a white
tennis skirt--she was the first morning in May and every taint of
the clinic was departed.

"Plunk!" she gasped.  "Whoo-oo that guard.  They'll arrest us at
the next stop.  Doctor Diver, the Conte de Marmora."

"Gee-imminy!"  She felt her new hair, panting.  "Sister bought
first-class tickets--it's a matter of principle with her."  She and
Marmora exchanged glances and shouted:  "Then we found that first-
class is the hearse part behind the chauffeur--shut in with
curtains for a rainy day, so you can't see anything.  But Sister's
very dignified--"  Again Nicole and Marmora laughed with young
intimacy.

"Where you bound?" asked Dick.

"Caux.  You too?"  Nicole looked at his costume.  "That your
bicycle they got up in front?"

"Yes.  I'm going to coast down Monday."

"With me on your handle-bars?  I mean, really--will you?  I can't
think of more fun."

"But I will carry you down in my arms," Marmora protested
intensely.  "I will roller-skate you--or I will throw you and you
will fall slowly like a feather."

The delight in Nicole's face--to be a feather again instead of a
plummet, to float and not to drag.  She was a carnival to watch--at
times primly coy, posing, grimacing and gesturing--sometimes the
shadow fell and the dignity of old suffering flowed down into her
finger tips.  Dick wished himself away from her, fearing that he
was a reminder of a world well left behind.  He resolved to go to
the other hotel.

When the funicular came to rest those new to it stirred in
suspension between the blues of two heavens.  It was merely for a
mysterious exchange between the conductor of the car going up and
the conductor of the car coming down.  Then up and up over a forest
path and a gorge--then again up a hill that became solid with
narcissus, from passengers to sky.  The people in Montreux playing
tennis in the lakeside courts were pinpoints now.  Something new
was in the air; freshness--freshness embodying itself in music as
the car slid into Glion and they heard the orchestra in the hotel
garden.

When they changed to the mountain train the music was drowned by
the rushing water released from the hydraulic chamber.  Almost
overhead was Caux, where the thousand windows of a hotel burned in
the late sun.

But the approach was different--a leather-lunged engine pushed the
passengers round and round in a corkscrew, mounting, rising; they
chugged through low-level clouds and for a moment Dick lost
Nicole's face in the spray of the slanting donkey engine; they
skirted a lost streak of wind with the hotel growing in size at
each spiral, until with a vast surprise they were there, on top of
the sunshine.

In the confusion of arrival, as Dick slung his knapsack and started
forward on the platform to get his bicycle, Nicole was beside him.

"Aren't you at our hotel?" she asked.

"I'm economizing."

"Will you come down and have dinner?"  Some confusion with baggage
ensued.  "This is my sister--Doctor Diver from Zurich."

Dick bowed to a young woman of twenty-five, tall and confident.
She was both formidable and vulnerable, he decided, remembering
other women with flower-like mouths grooved for bits.

"I'll drop in after dinner," Dick promised.  "First I must get
acclimated."

He wheeled off his bicycle, feeling Nicole's eyes following him,
feeling her helpless first love, feeling it twist around inside
him.  He went three hundred yards up the slope to the other hotel,
he engaged a room and found himself washing without a memory of the
intervening ten minutes, only a sort of drunken flush pierced with
voices, unimportant voices that did not know how much he was loved.



IX


They were waiting for him and incomplete without him.  He was still
the incalculable element; Miss Warren and the young Italian wore
their anticipation as obviously as Nicole.  The salon of the hotel,
a room of fabled acoustics, was stripped for dancing but there was
a small gallery of Englishwomen of a certain age, with neckbands,
dyed hair and faces powdered pinkish gray; and of American women of
a certain age, with snowy-white transformations, black dresses and
lips of cherry red.  Miss Warren and Marmora were at a corner
table--Nicole was diagonally across from them forty yards away, and
as Dick arrived he heard her voice:

"Can you hear me?  I'm speaking naturally."

"Perfectly,"

"Hello, Doctor Diver."

"What's this?"

"You realize the people in the centre of the floor can't hear what
I say, but you can?"

"A waiter told us about it," said Miss Warren.  "Corner to corner--
it's like wireless."

It was exciting up on the mountain, like a ship at sea.  Presently
Marmora's parents joined them.  They treated the Warrens with
respect--Dick gathered that their fortunes had something to do with
a bank in Milan that had something to do with the Warren fortunes.
But Baby Warren wanted to talk to Dick, wanted to talk to him with
the impetus that sent her out vagrantly toward all new men, as
though she were on an inelastic tether and considered that she
might as well get to the end of it as soon as possible.  She
crossed and recrossed her knees frequently in the manner of tall
restless virgins.

"--Nicole told me that you took part care of her, and had a lot to
do with her getting well.  What I can't understand is what WE'RE
supposed to do--they were so indefinite at the sanitarium; they
only told me she ought to be natural and gay.  I knew the Marmoras
were up here so I asked Tino to meet us at the funicular.  And you
see what happens--the very first thing Nicole has him crawling over
the sides of the car as if they were both insane--"

"That was absolutely normal," Dick laughed.  "I'd call it a good
sign.  They were showing off for each other."

"But how can _I_ tell?  Before I knew it, almost in front of my
eyes, she had her hair cut off, in Zurich, because of a picture in
'Vanity Fair.'"

"That's all right.  She's a schizoid--a permanent eccentric.  You
can't change that."

"What is it?"

"Just what I said--an eccentric."

"Well, how can any one tell what's eccentric and what's crazy?"

"Nothing is going to be crazy--Nicole is all fresh and happy, you
needn't be afraid."

Baby shifted her knees about--she was a compendium of all the
discontented women who had loved Byron a hundred years before, yet,
in spite of the tragic affair with the guards' officer there was
something wooden and onanistic about her.

"I don't mind the responsibility," she declared, "but I'm in the
air.  We've never had anything like this in the family before--we
know Nicole had some shock and my opinion is it was about a boy,
but we don't really know.  Father says he would have shot him if he
could have found out."

The orchestra was playing "Poor Butterfly"; young Marmora was
dancing with his mother.  It was a tune new enough to them all.
Listening, and watching Nicole's shoulders as she chattered to the
elder Marmora, whose hair was dashed with white like a piano
keyboard, Dick thought of the shoulders of a violin, and then he
thought of the dishonor, the secret.  Oh, butterfly--the moments
pass into hours--

"Actually _I_ have a plan," Baby continued with apologetic
hardness.  "It may seem absolutely impractical to you but they say
Nicole will need to be looked after for a few years.  I don't know
whether you know Chicago or not--"

"I don't."

"Well, there's a North Side and a South Side and they're very much
separated.  The North Side is chic and all that, and we've always
lived over there, at least for many years, but lots of old
families, old Chicago families, if you know what I mean, still live
on the South Side.  The University is there.  I mean it's stuffy to
some people, but anyhow it's different from the North Side.  I
don't know whether you understand."

He nodded.  With some concentration he had been able to follow her.

"Now of course we have lots of connections there--Father controls
certain chairs and fellowships and so forth at the University, and
I thought if we took Nicole home and threw her with that crowd--you
see she's quite musical and speaks all these languages--what could
be better in her condition than if she fell in love with some good
doctor--"

A burst of hilarity surged up in Dick, the Warrens were going to
buy Nicole a doctor--You got a nice doctor you can let us use?
There was no use worrying about Nicole when they were in the
position of being able to buy her a nice young doctor, the paint
scarcely dry on him.

"But how about the doctor?" he said automatically.

"There must be many who'd jump at the chance."

The dancers were back, but Baby whispered quickly:

"This is the sort of thing I mean.  Now where is Nicole--she's gone
off somewhere.  Is she upstairs in her room?  What am _I_ supposed
to do?  I never know whether it's something innocent or whether I
ought to go find her."

"Perhaps she just wants to be by herself--people living alone get
used to loneliness."  Seeing that Miss Warren was not listening he
stopped.  "I'll take a look around."

For a moment all the outdoors shut in with mist was like spring
with the curtains drawn.  Life was gathered near the hotel.  Dick
passed some cellar windows where bus boys sat on bunks and played
cards over a litre of Spanish wine.  As he approached the
promenade, the stars began to come through the white crests of the
high Alps.  On the horseshoe walk overlooking the lake Nicole was
the figure motionless between two lamp stands, and he approached
silently across the grass.  She turned to him with an expression
of:  "Here YOU are," and for a moment he was sorry he had come.

"Your sister wondered."

"Oh!"  She was accustomed to being watched.  With an effort she
explained herself:  "Sometimes I get a little--it gets a little too
much.  I've lived so quietly.  To-night that music was too much.
It made me want to cry--"

"I understand."

"This has been an awfully exciting day."

"I know."

"I don't want to do anything anti-social--I've caused everybody
enough trouble.  But to-night I wanted to get away."

It occurred to Dick suddenly, as it might occur to a dying man that
he had forgotten to tell where his will was, that Nicole had been
"re-educated" by Dohmler and the ghostly generations behind him; it
occurred to him also that there would be so much she would have to
be told.  But having recorded this wisdom within himself, he
yielded to the insistent face-value of the situation and said:

"You're a nice person--just keep using your own judgment about
yourself."

"You like me?"

"Of course."

"Would you--"  They were strolling along toward the dim end of the
horseshoe, two hundred yards ahead.  "If I hadn't been sick would
you--I mean, would I have been the sort of girl you might have--oh,
slush, you know what I mean."

He was in for it now, possessed by a vast irrationality.  She was
so near that he felt his breathing change but again his training
came to his aid in a boy's laugh and a trite remark.

"You're teasing yourself, my dear.  Once I knew a man who fell in
love with his nurse--"  The anecdote rambled on, punctuated by
their footsteps.  Suddenly Nicole interrupted in succinct
Chicagoese:  "Bull!"

"That's a very vulgar expression."

"What about it?" she flared up.  "You don't think I've got any
common sense--before I was sick I didn't have any, but I have now.
And if I don't know you're the most attractive man I ever met you
must think I'm still crazy.  It's my hard luck, all right--but
don't pretend I don't KNOW--I know everything about you and me."

Dick was at an additional disadvantage.  He remembered the
statement of the elder Miss Warren as to the young doctors that
could be purchased in the intellectual stockyards of the South Side
of Chicago, and he hardened for a moment.  "You're a fetching kid,
but I couldn't fall in love."

"You won't give me a chance."

"WHAT!"

The impertinence, the right to invade implied, astounded him.
Short of anarchy he could not think of any chance that Nicole
Warren deserved.

"Give me a chance now."

The voice fell low, sank into her breast and stretched the tight
bodice over her heart as she came up close.  He felt the young
lips, her body sighing in relief against the arm growing stronger
to hold her.  There were now no more plans than if Dick had
arbitrarily made some indissoluble mixture, with atoms joined and
inseparable; you could throw it all out but never again could they
fit back into atomic scale.  As he held her and tasted her, and as
she curved in further and further toward him, with her own lips,
new to herself, drowned and engulfed in love, yet solaced and
triumphant, he was thankful to have an existence at all, if only as
a reflection in her wet eyes.

"My God," he gasped, "you're fun to kiss."

That was talk, but Nicole had a better hold on him now and she held
it; she turned coquette and walked away, leaving him as suspended
as in the funicular of the afternoon.  She felt:  There, that'll
show him, how conceited; how he could do with me; oh, wasn't it
wonderful!  I've got him, he's mine.  Now in the sequence came
flight, but it was all so sweet and new that she dawdled, wanting
to draw all of it in.

She shivered suddenly.  Two thousand feet below she saw the
necklace and bracelet of lights that were Montreux and Vevey,
beyond them a dim pendant of Lausanne.  From down there somewhere
ascended a faint sound of dance music.  Nicole was up in her head
now, cool as cool, trying to collate the sentimentalities of her
childhood, as deliberate as a man getting drunk after battle.  But
she was still afraid of Dick, who stood near her, leaning,
characteristically, against the iron fence that rimmed the
horseshoe; and this prompted her to say:  "I can remember how I
stood waiting for you in the garden--holding all my self in my arms
like a basket of flowers.  It was that to me anyhow--I thought I
was sweet--waiting to hand that basket to you."

He breathed over her shoulder and turned her insistently about; she
kissed him several times, her face getting big every time she came
close, her hands holding him by the shoulders.

"It's raining hard."

Suddenly there was a booming from the wine slopes across the lake;
cannons were shooting at hail-bearing clouds in order to break
them.  The lights of the promenade went off, went on again.  Then
the storm came swiftly, first falling from the heavens, then doubly
falling in torrents from the mountains and washing loud down the
roads and stone ditches; with it came a dark, frightening sky and
savage filaments of lightning and world-splitting thunder, while
ragged, destroying clouds fled along past the hotel.  Mountains and
lake disappeared--the hotel crouched amid tumult, chaos and
darkness.

By this time Dick and Nicole had reached the vestibule, where Baby
Warren and the three Marmoras were anxiously awaiting them.  It was
exciting coming out of the wet fog--with the doors banging, to
stand and laugh and quiver with emotion, wind in their ears and
rain on their clothes.  Now in the ballroom the orchestra was
playing a Strauss waltz, high and confusing.

. . . For Doctor Diver to marry a mental patient?  How did it
happen?  Where did it begin?

"Won't you come back after you've changed?" Baby Warren asked after
a close scrutiny.

"I haven't got any change, except some shorts."

As he trudged up to his hotel in a borrowed raincoat he kept
laughing derisively in his throat.

"BIG chance--oh, yes.  My God!--they decided to buy a doctor?
Well, they better stick to whoever they've got in Chicago."
Revolted by his harshness he made amends to Nicole, remembering
that nothing had ever felt so young as her lips, remembering rain
like tears shed for him that lay upon her softly shining porcelain
cheeks . . . the silence of the storm ceasing woke him about three
o'clock and he went to the window.  Her beauty climbed the rolling
slope, it came into the room, rustling ghostlike through the
curtains. . . .

. . . He climbed two thousand meters to Rochers de Naye the
following morning, amused by the fact that his conductor of the day
before was using his day off to climb also.

Then Dick descended all the way to Montreux for a swim, got back to
his hotel in time for dinner.  Two notes awaited him.


"I'm not ashamed about last night--it was the nicest thing that
ever happened to me and even if I never saw you again, Mon
Capitaine, I would be glad it happened."


That was disarming enough--the heavy shade of Dohmler retreated as
Dick opened the second envelope:


DEAR DOCTOR DIVER:  I phoned but you were out.  I wonder if I may
ask you a great big favor.  Unforeseen circumstances call me back
to Paris, and I find I can make better time by way of Lausanne.
Can you let Nicole ride as far as Zurich with you, since you are
going back Monday? and drop her at the sanitarium?  Is this too
much to ask?

Sincerely,

BETH EVAN WARREN.


Dick was furious--Miss Warren had known he had a bicycle with him;
yet she had so phrased her note that it was impossible to refuse.
Throw us together!  Sweet propinquity and the Warren money!

He was wrong; Baby Warren had no such intentions.  She had looked
Dick over with worldly eyes, she had measured him with the warped
rule of an Anglophile and found him wanting--in spite of the
fact that she found him toothsome.  But for her he was too
"intellectual" and she pigeonholed him with a shabby-snobby crowd
she had once known in London--he put himself out too much to be
really of the correct stuff.  She could not see how he could be
made into her idea of an aristocrat.

In addition to that he was stubborn--she had seen him leave her
conversation and get down behind his eyes in that odd way that
people did, half a dozen times.  She had not liked Nicole's free
and easy manner as a child and now she was sensibly habituated to
thinking of her as a "gone coon"; and anyhow Doctor Diver was not
the sort of medical man she could envisage in the family.

She only wanted to use him innocently as a convenience.

But her request had the effect that Dick assumed she desired.  A
ride in a train can be a terrible, heavy-hearted or comic thing; it
can be a trial flight; it can be a prefiguration of another journey
just as a given day with a friend can be long, from the taste of
hurry in the morning up to the realization of both being hungry and
taking food together.  Then comes the afternoon with the journey
fading and dying, but quickening again at the end.  Dick was sad to
see Nicole's meagre joy; yet it was a relief for her, going back to
the only home she knew.  They made no love that day, but when he
left her outside the sad door on the Zurichsee and she turned and
looked at him he knew her problem was one they had together for
good now.



X


In Zurich in September Doctor Diver had tea with Baby Warren.

"I think it's ill advised," she said, "I'm not sure I truly
understand your motives."

"Don't let's be unpleasant."

"After all I'm Nicole's sister."

"That doesn't give you the right to be unpleasant."  It irritated
Dick that he knew so much that he could not tell her.  "Nicole's
rich, but that doesn't make me an adventurer."

"That's just it," complained Baby stubbornly.  "Nicole's rich."

"Just how much money has she got?" he asked.

She started; and with a silent laugh he continued, "You see how
silly this is?  I'd rather talk to some man in your family--"

"Everything's been left to me," she persisted.  "It isn't we think
you're an adventurer.  We don't know who you are."

"I'm a doctor of medicine," he said.  "My father is a clergyman,
now retired.  We lived in Buffalo and my past is open to
investigation.  I went to New Haven; afterward I was a Rhodes
scholar.  My great-grandfather was Governor of North Carolina and
I'm a direct descendant of Mad Anthony Wayne."

"Who was Mad Anthony Wayne?" Baby asked suspiciously.

"Mad Anthony Wayne?"

"I think there's enough madness in this affair."

He shook his head hopelessly, just as Nicole came out on the hotel
terrace and looked around for them.

"He was too mad to leave as much money as Marshall Field," he said.

"That's all very well--"

Baby was right and she knew it.  Face to face, her father would
have it on almost any clergyman.  They were an American ducal
family without a title--the very name written in a hotel register,
signed to an introduction, used in a difficult situation, caused a
psychological metamorphosis in people, and in return this change
had crystallized her own sense of position.  She knew these facts
from the English, who had known them for over two hundred years.
But she did not know that twice Dick had come close to flinging the
marriage in her face.  All that saved it this time was Nicole
finding their table and glowing away, white and fresh and new in
the September afternoon.



How do you do, lawyer.  We're going to Como tomorrow for a week and
then back to Zurich.  That's why I wanted you and sister to settle
this, because it doesn't matter to us how much I'm allowed.  We're
going to live very quietly in Zurich for two years and Dick has
enough to take care of us.  No, Baby, I'm more practical than you
think--It's only for clothes and things I'll need it. . . .  Why,
that's more than--can the estate really afford to give me all that?
I know I'll never manage to spend it.  Do you have that much?  Why
do you have more--is it because I'm supposed to be incompetent?
All right, let my share pile up then. . . .  No, Dick refuses to
have anything whatever to do with it.  I'll have to feel bloated
for us both. . . .  Baby, you have no more idea of what Dick is
like than, than--Now where do I sign?  Oh, I'm sorry.

. . . Isn't it funny and lonely being together, Dick.  No place to
go except close.  Shall we just love and love?  Ah, but I love the
most, and I can tell when you're away from me, even a little.  I
think it's wonderful to be just like everybody else, to reach out
and find you all warm beside me in the bed.

. . . If you will kindly call my husband at the hospital.  Yes, the
little book is selling everywhere--they want it published in six
languages.  I was to do the French translation but I'm tired these
days--I'm afraid of falling, I'm so heavy and clumsy--like a broken
roly-poly that can't stand up straight.  The cold stethoscope
against my heart and my strongest feeling "Je m'en fiche de tout."--
Oh, that poor woman in the hospital with the blue baby, much
better dead.  Isn't it fine there are three of us now?

. . . That seems unreasonable, Dick--we have every reason for
taking the bigger apartment.  Why should we penalize ourselves just
because there's more Warren money than Diver money.  Oh, thank you,
cameriere, but we've changed our minds.  This English clergyman
tells us that your wine here in Orvieto is excellent.  It doesn't
travel?  That must be why we have never heard of it, because we
love wine.

The lakes are sunk in the brown clay and the slopes have all the
creases of a belly.  The photographer gave us the picture of me, my
hair limp over the rail on the boat to Capri.  "Good-by, Blue
Grotte," sang the boatman, "come again soo-oon."  And afterward
tracing down the hot sinister shin of the Italian boot with the
wind soughing around those eerie castles, the dead watching from up
on those hills.

. . . This ship is nice, with our heels hitting the deck together.
This is the blowy corner and each time we turn it I slant forward
against the wind and pull my coat together without losing step with
Dick.  We are chanting nonsense:


     "Oh--oh--oh--oh
      Other flamingoes than me,
      Oh--oh--oh--oh
      Other flamingoes than me--"


Life is fun with Dick--the people in deck chairs look at us, and a
woman is trying to hear what we are singing.  Dick is tired of
singing it, so go on alone, Dick.  You will walk differently alone,
dear, through a thicker atmosphere, forcing your way through the
shadows of chairs, through the dripping smoke of the funnels.  You
will feel your own reflection sliding along the eyes of those who
look at you.  You are no longer insulated; but I suppose you must
touch life in order to spring from it.

Sitting on the stanchion of this life-boat I look seaward and let
my hair blow and shine.  I am motionless against the sky and the
boat is made to carry my form onward into the blue obscurity of the
future, I am Pallas Athene carved reverently on the front of a
galley.  The waters are lapping in the public toilets and the agate
green foliage of spray changes and complains about the stern.

. . . We travelled a lot that year--from Woolloomooloo Bay to
Biskra.  On the edge of the Sahara we ran into a plague of locusts
and the chauffeur explained kindly that they were bumble-bees.  The
sky was low at night, full of the presence of a strange and
watchful God.  Oh, the poor little naked Ouled Naïl; the night was
noisy with drums from Senegal and flutes and whining camels, and
the natives pattering about in shoes made of old automobile tires.

But I was gone again by that time--trains and beaches they were all
one.  That was why he took me travelling but after my second child,
my little girl, Topsy, was born everything got dark again.

. . . If I could get word to my husband who has seen fit to desert
me here, to leave me in the hands of incompetents.  You tell me my
baby is black--that's farcical, that's very cheap.  We went to
Africa merely to see Timgad, since my principal interest in life is
archeology.  I am tired of knowing nothing and being reminded of it
all the time.

. . . When I get well I want to be a fine person like you, Dick--I
would study medicine except it's too late.  We must spend my money
and have a house--I'm tired of apartments and waiting for you.
You're bored with Zurich and you can't find time for writing here
and you say that it's a confession of weakness for a scientist not
to write.  And I'll look over the whole field of knowledge and pick
out something and really know about it, so I'll have it to hang on
to if I go to pieces again.  You'll help me, Dick, so I won't feel
so guilty.  We'll live near a warm beach where we can be brown and
young together.

. . . This is going to be Dick's work house.  Oh, the idea came to
us both at the same moment.  We had passed Tarmes a dozen times and
we rode up here and found the houses empty, except two stables.
When we bought we acted through a Frenchman but the navy sent spies
up here in no time when they found that Americans had bought part
of a hill village.  They looked for cannons all through the
building material, and finally Baby had to twitch wires for us at
the Affaires Etrangères in Paris.

No one comes to the Riviera in summer, so we expect to have a few
guests and to work.  There are some French people here--Mistinguet
last week, surprised to find the hotel open, and Picasso and the
man who wrote Pas sur la Bouche.

. . . Dick, why did you register Mr. and Mrs. Diver instead of
Doctor and Mrs. Diver?  I just wondered--it just floated through my
mind.--You've taught me that work is everything and I believe you.
You used to say a man knows things and when he stops knowing things
he's like anybody else, and the thing is to get power before he
stops knowing things.  If you want to turn things topsy-turvy, all
right, but must your Nicole follow you walking on her hands,
darling?

. . . Tommy says I am silent.  Since I was well the first time I
talked a lot to Dick late at night, both of us sitting up in bed
and lighting cigarettes, then diving down afterward out of the blue
dawn and into the pillows, to keep the light from our eyes.
Sometimes I sing, and play with the animals, and I have a few
friends too--Mary, for instance.  When Mary and I talk neither of
us listens to the other.  Talk is men.  When I talk I say to myself
that I am probably Dick.  Already I have even been my son,
remembering how wise and slow he is.  Sometimes I am Doctor Dohmler
and one time I may even be an aspect of you, Tommy Barban.  Tommy
is in love with me, I think, but gently, reassuringly.  Enough,
though, so that he and Dick have begun to disapprove of each other.
All in all, everything has never gone better.  I am among friends
who like me.  I am here on this tranquil beach with my husband and
two children.  Everything is all right--if I can finish translating
this damn recipe for chicken a la Maryland into French.  My toes
feel warm in the sand.

"Yes, I'll look.  More new people--oh, that girl--yes.  Who did you
say she looked like. . . .  No, I haven't, we don't get much chance
to see the new American pictures over here.  Rosemary who?  Well,
we're getting very fashionable for July--seems very peculiar to me.
Yes, she's lovely, but there can be too many people."



XI


Doctor Richard Diver and Mrs. Elsie Speers sat in the Café des
Alliées in August, under cool and dusty trees.  The sparkle of the
mica was dulled by the baked ground, and a few gusts of mistral
from down the coast seeped through the Esterel and rocked the
fishing boats in the harbor, pointing the masts here and there at a
featureless sky.

"I had a letter this morning," said Mrs. Speers.  "What a terrible
time you all must have had with those Negroes!  But Rosemary said
you were perfectly wonderful to her."

"Rosemary ought to have a service stripe.  It was pretty harrowing--
the only person it didn't disturb was Abe North--he flew off to
Havre--he probably doesn't know about it yet."

"I'm sorry Mrs. Diver was upset," she said carefully.

Rosemary had written:


Nicole seemed Out of her Mind.  I didn't want to come South with
them because I felt Dick had enough on his hands.


"She's all right now."  He spoke almost impatiently.  "So you're
leaving to-morrow.  When will you sail?"

"Right away."

"My God, it's awful to have you go."

"We're glad we came here.  We've had a good time, thanks to you.
You're the first man Rosemary ever cared for."

Another gust of wind strained around the porphyry hills of la
Napoule.  There was a hint in the air that the earth was hurrying
on toward other weather; the lush midsummer moment outside of time
was already over.

"Rosemary's had crushes but sooner or later she always turned the
man over to me--" Mrs. Speers laughed, "--for dissection."

"So I was spared."

"There was nothing I could have done.  She was in love with you
before I ever saw you.  I told her to go ahead."

He saw that no provision had been made for him, or for Nicole, in
Mrs. Speers' plans--and he saw that her amorality sprang from the
conditions of her own withdrawal.  It was her right, the pension on
which her own emotions had retired.  Women are necessarily capable
of almost anything in their struggle for survival and can scarcely
be convicted of such man-made crimes as "cruelty."  So long as the
shuffle of love and pain went on within proper walls Mrs. Speers
could view it with as much detachment and humor as a eunuch.  She
had not even allowed for the possibility of Rosemary's being
damaged--or was she certain that she couldn't be?

"If what you say is true I don't think it did her any harm."  He
was keeping up to the end the pretense that he could still think
objectively about Rosemary.  "She's over it already.  Still--so
many of the important times in life begin by seeming incidental."

"This wasn't incidental," Mrs. Speers insisted.  "You were the
first man--you're an ideal to her.  In every letter she says that."

"She's so polite."

"You and Rosemary are the politest people I've ever known, but she
means this."

"My politeness is a trick of the heart."

This was partly true.  From his father Dick had learned the
somewhat conscious good manners of the young Southerner coming
north after the Civil War.  Often he used them and just as often he
despised them because they were not a protest against how
unpleasant selfishness was but against how unpleasant it looked.

"I'm in love with Rosemary," he told her suddenly.  "It's a kind of
self-indulgence saying that to you."

It seemed very strange and official to him, as if the very tables
and chairs in the Café des Alliées would remember it forever.
Already he felt her absence from these skies: on the beach he could
only remember the sun-torn flesh of her shoulder; at Tarmes he
crushed out her footprints as he crossed the garden; and now the
orchestra launching into the Nice Carnival Song, an echo of last
year's vanished gaieties, started the little dance that went on all
about her.  In a hundred hours she had come to possess all the
world's dark magic; the blinding belladonna, the caffein converting
physical into nervous energy, the mandragora that imposes harmony.

With an effort he once more accepted the fiction that he shared
Mrs. Speers' detachment.

"You and Rosemary aren't really alike," he said.  "The wisdom she
got from you is all molded up into her persona, into the mask she
faces the world with.  She doesn't think; her real depths are Irish
and romantic and illogical."

Mrs. Speers knew too that Rosemary, for all her delicate surface,
was a young mustang, perceptibly by Captain Doctor Hoyt, U.S.A.
Cross-sectioned, Rosemary would have displayed an enormous heart,
liver and soul, all crammed close together under the lovely shell.

Saying good-by, Dick was aware of Elsie Speers' full charm, aware
that she meant rather more to him than merely a last unwillingly
relinquished fragment of Rosemary.  He could possibly have made up
Rosemary--he could never have made up her mother.  If the cloak,
spurs and brilliants in which Rosemary had walked off were things
with which he had endowed her, it was nice in contrast to watch her
mother's grace knowing it was surely something he had not evoked.
She had an air of seeming to wait, as if for a man to get through
with something more important than herself, a battle or an
operation, during which he must not be hurried or interfered with.
When the man had finished she would be waiting, without fret or
impatience, somewhere on a highstool, turning the pages of a
newspaper.

"Good-by--and I want you both to remember always how fond of you
Nicole and I have grown."

Back at the Villa Diana, he went to his work-room, and opened the
shutters, closed against the mid-day glare.  On his two long
tables, in ordered confusion, lay the materials of his book.
Volume I, concerned with Classification, had achieved some success
in a small subsidized edition.  He was negotiating for its reissue.
Volume II was to be a great amplification of his first little book,
A Psychology for Psychiatrists.  Like so many men he had found that
he had only one or two ideas--that his little collection of
pamphlets now in its fiftieth German edition contained the germ of
all he would ever think or know.

But he was currently uneasy about the whole thing.  He resented the
wasted years at New Haven, but mostly he felt a discrepancy between
the growing luxury in which the Divers lived, and the need for
display which apparently went along with it.  Remembering his
Rumanian friend's story, about the man who had worked for years on
the brain of an armadillo, he suspected that patient Germans were
sitting close to the libraries of Berlin and Vienna callously
anticipating him.  He had about decided to brief the work in its
present condition and publish it in an undocumented volume of a
hundred thousand words as an introduction to more scholarly volumes
to follow.

He confirmed this decision walking around the rays of late
afternoon in his work-room.  With the new plan he could be through
by spring.  It seemed to him that when a man with his energy was
pursued for a year by increasing doubts, it indicated some fault in
the plan.

He laid the bars of gilded metal that he used as paperweights along
the sheaves of notes.  He swept up, for no servant was allowed in
here, treated his washroom sketchily with Bon Ami, repaired a
screen and sent off an order to a publishing house in Zurich.  Then
he drank an ounce of gin with twice as much water.

He saw Nicole in the garden.  Presently he must encounter her and
the prospect gave him a leaden feeling.  Before her he must keep up
a perfect front, now and to-morrow, next week and next year.  All
night in Paris he had held her in his arms while she slept light
under the luminol; in the early morning he broke in upon her
confusion before it could form, with words of tenderness and
protection, and she slept again with his face against the warm
scent of her hair.  Before she woke he had arranged everything at
the phone in the next room.  Rosemary was to move to another hotel.
She was to be "Daddy's Girl" and even to give up saying good-by to
them.  The proprietor of the hotel, Mr. McBeth, was to be the three
Chinese monkeys.  Packing amid the piled boxes and tissue paper of
many purchases, Dick and Nicole left for the Riviera at noon.

Then there was a reaction.  As they settled down in the wagon-lit
Dick saw that Nicole was waiting for it, and it came quickly and
desperately, before the train was out of the ceinture--his only
instinct was to step off while the train was still going slow, rush
back and see where Rosemary was, what she was doing.  He opened a
book and bent his pince-nez upon it, aware that Nicole was watching
him from her pillow across the compartment.  Unable to read, he
pretended to be tired and shut his eyes but she was still watching
him, and though still she was half asleep from the hangover of the
drug, she was relieved and almost happy that he was hers again.

It was worse with his eyes shut for it gave a rhythm of finding and
losing, finding and losing; but so as not to appear restless he lay
like that until noon.  At luncheon things were better--it was
always a fine meal; a thousand lunches in inns and restaurants,
wagon-lits, buffets, and aeroplanes were a mighty collation to have
taken together.  The familiar hurry of the train waiters, the
little bottles of wine and mineral water, the excellent food of the
Paris-Lyons-Méditerranee gave them the illusion that everything was
the same as before, but it was almost the first trip he had ever
taken with Nicole that was a going away rather than a going toward.
He drank a whole bottle of wine save for Nicole's single glass;
they talked about the house and the children.  But once back in the
compartment a silence fell over them like the silence in the
restaurant across from the Luxembourg.  Receding from a grief, it
seems necessary to retrace the same steps that brought us there.
An unfamiliar impatience settled on Dick; suddenly Nicole said:

"It seemed too bad to leave Rosemary like that--do you suppose
she'll be all right?"

"Of course.  She could take care of herself anywhere--"  Lest this
belittle Nicole's ability to do likewise, he added, "After all,
she's an actress, and even though her mother's in the background
she HAS to look out for herself."

"She's very attractive."

"She's an infant."

"She's attractive though."

They talked aimlessly back and forth, each speaking for the other.

"She's not as intelligent as I thought," Dick offered.

"She's quite smart."

"Not very, though--there's a persistent aroma of the nursery."

"She's very--very pretty," Nicole said in a detached, emphatic
way, "and I thought she was very good in the picture."

"She was well directed.  Thinking it over, it wasn't very
individual."

"I thought it was.  I can see how she'd be very attractive to men."

His heart twisted.  To what men?  How many men?

--Do you mind if I pull down the curtain?

--Please do, it's too light in here.

Where now?  And with whom?

"In a few years she'll look ten years older than you."

"On the contrary.  I sketched her one night on a theatre program, I
think she'll last."

They were both restless in the night.  In a day or two Dick would
try to banish the ghost of Rosemary before it became walled up with
them, but for the moment he had no force to do it.  Sometimes it is
harder to deprive oneself of a pain than of a pleasure and the
memory so possessed him that for the moment there was nothing to do
but to pretend.  This was more difficult because he was currently
annoyed with Nicole, who, after all these years, should recognize
symptoms of strain in herself and guard against them.  Twice within
a fortnight she had broken up: there had been the night of the
dinner at Tarmes when he had found her in her bedroom dissolved in
crazy laughter telling Mrs. McKisco she could not go in the
bathroom because the key was thrown down the well.  Mrs. McKisco
was astonished and resentful, baffled and yet in a way comprehending.
Dick had not been particularly alarmed then, for afterward Nicole
was repentant.  She called at Gausse's Hotel but the McKiscos were
gone.

The collapse in Paris was another matter, adding significance to
the first one.  It prophesied possibly a new cycle, a new pousse of
the malady.  Having gone through unprofessional agonies during her
long relapse following Topsy's birth, he had, perforce, hardened
himself about her, making a cleavage between Nicole sick and Nicole
well.  This made it difficult now to distinguish between his self-
protective professional detachment and some new coldness in his
heart.  As an indifference cherished, or left to atrophy, becomes
an emptiness, to this extent he had learned to become empty of
Nicole, serving her against his will with negations and emotional
neglect.  One writes of scars healed, a loose parallel to the
pathology of the skin, but there is no such thing in the life of an
individual.  There are open wounds, shrunk sometimes to the size of
a pin-prick but wounds still.  The marks of suffering are more
comparable to the loss of a finger, or of the sight of an eye.  We
may not miss them, either, for one minute in a year, but if we
should there is nothing to be done about it.



XII


He found Nicole in the garden with her arms folded high on her
shoulders.  She looked at him with straight gray eyes, with a
child's searching wonder.

"I went to Cannes," he said.  "I ran into Mrs. Speers.  She's
leaving to-morrow.  She wanted to come up and say good-by to you,
but I slew the idea."

"I'm sorry.  I'd like to have seen her.  I like her."

"Who else do you think I saw--Bartholomew Tailor."

"You didn't."

"I couldn't have missed that face of his, the old experienced
weasel.  He was looking over the ground for Ciro's Menagerie--
they'll all be down next year.  I suspected Mrs. Abrams was a sort
of outpost."

"And Baby was outraged the first summer we came here."

"They don't really give a damn where they are, so I don't see why
they don't stay and freeze in Deauville."

"Can't we start rumors about cholera or something?"

"I told Bartholomew that some categories died off like flies here--
I told him the life of a suck was as short as the life of a
machine-gunner in the war."

"You didn't."

"No, I didn't," he admitted.  "He was very pleasant.  It was a
beautiful sight, he and I shaking hands there on the boulevard.
The meeting of Sigmund Freud and Ward McAllister."

Dick didn't want to talk--he wanted to be alone so that his
thoughts about work and the future would overpower his thoughts of
love and to-day.  Nicole knew about it but only darkly and
tragically, hating him a little in an animal way, yet wanting to
rub against his shoulder.

"The darling," Dick said lightly.

He went into the house, forgetting something he wanted to do there,
and then remembering it was the piano.  He sat down whistling and
played by ear:


     "Just picture you upon my knee
      With tea for two and two for tea
      And me for you and you for me--"


Through the melody flowed a sudden realization that Nicole, hearing
it, would guess quickly at a nostalgia for the past fortnight.  He
broke off with a casual chord and left the piano.

It was hard to know where to go.  He glanced about the house that
Nicole had made, that Nicole's grandfather had paid for.  He owned
only his work house and the ground on which it stood.  Out of three
thousand a year and what dribbled in from his publications he paid
for his clothes and personal expenses, for cellar charges, and for
Lanier's education, so far confined to a nurse's wage.  Never had a
move been contemplated without Dick's figuring his share.  Living
rather ascetically, travelling third-class when he was alone, with
the cheapest wine, and good care of his clothes, and penalizing
himself for any extravagances, he maintained a qualified financial
independence.  After a certain point, though, it was difficult--
again and again it was necessary to decide together as to the uses
to which Nicole's money should be put.  Naturally Nicole, wanting
to own him, wanting him to stand still forever, encouraged any
slackness on his part, and in multiplying ways he was constantly
inundated by a trickling of goods and money.  The inception of the
idea of the cliff villa which they had elaborated as a fantasy one
day was a typical example of the forces divorcing them from the
first simple arrangements in Zurich.

"Wouldn't it be fun if--" it had been; and then, "Won't it be fun
when--"

It was not so much fun.  His work became confused with Nicole's
problems; in addition, her income had increased so fast of late
that it seemed to belittle his work.  Also, for the purpose of her
cure, he had for many years pretended to a rigid domesticity from
which he was drifting away, and this pretense became more arduous
in this effortless immobility, in which he was inevitably subjected
to microscopic examination.  When Dick could no longer play what he
wanted to play on the piano, it was an indication that life was
being refined down to a point.  He stayed in the big room a long
time listening to the buzz of the electric clock, listening to
time.



In November the waves grew black and dashed over the sea wall onto
the shore road--such summer life as had survived disappeared and
the beaches were melancholy and desolate under the mistral and
rain.  Gausse's Hotel was closed for repairs and enlargement and
the scaffolding of the summer Casino at Juan les Pins grew larger
and more formidable.  Going into Cannes or Nice, Dick and Nicole
met new people--members of orchestras, restaurateurs, horticultural
enthusiasts, shipbuilders--for Dick had bought an old dinghy--and
members of the Syndicat d'Initiative.  They knew their servants
well and gave thought to the children's education.  In December,
Nicole seemed well-knit again; when a month had passed without
tension, without the tight mouth, the unmotivated smile, the
unfathomable remark, they went to the Swiss Alps for the Christmas
holidays.



XIII


With his cap, Dick slapped the snow from his dark blue ski-suit
before going inside.  The great hall, its floor pockmarked by two
decades of hobnails, was cleared for the tea dance, and four-score
young Americans, domiciled in schools near Gstaad, bounced about to
the frolic of "Don't Bring Lulu," or exploded violently with the
first percussions of the Charleston.  It was a colony of the young,
simple, and expensive--the Sturmtruppen of the rich were at St.
Moritz.  Baby Warren felt that she had made a gesture of
renunciation in joining the Divers here.

Dick picked out the two sisters easily across the delicately
haunted, soft-swaying room--they were poster-like, formidable in
their snow costumes, Nicole's of cerulean blue, Baby's of brick
red.  The young Englishman was talking to them; but they were
paying no attention, lulled to the staring point by the adolescent
dance.

Nicole's snow-warm face lighted up further as she saw Dick.  "Where
is he?"

"He missed the train--I'm meeting him later."  Dick sat down,
swinging a heavy boot over his knee.  "You two look very striking
together.  Every once in a while I forget we're in the same party
and get a big shock at seeing you."

Baby was a tall, fine-looking woman, deeply engaged in being almost
thirty.  Symptomatically she had pulled two men with her from
London, one scarcely down from Cambridge, one old and hard with
Victorian lecheries.  Baby had certain spinsters' characteristics--
she was alien from touch, she started if she was touched suddenly,
and such lingering touches as kisses and embraces slipped directly
through the flesh into the forefront of her consciousness.  She
made few gestures with her trunk, her body proper--instead, she
stamped her foot and tossed her head in almost an old-fashioned
way.  She relished the foretaste of death, prefigured by the
catastrophes of friends--persistently she clung to the idea of
Nicole's tragic destiny.

Baby's younger Englishman had been chaperoning the women down
appropriate inclines and harrowing them on the bob-run.  Dick,
having turned an ankle in a too ambitious telemark, loafed
gratefully about the "nursery slope" with the children or drank
kvass with a Russian doctor at the hotel.

"Please be happy, Dick," Nicole urged him.  "Why don't you meet
some of these ickle durls and dance with them in the afternoon?"

"What would I say to them?"

Her low almost harsh voice rose a few notes, simulating a plaintive
coquetry:  "Say:  'Ickle durl, oo is de pwettiest sing.'  What do
you think you say?"

"I don't like ickle durls.  They smell of castile soap and
peppermint.  When I dance with them, I feel as if I'm pushing a
baby carriage."

It was a dangerous subject--he was careful, to the point of self-
consciousness, to stare far over the heads of young maidens.

"There's a lot of business," said Baby.  "First place, there's news
from home--the property we used to call the station property.  The
railroads only bought the centre of it at first.  Now they've
bought the rest, and it belonged to Mother.  It's a question of
investing the money."

Pretending to be repelled by this gross turn in the conversation,
the Englishman made for a girl on the floor.  Following him for an
instant with the uncertain eyes of an American girl in the grip of
a life-long Anglophilia, Baby continued defiantly:

"It's a lot of money.  It's three hundred thousand apiece.  I keep
an eye on my own investments but Nicole doesn't know anything about
securities, and I don't suppose you do either."

"I've got to meet the train," Dick said evasively.

Outside he inhaled damp snowflakes that he could no longer see
against the darkening sky.  Three children sledding past shouted a
warning in some strange language; he heard them yell at the next
bend and a little farther on he heard sleigh-bells coming up the
hill in the dark.  The holiday station glittered with expectancy,
boys and girls waiting for new boys and girls, and by the time the
train arrived, Dick had caught the rhythm, and pretended to Franz
Gregorovius that he was clipping off a half-hour from an endless
roll of pleasures.  But Franz had some intensity of purpose at the
moment that fought through any superimposition of mood on Dick's
part.  "I may get up to Zurich for a day," Dick had written, "or
you can manage to come to Lausanne."  Franz had managed to come all
the way to Gstaad.

He was forty.  Upon his healthy maturity reposed a set of pleasant
official manners, but he was most at home in a somewhat stuffy
safety from which he could despise the broken rich whom he re-
educated.  His scientific heredity might have bequeathed him a
wider world but he seemed to have deliberately chosen the
standpoint of an humbler class, a choice typified by his selection
of a wife.  At the hotel Baby Warren made a quick examination of
him, and failing to find any of the hall-marks she respected, the
subtler virtues or courtesies by which the privileged classes
recognized one another, treated him thereafter with her second
manner.  Nicole was always a little afraid of him.  Dick liked him,
as he liked his friends, without reservations.

For the evening they were sliding down the hill into the village,
on those little sleds which serve the same purpose as gondolas do
in Venice.  Their destination was a hotel with an old-fashioned
Swiss tap-room, wooden and resounding, a room of clocks, kegs,
steins, and antlers.  Many parties at long tables blurred into one
great party and ate fondue--a peculiarly indigestible form of Welsh
rarebit, mitigated by hot spiced wine.

It was jolly in the big room; the younger Englishman remarked it
and Dick conceded that there was no other word.  With the pert
heady wine he relaxed and pretended that the world was all put
together again by the gray-haired men of the golden nineties who
shouted old glees at the piano, by the young voices and the bright
costumes toned into the room by the swirling smoke.  For a moment
he felt that they were in a ship with landfall just ahead; in the
faces of all the girls was the same innocent expectation of the
possibilities inherent in the situation and the night.  He looked
to see if that special girl was there and got an impression that
she was at the table behind them--then he forgot her and invented a
rigmarole and tried to make his party have a good time.

"I must talk to you," said Franz in English.  "I have only twenty-
four hours to spend here."

"I suspected you had something on your mind."

"I have a plan that is--so marvellous."  His hand fell upon Dick's
knee.  "I have a plan that will be the making of us two."

"Well?"

"Dick--there is a clinic we could have together--the old clinic of
Braun on the Zugersee.  The plant is all modern except for a few
points.  He is sick--he wants to go up in Austria, to die probably.
It is a chance that is just insuperable.  You and me--what a pair!
Now don't say anything yet until I finish."

From the yellow glint in Baby's eyes, Dick saw she was listening.

"We must undertake it together.  It would not bind you too tight--
it would give you a base, a laboratory, a centre.  You could stay
in residence say no more than half the year, when the weather is
fine.  In winter you could go to France or America and write your
texts fresh from clinical experience."  He lowered his voice.  "And
for the convalescence in your family, there are the atmosphere and
regularity of the clinic at hand."  Dick's expression did not
encourage this note so Franz dropped it with the punctuation of his
tongue leaving his lip quickly.  "We could be partners.  I the
executive manager, you the theoretician, the brilliant consultant
and all that.  I know myself--I know I have no genius and you have.
But, in my way, I am thought very capable; I am utterly competent
at the most modern clinical methods.  Sometimes for months I have
served as the practical head of the old clinic.  The professor says
this plan is excellent, he advises me to go ahead.  He says he is
going to live forever, and work up to the last minute."

Dick formed imaginary pictures of the prospect as a preliminary to
any exercise of judgment.

"What's the financial angle?" he asked.

Franz threw up his chin, his eyebrows, the transient wrinkles of
his forehead, his hands, his elbows, his shoulders; he strained up
the muscles of his legs, so that the cloth of his trousers bulged,
pushed up his heart into his throat and his voice into the roof of
his mouth.

"There we have it!  Money!" he bewailed.  "I have little money.
The price in American money is two hundred thousand dollars.  The
innovation--ary--" he tasted the coinage doubtfully, "--steps, that
you will agree are necessary, will cost twenty thousand dollars
American.  But the clinic is a gold mine--I tell you, I haven't
seen the books.  For an investment of two hundred and twenty
thousand dollars we have an assured income of--"

Baby's curiosity was such that Dick brought her into the
conversation.

"In your experience, Baby," he demanded, "have you found that when
a European wants to see an American VERY pressingly it is
invariably something concerned with money?"

"What is it?" she said innocently.

"This young Privat-dozent thinks that he and I ought to launch into
big business and try to attract nervous breakdowns from America."

Worried, Franz stared at Baby as Dick continued:

"But who are we, Franz?  You bear a big name and I've written two
textbooks.  Is that enough to attract anybody?  And I haven't got
that much money--I haven't got a tenth of it."  Franz smiled
cynically.  "Honestly I haven't.  Nicole and Baby are rich as
Croesus but I haven't managed to get my hands on any of it yet."

They were all listening now--Dick wondered if the girl at the table
behind was listening too.  The idea attracted him.  He decided to
let Baby speak for him, as one often lets women raise their voices
over issues that are not in their hands.  Baby became suddenly her
grandfather, cool and experimental.

"I think it's a suggestion you ought to consider, Dick.  I don't
know what Doctor Gregory was saying--but it seems to me--"

Behind him the girl had leaned forward into a smoke ring and was
picking up something from the floor.  Nicole's face, fitted into
his own across the table--her beauty, tentatively nesting and
posing, flowed into his love, ever braced to protect it.

"Consider it, Dick," Franz urged excitedly.  "When one writes on
psychiatry, one should have actual clinical contacts.  Jung writes,
Bleuler writes, Freud writes, Forel writes, Adler writes--also they
are in constant contact with mental disorder."

"Dick has me," laughed Nicole.  "I should think that'd be enough
mental disorder for one man."

"That's different," said Franz cautiously.

Baby was thinking that if Nicole lived beside a clinic she would
always feel quite safe about her.

"We must think it over carefully," she said.

Though amused at her insolence, Dick did not encourage it.

"The decision concerns me, Baby," he said gently.  "It's nice of
you to want to buy me a clinic."

Realizing she had meddled, Baby withdrew hurriedly:

"Of course, it's entirely your affair."

"A thing as important as this will take weeks to decide.  I wonder
how I like the picture of Nicole and me anchored to Zurich--"  He
turned to Franz, anticipating: "--I know.  Zurich has a gashouse
and running water and electric light--I lived there three years."

"I will leave you to think it over," said Franz.  "I am confident--"

One hundred pair of five-pound boots had begun to clump toward the
door, and they joined the press.  Outside in the crisp moonlight,
Dick saw the girl tying her sled to one of the sleighs ahead.  They
piled into their own sleigh and at the crisp-cracking whips the
horses strained, breasting the dark air.  Past them figures ran and
scrambled, the younger ones shoving each other from sleds and
runners, landing in the soft snow, then panting after the horses to
drop exhausted on a sled or wail that they were abandoned.  On
either side the fields were beneficently tranquil; the space
through which the cavalcade moved was high and limitless.  In the
country there was less noise as though they were all listening
atavistically for wolves in the wide snow.

In Saanen, they poured into the municipal dance, crowded with cow
herders, hotel servants, shop-keepers, ski teachers, guides,
tourists, peasants.  To come into the warm enclosed place after the
pantheistic animal feeling without, was to reassume some absurd and
impressive knightly name, as thunderous as spurred boots in war, as
football cleats on the cement of a locker-room floor.  There was
conventional yodelling, and the familiar rhythm of it separated
Dick from what he had first found romantic in the scene.  At first
he thought it was because he had hounded the girl out of his
consciousness; then it came to him under the form of what Baby had
said:  "We must think it over carefully--" and the unsaid lines
back of that:  "We own you, and you'll admit it sooner or later.
It is absurd to keep up the pretense of independence."

It had been years since Dick had bottled up malice against a
creature--since freshman year at New Haven when he had come upon a
popular essay about "mental hygiene."  Now he lost his temper at
Baby and simultaneously tried to coop it up within him, resenting
her cold rich insolence.  It would be hundreds of years before any
emergent Amazons would ever grasp the fact that a man is vulnerable
only in his pride, but delicate as Humpty-Dumpty once that is
meddled with--though some of them paid the fact a cautious lip-
service.  Doctor Diver's profession of sorting the broken shells of
another sort of egg had given him a dread of breakage.  But:

"There's too much good manners," he said on the way back to Gstaad
in the smooth sleigh.

"Well, I think that's nice," said Baby.

"No, it isn't," he insisted to the anonymous bundle of fur.  "Good
manners are an admission that everybody is so tender that they have
to be handled with gloves.  Now, human respect--you don't call a
man a coward or a liar lightly, but if you spend your life sparing
people's feelings and feeding their vanity, you get so you can't
distinguish what SHOULD be respected in them."

"I think Americans take their manners rather seriously," said the
elder Englishman.

"I guess so," said Dick.  "My father had the kind of manners he
inherited from the days when you shot first and apologized
afterward.  Men armed--why, you Europeans haven't carried arms in
civil life since the beginning of the eighteenth century--"

"Not actually, perhaps--"

"Not ACT-ually.  Not really."

"Dick, you've always had such beautiful manners," said Baby
conciliatingly.

The women were regarding him across the zoo of robes with some
alarm.  The younger Englishman did not understand--he was one of
the kind who were always jumping around cornices and balconies, as
if they thought they were in the rigging of a ship--and filled the
ride to the hotel with a preposterous story about a boxing match
with his best friend in which they loved and bruised each other for
an hour, always with great reserve.  Dick became facetious.

"So every time he hit you you considered him an even better
friend?"

"I respected him more."

"It's the premise I don't understand.  You and your best friend
scrap about a trivial matter--"

"If you don't understand, I can't explain it to you," said the
young Englishman coldly.

--This is what I'll get if I begin saying what I think, Dick said
to himself.

He was ashamed at baiting the man, realizing that the absurdity of
the story rested in the immaturity of the attitude combined with
the sophisticated method of its narration.

The carnival spirit was strong and they went with the crowd into
the grill, where a Tunisian barman manipulated the illumination in
a counterpoint, whose other melody was the moon off the ice rink
staring in the big windows.  In that light, Dick found the girl
devitalized, and uninteresting--he turned from her to enjoy the
darkness, the cigarette points going green and silver when the
lights shone red, the band of white that fell across the dancers as
the door to the bar was opened and closed.

"Now tell me, Franz," he demanded, "do you think after sitting up
all night drinking beer, you can go back and convince your patients
that you have any character?  Don't you think they'll see you're a
gastropath?"

"I'm going to bed," Nicole announced.  Dick accompanied her to the
door of the elevator.

"I'd come with you but I must show Franz that I'm not intended for
a clinician."

Nicole walked into the elevator.

"Baby has lots of common sense," she said meditatively.

"Baby is one of--"

The door slashed shut--facing a mechanical hum, Dick finished the
sentence in his mind, "--Baby is a trivial, selfish woman."

But two days later, sleighing to the station with Franz, Dick
admitted that he thought favorably upon the matter.

"We're beginning to turn in a circle," he admitted.  "Living on
this scale, there's an unavoidable series of strains, and Nicole
doesn't survive them.  The pastoral quality down on the summer
Riviera is all changing anyhow--next year they'll have a Season."

They passed the crisp green rinks where Wiener waltzes blared and
the colors of many mountain schools flashed against the pale-blue
skies.

"--I hope we'll be able to do it, Franz.  There's nobody I'd rather
try it with than you--"

Good-by, Gstaad!  Good-by, fresh faces, cold sweet flowers, flakes
in the darkness.  Good-by, Gstaad, good-by!



XIV


Dick awoke at five after a long dream of war, walked to the window
and stared out it at the Zugersee.  His dream had begun in sombre
majesty; navy blue uniforms crossed a dark plaza behind bands
playing the second movement of Prokofieff's "Love of Three
Oranges."  Presently there were fire engines, symbols of disaster,
and a ghastly uprising of the mutilated in a dressing station.  He
turned on his bed-lamp light and made a thorough note of it ending
with the half-ironic phrase:  "Non-combatant's shell-shock."

As he sat on the side of his bed, he felt the room, the house and
the night as empty.  In the next room Nicole muttered something
desolate and he felt sorry for whatever loneliness she was feeling
in her sleep.  For him time stood still and then every few years
accelerated in a rush, like the quick re-wind of a film, but for
Nicole the years slipped away by clock and calendar and birthday,
with the added poignance of her perishable beauty.

Even this past year and a half on the Zugersee seemed wasted time
for her, the seasons marked only by the workmen on the road turning
pink in May, brown in July, black in September, white again in
Spring.  She had come out of her first illness alive with new
hopes, expecting so much, yet deprived of any subsistence except
Dick, bringing up children she could only pretend gently to love,
guided orphans.  The people she liked, rebels mostly, disturbed her
and were bad for her--she sought in them the vitality that had made
them independent or creative or rugged, sought in vain--for their
secrets were buried deep in childhood struggles they had forgotten.
They were more interested in Nicole's exterior harmony and charm,
the other face of her illness.  She led a lonely life owning Dick
who did not want to be owned.

Many times he had tried unsuccessfully to let go his hold on her.
They had many fine times together, fine talks between the loves of
the white nights, but always when he turned away from her into
himself he left her holding Nothing in her hands and staring at it,
calling it many names, but knowing it was only the hope that he
would come back soon.

He scrunched his pillow hard, lay down, and put the back of his
neck against it as a Japanese does to slow the circulation, and
slept again for a time.  Later, while he shaved, Nicole awoke and
marched around, giving abrupt, succinct orders to children and
servants.  Lanier came in to watch his father shave--living beside
a psychiatric clinic he had developed an extraordinary confidence
in and admiration for his father, together with an exaggerated
indifference toward most other adults; the patients appeared to him
either in their odd aspects, or else as devitalized, over-correct
creatures without personality.  He was a handsome, promising boy
and Dick devoted much time to him, in the relationship of a
sympathetic but exacting officer and respectful enlisted man.

"Why," Lanier asked, "do you always leave a little lather on the
top of your hair when you shave?"

Cautiously Dick parted soapy lips:  "I have never been able to find
out.  I've often wondered.  I think it's because I get the first
finger soapy when I make the line of my side-burn, but how it gets
up on top of my head I don't know."

"I'm going to watch it all to-morrow."

"That's your only question before breakfast?"

"I don't really call it a question."

"That's one on you."

Half an hour later Dick started up to the administration building.
He was thirty-eight--still declining a beard he yet had a more
medical aura about him than he had worn upon the Riviera.  For
eighteen months now he had lived at the clinic--certainly one of
the best-appointed in Europe.  Like Dohmler's it was of the modern
type--no longer a single dark and sinister building but a small,
scattered, yet deceitfully integrated village--Dick and Nicole had
added much in the domain of taste, so that the plant was a thing of
beauty, visited by every psychologist passing through Zurich.  With
the addition of a caddy house it might very well have been a
country club.  The Eglantine and the Beeches, houses for those sunk
into eternal darkness, were screened by little copses from the main
building, camouflaged strong-points.  Behind was a large truck
farm, worked partly by the patients.  The workshops for ergo-
therapy were three, placed under a single roof and there Doctor
Diver began his morning's inspection.  The carpentry shop, full of
sunlight, exuded the sweetness of sawdust, of a lost age of wood;
always half a dozen men were there, hammering, planing, buzzing--
silent men, who lifted solemn eyes from their work as he passed
through.  Himself a good carpenter, he discussed with them the
efficiency of some tools for a moment in a quiet, personal,
interested voice.  Adjoining was the book-bindery, adapted to the
most mobile of patients who were not always, however, those who had
the greatest chance for recovery.  The last chamber was devoted to
beadwork, weaving and work in brass.  The faces of the patients
here wore the expression of one who had just sighed profoundly,
dismissing something insoluble--but their sighs only marked the
beginning of another ceaseless round of ratiocination, not in a
line as with normal people but in the same circle.  Round, round,
and round.  Around forever.  But the bright colors of the stuffs
they worked with gave strangers a momentary illusion that all was
well, as in a kindergarten.  These patients brightened as Doctor
Diver came in.  Most of them liked him better than they liked
Doctor Gregorovius.  Those who had once lived in the great world
invariably liked him better.  There were a few who thought he
neglected them, or that he was not simple, or that he posed.  Their
responses were not dissimilar to those that Dick evoked in non-
professional life, but here they were warped and distorted.

One Englishwoman spoke to him always about a subject which she
considered her own.

"Have we got music to-night?"

"I don't know," he answered.  "I haven't seen Doctor Ladislau.  How
did you enjoy the music that Mrs. Sachs and Mr. Longstreet gave us
last night?"

"It was so-so."

"I thought it was fine--especially the Chopin."

"I thought it was so-so."

"When are you going to play for us yourself?"

She shrugged her shoulders, as pleased at this question as she had
been for several years.

"Some time.  But I only play so-so."

They knew that she did not play at all--she had had two sisters who
were brilliant musicians, but she had never been able to learn the
notes when they had been young together.

From the workshop Dick went to visit the Eglantine and the Beeches.
Exteriorly these houses were as cheerful as the others; Nicole had
designed the decoration and the furniture on a necessary base of
concealed grills and bars and immovable furniture.  She had worked
with so much imagination--the inventive quality, which she lacked,
being supplied by the problem itself--that no instructed visitor
would have dreamed that the light, graceful filagree work at a
window was a strong, unyielding end of a tether, that the pieces
reflecting modern tubular tendencies were stancher than the massive
creations of the Edwardians--even the flowers lay in iron fingers
and every casual ornament and fixture was as necessary as a girder
in a skyscraper.  Her tireless eyes had made each room yield up its
greatest usefulness.  Complimented, she referred to herself
brusquely as a master plumber.

For those whose compasses were not depolarized there seemed many
odd things in these houses.  Doctor Diver was often amused in the
Eglantine, the men's building--here there was a strange little
exhibitionist who thought that if he could walk unclothed and
unmolested from the Êtoile to the Place de la Concorde he would
solve many things--and, perhaps, Dick thought, he was quite right.

His most interesting case was in the main building.  The patient
was a woman of thirty who had been in the clinic six months; she
was an American painter who had lived long in Paris.  They had no
very satisfactory history of her.  A cousin had happened upon her
all mad and gone and after an unsatisfactory interlude at one of
the whoopee cures that fringed the city, dedicated largely to
tourist victims of drug and drink, he had managed to get her to
Switzerland.  On her admittance she had been exceptionally pretty--
now she was a living agonizing sore.  All blood tests had failed to
give a positive reaction and the trouble was unsatisfactorily
catalogued as nervous eczema.  For two months she had lain under
it, as imprisoned as in the Iron Maiden.  She was coherent, even
brilliant, within the limits of her special hallucinations.

She was particularly his patient.  During spells of overexcitement
he was the only doctor who could "do anything with her."  Several
weeks ago, on one of many nights that she had passed in sleepless
torture Franz had succeeded in hypnotizing her into a few hours of
needed rest, but he had never again succeeded.  Hypnosis was a tool
that Dick had distrusted and seldom used, for he knew that he could
not always summon up the mood in himself--he had once tried it on
Nicole and she had scornfully laughed at him.

The woman in room twenty could not see him when he came in--the
area about her eyes was too tightly swollen.  She spoke in a
strong, rich, deep, thrilling voice.

"How long will this last?  Is it going to be forever?"

"It's not going to be very long now.  Doctor Ladislau tells me
there are whole areas cleared up."

"If I knew what I had done to deserve this I could accept it with
equanimity."

"It isn't wise to be mystical about it--we recognize it as a
nervous phenomenon.  It's related to the blush--when you were a
girl, did you blush easily?"

She lay with her face turned to the ceiling.

"I have found nothing to blush for since I cut my wisdom teeth."

"Haven't you committed your share of petty sins and mistakes?"

"I have nothing to reproach myself with."

"You're very fortunate."

The woman thought a moment; her voice came up through her bandaged
face afflicted with subterranean melodies:

"I'm sharing the fate of the women of my time who challenged men to
battle."

"To your vast surprise it was just like all battles," he answered,
adopting her formal diction.

"Just like all battles."  She thought this over.  "You pick a set-
up, or else win a Pyrrhic victory, or you're wrecked and ruined--
you're a ghostly echo from a broken wall."

"You are neither wrecked nor ruined," he told her.  "Are you quite
sure you've been in a real battle?"

"Look at me!" she cried furiously.

"You've suffered, but many women suffered before they mistook
themselves for men."  It was becoming an argument and he retreated.
"In any case you mustn't confuse a single failure with a final
defeat."

She sneered.  "Beautiful words," and the phrase transpiring up
through the crust of pain humbled him.

"We would like to go into the true reasons that brought you here--"
he began but she interrupted.

"I am here as a symbol of something.  I thought perhaps you would
know what it was."

"You are sick," he said mechanically.

"Then what was it I had almost found?"

"A greater sickness."

"That's all?"

"That's all."  With disgust he heard himself lying, but here and
now the vastness of the subject could only be compressed into a
lie.  "Outside of that there's only confusion and chaos.  I won't
lecture to you--we have too acute a realization of your physical
suffering.  But it's only by meeting the problems of every day, no
matter how trifling and boring they seem, that you can make things
drop back into place again.  After that--perhaps you'll be able
again to examine--"

He had slowed up to avoid the inevitable end of his thought: "--the
frontiers of consciousness."  The frontiers that artists must
explore were not for her, ever.  She was fine-spun, inbred--
eventually she might find rest in some quiet mysticism.
Exploration was for those with a measure of peasant blood, those
with big thighs and thick ankles who could take punishment as they
took bread and salt, on every inch of flesh and spirit.

--Not for you, he almost said.  It's too tough a game for you.

Yet in the awful majesty of her pain he went out to her
unreservedly, almost sexually.  He wanted to gather her up in his
arms, as he so often had Nicole, and cherish even her mistakes, so
deeply were they part of her.  The orange light through the drawn
blind, the sarcophagus of her figure on the bed, the spot of face,
the voice searching the vacuity of her illness and finding only
remote abstractions.

As he arose the tears fled lava-like into her bandages.

"That is for something," she whispered.  "Something must come out
of it."

He stooped and kissed her forehead.

"We must all try to be good," he said.

Leaving her room he sent the nurse in to her.  There were other
patients to see: an American girl of fifteen who had been brought
up on the basis that childhood was intended to be all fun--his
visit was provoked by the fact that she had just hacked off all her
hair with a nail scissors.  There was nothing much to be done for
her--a family history of neurosis and nothing stable in her past to
build on.  The father, normal and conscientious himself, had tried
to protect a nervous brood from life's troubles and had succeeded
merely in preventing them from developing powers of adjustment to
life's inevitable surprises.  There was little that Dick could say:
"Helen, when you're in doubt you must ask a nurse, you must learn
to take advice.  Promise me you will."

What was a promise with the head sick?  He looked in upon a frail
exile from the Caucasus buckled securely in a sort of hammock which
in turn was submerged in a warm medical bath, and upon the three
daughters of a Portuguese general who slid almost imperceptibly
toward paresis.  He went into the room next to them and told a
collapsed psychiatrist that he was better, always better, and the
man tried to read his face for conviction, since he hung on the
real world only through such reassurance as he could find in the
resonance, or lack of it, in Doctor Diver's voice.  After that Dick
discharged a shiftless orderly and by then it was the lunch hour.



XV


Meals with the patients were a chore he approached with apathy.
The gathering, which of course did not include residents at the
Eglantine or the Beeches, was conventional enough at first sight,
but over it brooded always a heavy melancholy.  Such doctors as
were present kept up a conversation but most of the patients, as if
exhausted by their morning's endeavor, or depressed by the company,
spoke little, and ate looking into their plates.

Luncheon over, Dick returned to his villa.  Nicole was in the salon
wearing a strange expression.

"Read that," she said.

He opened the letter.  It was from a woman recently discharged,
though with skepticism on the part of the faculty.  It accused him
in no uncertain terms of having seduced her daughter, who had been
at her mother's side during the crucial stage of the illness.  It
presumed that Mrs. Diver would be glad to have this information and
learn what her husband was "really like."

Dick read the letter again.  Couched in clear and concise English
he yet recognized it as the letter of a maniac.  Upon a single
occasion he had let the girl, a flirtatious little brunette, ride
into Zurich with him, upon her request, and in the evening had
brought her back to the clinic.  In an idle, almost indulgent way,
he kissed her.  Later, she tried to carry the affair further, but
he was not interested and subsequently, probably consequently, the
girl had come to dislike him, and taken her mother away.

"This letter is deranged," he said.  "I had no relations of any
kind with that girl.  I didn't even like her."

"Yes, I've tried thinking that," said Nicole.

"Surely you don't believe it?"

"I've been sitting here."

He sank his voice to a reproachful note and sat beside her.

"This is absurd.  This is a letter from a mental patient."

"I was a mental patient."

He stood up and spoke more authoritatively.

"Suppose we don't have any nonsense, Nicole.  Go and round up the
children and we'll start."

In the car, with Dick driving, they followed the little
promontories of the lake, catching the burn of light and water in
the windshield, tunnelling through cascades of evergreen.  It was
Dick's car, a Renault so dwarfish that they all stuck out of it
except the children, between whom Mademoiselle towered mastlike in
the rear seat.  They knew every kilometer of the road--where they
would smell the pine needles and the black stove smoke.  A high sun
with a face traced on it beat fierce on the straw hats of the
children.

Nicole was silent; Dick was uneasy at her straight hard gaze.
Often he felt lonely with her, and frequently she tired him with
the short floods of personal revelations that she reserved
exclusively for him, "I'm like this--I'm more like that," but this
afternoon he would have been glad had she rattled on in staccato
for a while and given him glimpses of her thoughts.  The situation
was always most threatening when she backed up into herself and
closed the doors behind her.

At Zug Mademoiselle got out and left them.  The Divers approached
the Agiri Fair through a menagerie of mammoth steamrollers that
made way for them.  Dick parked the car, and as Nicole looked at
him without moving, he said:  "Come on, darl."  Her lips drew apart
into a sudden awful smile, and his belly quailed, but as if he
hadn't seen it he repeated:  "Come on.  So the children can get
out."

"Oh, I'll come all right," she answered, tearing the words from
some story spinning itself out inside her, too fast for him to
grasp.  "Don't worry about that.  I'll come--"

"Then come."

She turned from him as he walked beside her but the smile still
flickered across her face, derisive and remote.  Only when Lanier
spoke to her several times did she manage to fix her attention upon
an object, a Punch-and-Judy show, and to orient herself by
anchoring to it.

Dick tried to think what to do.  The dualism in his views of her--
that of the husband, that of the psychiatrist--was increasingly
paralyzing his faculties.  In these six years she had several times
carried him over the line with her, disarming him by exciting
emotional pity or by a flow of wit, fantastic and disassociated, so
that only after the episode did he realize with the consciousness
of his own relaxation from tension, that she had succeeded in
getting a point against his better judgment.

A discussion with Topsy about the guignol--as to whether the Punch
was the same Punch they had seen last year in Cannes--having been
settled, the family walked along again between the booths under the
open sky.  The women's bonnets, perching over velvet vests, the
bright, spreading skirts of many cantons, seemed demure against the
blue and orange paint of the wagons and displays.  There was the
sound of a whining, tinkling hootchy-kootchy show.

Nicole began to run very suddenly, so suddenly that for a moment
Dick did not miss her.  Far ahead he saw her yellow dress twisting
through the crowd, an ochre stitch along the edge of reality and
unreality, and started after her.  Secretly she ran and secretly he
followed.  As the hot afternoon went shrill and terrible with her
flight he had forgotten the children; then he wheeled and ran back
to them, drawing them this way and that by their arms, his eyes
jumping from booth to booth.

"Madame," he cried to a young woman behind a white lottery wheel,
"Est-ce que je peux laisser ces petits avec vous deux minutes?
C'est très urgent--je vous donnerai dix francs."

"Mais oui."

He headed the children into the booth.  "Alors--restez avec cette
gentille dame."

"Oui, Dick."

He darted off again but he had lost her; he circled the merry-go-
round keeping up with it till he realized he was running beside it,
staring always at the same horse.  He elbowed through the crowd in
the buvette; then remembering a predilection of Nicole's he
snatched up an edge of a fortuneteller's tent and peered within.  A
droning voice greeted him:  "La septième fille d'une septième fille
née sur les rives du Nil--entrez, Monsieur--"

Dropping the flap he ran along toward where the plaisance
terminated at the lake and a small ferris wheel revolved slowly
against the sky.  There he found her.

She was alone in what was momentarily the top boat of the wheel,
and as it descended he saw that she was laughing hilariously; he
slunk back in the crowd, a crowd which, at the wheel's next
revolution, spotted the intensity of Nicole's hysteria.

"Regardez-moi ça!"

"Regarde donc cette Anglaise!"

Down she dropped again--this time the wheel and its music were
slowing and a dozen people were around her car, all of them
impelled by the quality of her laughter to smile in sympathetic
idiocy.  But when Nicole saw Dick her laughter died--she made a
gesture of slipping by and away from him but he caught her arm and
held it as they walked away.

"Why did you lose control of yourself like that?"

"You know very well why."

"No, I don't."

"That's just preposterous--let me loose--that's an insult to my
intelligence.  Don't you think I saw that girl look at you--that
little dark girl.  Oh, this is farcical--a child, not more than
fifteen.  Don't you think I saw?"

"Stop here a minute and quiet down."

They sat at a table, her eyes in a profundity of suspicion, her
hand moving across her line of sight as if it were obstructed.  "I
want a drink--I want a brandy."

"You can't have brandy--you can have a bock if you want it."

"Why can't I have a brandy?"

"We won't go into that.  Listen to me--this business about a girl
is a delusion, do you understand that word?"

"It's always a delusion when I see what you don't want me to see."

He had a sense of guilt as in one of those nightmares where we are
accused of a crime which we recognize as something undeniably
experienced, but which upon waking we realize we have not
committed.  His eyes wavered from hers.

"I left the children with a gypsy woman in a booth.  We ought to
get them."

"Who do you think you are?" she demanded.  "Svengali?"

Fifteen minutes ago they had been a family.  Now as she was crushed
into a corner by his unwilling shoulder, he saw them all, child and
man, as a perilous accident.

"We're going home."

"Home!" she roared in a voice so abandoned that its louder tones
wavered and cracked.  "And sit and think that we're all rotting and
the children's ashes are rotting in every box I open?  That filth!"

Almost with relief he saw that her words sterilized her, and
Nicole, sensitized down to the corium of the skin, saw the
withdrawal in his face.  Her own face softened and she begged,
"Help me, help me, Dick!"

A wave of agony went over him.  It was awful that such a fine tower
should not be erected, only suspended, suspended from him.  Up to a
point that was right: men were for that, beam and idea, girder and
logarithm; but somehow Dick and Nicole had become one and equal,
not opposite and complementary; she was Dick too, the drought in
the marrow of his bones.  He could not watch her disintegrations
without participating in them.  His intuition rilled out of him as
tenderness and compassion--he could only take the characteristically
modern course, to interpose--he would get a nurse from Zurich, to
take her over to-night.

"You CAN help me."

Her sweet bullying pulled him forward off his feet.  "You've helped
me before--you can help me now."

"I can only help you the same old way."

"Some one can help me."

"Maybe so.  You can help yourself most.  Let's find the children."

There were numerous lottery booths with white wheels--Dick was
startled when he inquired at the first and encountered blank
disavowals.  Evil-eyed, Nicole stood apart, denying the children,
resenting them as part of a downright world she sought to make
amorphous.  Presently Dick found them, surrounded by women who were
examining them with delight like fine goods, and by peasant
children staring.

"Merci, Monsieur, ah Monsieur est trop généreux.  C'était un
plaisir, M'sieur, Madame.  Au revoir, mes petits."

They started back with a hot sorrow streaming down upon them; the
car was weighted with their mutual apprehension and anguish, and
the children's mouths were grave with disappointment.  Grief
presented itself in its terrible, dark unfamiliar color.  Somewhere
around Zug, Nicole, with a convulsive effort, reiterated a remark
she had made before about a misty yellow house set back from the
road that looked like a painting not yet dry, but it was just an
attempt to catch at a rope that was playing out too swiftly.

Dick tried to rest--the struggle would come presently at home and
he might have to sit a long time, restating the universe for her.
A "schizophrêne" is well named as a split personality--Nicole was
alternately a person to whom nothing need be explained and one to
whom nothing COULD be explained.  It was necessary to treat her
with active and affirmative insistence, keeping the road to reality
always open, making the road to escape harder going.  But the
brilliance, the versatility of madness is akin to the resourcefulness
of water seeping through, over and around a dike.  It requires the
united front of many people to work against it.  He felt it
necessary that this time Nicole cure herself; he wanted to wait
until she remembered the other times, and revolted from them. In a
tired way, he planned that they would again resume the régime
relaxed a year before.

He had turned up a hill that made a short cut to the clinic, and
now as he stepped on the accelerator for a short straightaway run
parallel to the hillside the car swerved violently left, swerved
right, tipped on two wheels and, as Dick, with Nicole's voice
screaming in his ear, crushed down the mad hand clutching the
steering wheel, righted itself, swerved once more and shot off the
road; it tore through low underbrush, tipped again and settled
slowly at an angle of ninety degrees against a tree.

The children were screaming and Nicole was screaming and cursing
and trying to tear at Dick's face.  Thinking first of the list of
the car and unable to estimate it Dick bent away Nicole's arm,
climbed over the top side and lifted out the children; then he saw
the car was in a stable position.  Before doing anything else he
stood there shaking and panting.

"You--!" he cried.

She was laughing hilariously, unashamed, unafraid, unconcerned.  No
one coming on the scene would have imagined that she had caused it;
she laughed as after some mild escape of childhood.

"You were scared, weren't you?" she accused him.  "You wanted to
live!"

She spoke with such force that in his shocked state Dick wondered
if he had been frightened for himself--but the strained faces of
the children, looking from parent to parent, made him want to grind
her grinning mask into jelly.

Directly above them, half a kilometer by the winding road but only
a hundred yards climbing, was an inn; one of its wings showed
through the wooded hill.

"Take Topsy's hand," he said to Lanier, "like that, tight, and
climb up that hill--see the little path?  When you get to the inn
tell them 'La voiture Divare est cassée.'  Some one must come right
down."

Lanier, not sure what had happened, but suspecting the dark and
unprecedented, asked:

"What will you do, Dick?"

"We'll stay here with the car."

Neither of them looked at their mother as they started off.  "Be
careful crossing the road up there!  Look both ways!" Dick shouted
after them.

He and Nicole looked at each other directly, their eyes like
blazing windows across a court of the same house.  Then she took
out a compact, looked in its mirror, and smoothed back the temple
hair.  Dick watched the children climbing for a moment until they
disappeared among the pines half way up; then he walked around the
car to see the damage and plan how to get it back on the road.  In
the dirt he could trace the rocking course they had pursued for
over a hundred feet; he was filled with a violent disgust that was
not like anger.

In a few minutes the proprietor of the inn came running down.

"My God!" he exclaimed.  "How did it happen, were you going fast?
What luck!  Except for that tree you'd have rolled down hill!"

Taking advantage of Emile's reality, the wide black apron, the
sweat upon the rolls of his face, Dick signalled to Nicole in a
matter-of-fact way to let him help her from the car; whereupon she
jumped over the lower side, lost her balance on the slope, fell to
her knees and got up again.  As she watched the men trying to move
the car her expression became defiant.  Welcoming even that mood
Dick said:

"Go and wait with the children, Nicole."

Only after she had gone did he remember that she had wanted cognac,
and that there was cognac available up there--he told Emile never
mind about the car; they would wait for the chauffeur and the big
car to pull it up onto the road.  Together they hurried up to the
inn.



XVI


"I want to go away," he told Franz.  "For a month or so, for as
long as I can."

"Why not, Dick?  That was our original arrangement--it was you who
insisted on staying.  If you and Nicole--"

"I don't want to go away with Nicole.  I want to go away alone.
This last thing knocked me sideways--if I get two hours' sleep in
twenty-four, it's one of Zwingli's miracles."

"You wish a real leave of abstinence."

"The word is 'absence.'  Look here: if I go to Berlin to the
Psychiatric Congress could you manage to keep the peace?  For three
months she's been all right and she likes her nurse.  My God,
you're the only human being in this world I can ask this of."

Franz grunted, considering whether or not he could be trusted to
think always of his partner's interest.



In Zurich the next week Dick drove to the airport and took the big
plane for Munich.  Soaring and roaring into the blue he felt numb,
realizing how tired he was.  A vast persuasive quiet stole over
him, and he abandoned sickness to the sick, sound to the motors,
direction to the pilot.  He had no intention of attending so much
as a single session of the congress--he could imagine it well
enough, new pamphlets by Bleuler and the elder Forel that he could
much better digest at home, the paper by the American who cured
dementia præcox by pulling out his patient's teeth or cauterizing
their tonsils, the half-derisive respect with which this idea would
be greeted, for no more reason than that America was such a rich
and powerful country.  The other delegates from America--red-headed
Schwartz with his saint's face and his infinite patience in
straddling two worlds, as well as dozens of commercial alienists
with hang-dog faces, who would be present partly to increase their
standing, and hence their reach for the big plums of the criminal
practice, partly to master novel sophistries that they could weave
into their stock in trade, to the infinite confusion of all values.
There would be cynical Latins, and some man of Freud's from Vienna.
Articulate among them would be the great Jung, bland, super-
vigorous, on his rounds between the forests of anthropology and the
neuroses of school-boys.  At first there would be an American cast
to the congress, almost Rotarian in its forms and ceremonies, then
the closer-knit European vitality would fight through, and finally
the Americans would play their trump card, the announcement of
colossal gifts and endowments, of great new plants and training
schools, and in the presence of the figures the Europeans would
blanch and walk timidly.  But he would not be there to see.

They skirted the Vorarlberg Alps, and Dick felt a pastoral delight
in watching the villages.  There were always four or five in sight,
each one gathered around a church.  It was simple looking at the
earth from far off, simple as playing grim games with dolls and
soldiers.  This was the way statesmen and commanders and all
retired people looked at things.  Anyhow, it was a good draft of
relief.

An Englishman spoke to him from across the aisle but he found
something antipathetic in the English lately.  England was like a
rich man after a disastrous orgy who makes up to the household by
chatting with them individually, when it is obvious to them that he
is only trying to get back his self-respect in order to usurp his
former power.

Dick had with him what magazines were available on the station
quays:  The Century, The Motion Picture, L'lllustration, and the
Fliegende Blätter, but it was more fun to descend in his
imagination into the villages and shake hands with the rural
characters.  He sat in the churches as he sat in his father's
church in Buffalo, amid the starchy must of Sunday clothes.  He
listened to the wisdom of the Near East, was Crucified, Died, and
was Buried in the cheerful church, and once more worried between
five or ten cents for the collection plate, because of the girl who
sat in the pew behind.

The Englishman suddenly borrowed his magazines with a little small
change of conversation, and Dick, glad to see them go, thought of
the voyage ahead of him.  Wolf-like under his sheep's clothing of
long-staple Australian wool, he considered the world of pleasure--
the incorruptible Mediterranean with sweet old dirt caked in the
olive trees, the peasant girl near Savona with a face as green and
rose as the color of an illuminated missal.  He would take her in
his hands and snatch her across the border . . .

. . . but there he deserted her--he must press on toward the Isles
of Greece, the cloudy waters of unfamiliar ports, the lost girl on
shore, the moon of popular songs.  A part of Dick's mind was made
up of the tawdry souvenirs of his boyhood.  Yet in that somewhat
littered Five-and-Ten, he had managed to keep alive the low painful
fire of intelligence.



XVII


Tommy Barban was a ruler, Tommy was a hero--Dick happened upon him
in the Marienplatz in Munich, in one of those cafés, where small
gamblers diced on "tapestry" mats.  The air was full of politics,
and the slap of cards.

Tommy was at a table laughing his martial laugh:  "Um-buh--ha-ha!
Um-buh--ha-ha!"  As a rule, he drank little; courage was his game
and his companions were always a little afraid of him.  Recently an
eighth of the area of his skull had been removed by a Warsaw
surgeon and was knitting under his hair, and the weakest person in
the café could have killed him with a flip of a knotted napkin.

"--this is Prince Chillicheff--"  A battered, powder-gray Russian
of fifty, "--and Mr. McKibben--and Mr. Hannan--" the latter was a
lively ball of black eyes and hair, a clown; and he said
immediately to Dick:

"The first thing before we shake hands--what do you mean by fooling
around with my aunt?"

"Why, I--"

"You heard me.  What are you doing here in Munich anyhow?"

"Um-bah--ha-ha!" laughed Tommy.

"Haven't you got aunts of your own?  Why don't you fool with them?"

Dick laughed, whereupon the man shifted his attack:

"Now let's not have any more talk about aunts.  How do I know you
didn't make up the whole thing?  Here you are a complete stranger
with an acquaintance of less than half an hour, and you come up to
me with a cock-and-bull story about your aunts.  How do I know what
you have concealed about you?"

Tommy laughed again, then he said good-naturedly, but firmly,
"That's enough, Carly.  Sit down, Dick--how're you?  How's Nicole?"

He did not like any man very much nor feel their presence with much
intensity--he was all relaxed for combat; as a fine athlete playing
secondary defense in any sport is really resting much of the time,
while a lesser man only pretends to rest and is at a continual and
self-destroying nervous tension.

Hannan, not entirely suppressed, moved to an adjoining piano, and
with recurring resentment on his face whenever he looked at Dick,
played chords, from time to time muttering, "Your aunts," and, in a
dying cadence, "I didn't say aunts anyhow.  I said pants."

"Well, how're you?" repeated Tommy.  "You don't look so--" he
fought for a word, "--so jaunty as you used to, so spruce, you know
what I mean."

The remark sounded too much like one of those irritating
accusations of waning vitality and Dick was about to retort by
commenting on the extraordinary suits worn by Tommy and Prince
Chillicheff, suits of a cut and pattern fantastic enough to have
sauntered down Beale Street on a Sunday--when an explanation was
forthcoming.

"I see you are regarding our clothes," said the Prince.  "We have
just come out of Russia."

"These were made in Poland by the court tailor," said Tommy.
"That's a fact--Pilsudski's own tailor."

"You've been touring?" Dick asked.

They laughed, the Prince inordinately meanwhile clapping Tommy on
the back.

"Yes, we have been touring.  That's it, touring.  We have made the
grand Tour of all the Russias.  In state."

Dick waited for an explanation.  It came from Mr. McKibben in two
words.

"They escaped."

"Have you been prisoners in Russia?"

"It was I," explained Prince Chillicheff, his dead yellow eyes
staring at Dick.  "Not a prisoner but in hiding."

"Did you have much trouble getting out?"

"Some trouble.  We left three Red Guards dead at the border.  Tommy
left two--"  He held up two fingers like a Frenchman--"I left one."

"That's the part I don't understand," said Mr. McKibben.  "Why they
should have objected to your leaving."

Hannan turned from the piano and said, winking at the others:  "Mac
thinks a Marxian is somebody who went to St. Mark's school."

It was an escape story in the best tradition--an aristocrat hiding
nine years with a former servant and working in a government
bakery; the eighteen-year-old daughter in Paris who knew Tommy
Barban. . . .  During the narrative Dick decided that this parched
papier mâché relic of the past was scarcely worth the lives of
three young men.  The question arose as to whether Tommy and
Chillicheff had been frightened.

"When I was cold," Tommy said.  "I always get scared when I'm cold.
During the war I was always frightened when I was cold."

McKibben stood up.

"I must leave.  To-morrow morning I'm going to Innsbruck by car
with my wife and children--and the governess."

"I'm going there to-morrow, too," said Dick.

"Oh, are you?" exclaimed McKibben.  "Why not come with us?  It's a
big Packard and there's only my wife and my children and myself--
and the governess--"

"I can't possibly--"

"Of course she's not really a governess," McKibben concluded,
looking rather pathetically at Dick.  "As a matter of fact my wife
knows your sister-in-law, Baby Warren."

But Dick was not to be drawn in a blind contract.

"I've promised to travel with two men."

"Oh," McKibben's face fell.  "Well, I'll say good-by."  He
unscrewed two blooded wire-hairs from a nearby table and departed;
Dick pictured the jammed Packard pounding toward Innsbruck with the
McKibbens and their children and their baggage and yapping dogs--
and the governess.

"The paper says they know the man who killed him," said Tommy.
"But his cousins did not want it in the papers, because it happened
in a speakeasy.  What do you think of that?"

"It's what's known as family pride."

Hannan played a loud chord on the piano to attract attention to
himself.

"I don't believe his first stuff holds up," he said.  "Even barring
the Europeans there are a dozen Americans can do what North did."

It was the first indication Dick had had that they were talking
about Abe North.

"The only difference is that Abe did it first," said Tommy.

"I don't agree," persisted Hannan.  "He got the reputation for
being a good musician because he drank so much that his friends had
to explain him away somehow--"

"What's this about Abe North?  What about him?  Is he in a jam?"

"Didn't you read The Herald this morning?"

"No."

"He's dead.  He was beaten to death in a speakeasy in New York.  He
just managed to crawl home to the Racquet Club to die--"

"Abe North?"

"Yes, sure, they--"

"Abe North?"  Dick stood up.  "Are you sure he's dead?"

Hannan turned around to McKibben:  "It wasn't the Racquet Club he
crawled to--it was the Harvard Club.  I'm sure he didn't belong to
the Racquet."

"The paper said so," McKibben insisted.

"It must have been a mistake.  I'm quite sure."

"Beaten to death in a speakeasy."

"But I happen to know most of the members of the Racquet Club,"
said Hannan.  "It MUST have been the Harvard Club."

Dick got up, Tommy too.  Prince Chillicheff started out of a wan
study of nothing, perhaps of his chances of ever getting out of
Russia, a study that had occupied him so long that it was doubtful
if he could give it up immediately, and joined them in leaving.

"Abe North beaten to death."

On the way to the hotel, a journey of which Dick was scarcely
aware, Tommy said:

"We're waiting for a tailor to finish some suits so we can get to
Paris.  I'm going into stock-broking and they wouldn't take me if I
showed up like this.  Everybody in your country is making millions.
Are you really leaving to-morrow?  We can't even have dinner with
you.  It seems the Prince had an old girl in Munich.  He called her
up but she'd been dead five years and we're having dinner with the
two daughters."

The Prince nodded.

"Perhaps I could have arranged for Doctor Diver."

"No, no," said Dick hastily.

He slept deep and awoke to a slow mournful march passing his
window.  It was a long column of men in uniform, wearing the
familiar helmet of 1914, thick men in frock coats and silk hats,
burghers, aristocrats, plain men.  It was a society of veterans
going to lay wreaths on the tombs of the dead.  The column marched
slowly with a sort of swagger for a lost magnificence, a past
effort, a forgotten sorrow.  The faces were only formally sad but
Dick's lungs burst for a moment with regret for Abe's death, and
his own youth of ten years ago.



XVIII


He reached Innsbruck at dusk, sent his bags up to a hotel and
walked into town.  In the sunset the Emperor Maximilian knelt in
prayer above his bronze mourners; a quartet of Jesuit novices paced
and read in the university garden.  The marble souvenirs of old
sieges, marriages, anniversaries, faded quickly when the sun was
down, and he had erbsen-suppe with würstchen cut up in it, drank
four helles of Pilsener and refused a formidable dessert known as
"kaiser-schmarren."

Despite the overhanging mountains Switzerland was far away, Nicole
was far away.  Walking in the garden later when it was quite dark
he thought about her with detachment, loving her for her best self.
He remembered once when the grass was damp and she came to him on
hurried feet, her thin slippers drenched with dew.  She stood upon
his shoes nestling close and held up her face, showing it as a book
open at a page.

"Think how you love me," she whispered.  "I don't ask you to love
me always like this, but I ask you to remember.  Somewhere inside
me there'll always be the person I am to-night."

But Dick had come away for his soul's sake, and he began thinking
about that.  He had lost himself--he could not tell the hour when,
or the day or the week, the month or the year.  Once he had cut
through things, solving the most complicated equations as the
simplest problems of his simplest patients.  Between the time he
found Nicole flowering under a stone on the Zurichsee and the
moment of his meeting with Rosemary the spear had been blunted.

Watching his father's struggles in poor parishes had wedded a
desire for money to an essentially unacquisitive nature.  It was
not a healthy necessity for security--he had never felt more sure
of himself, more thoroughly his own man, than at the time of his
marriage to Nicole.  Yet he had been swallowed up like a gigolo,
and somehow permitted his arsenal to be locked up in the Warren
safety-deposit vaults.

"There should have been a settlement in the Continental style; but
it isn't over yet.  I've wasted eight years teaching the rich the
ABC's of human decency, but I'm not done.  I've got too many
unplayed trumps in my hand."

He loitered among the fallow rose bushes and the beds of damp sweet
indistinguishable fern.  It was warm for October but cool enough to
wear a heavy tweed coat buttoned by a little elastic tape at the
neck.  A figure detached itself from the black shape of a tree and
he knew it was the woman whom he had passed in the lobby coming
out.  He was in love with every pretty woman he saw now, their
forms at a distance, their shadows on a wall.

Her back was toward him as she faced the lights of the town.  He
scratched a match that she must have heard, but she remained
motionless.

--Was it an invitation?  Or an indication of obliviousness?  He had
long been outside of the world of simple desires and their
fulfillments, and he was inept and uncertain.  For all he knew
there might be some code among the wanderers of obscure spas by
which they found each other quickly.

--Perhaps the next gesture was his.  Strange children should smile
at each other and say, "Let's play."

He moved closer, the shadow moved sideways.  Possibly he would be
snubbed like the scapegrace drummers he had heard of in youth.  His
heart beat loud in contact with the unprobed, undissected,
unanalyzed, unaccounted for.  Suddenly he turned away, and, as he
did, the girl, too, broke the black frieze she made with the
foliage, rounded a bench at a moderate but determined pace and took
the path back to the hotel.

With a guide and two other men, Dick started up the Birkkarspitze
next morning.  It was a fine feeling once they were above the
cowbells of the highest pastures--Dick looked forward to the night
in the shack, enjoying his own fatigue, enjoying the captaincy of
the guide, feeling a delight in his own anonymity.  But at mid-day
the weather changed to black sleet and hail and mountain thunder.
Dick and one of the other climbers wanted to go on but the guide
refused.  Regretfully they struggled back to Innsbruck to start
again to-morrow.

After dinner and a bottle of heavy local wine in the deserted
dining-room, he felt excited, without knowing why, until he began
thinking of the garden.  He had passed the girl in the lobby before
supper and this time she had looked at him and approved of him, but
it kept worrying him:  Why?  When I could have had a good share of
the pretty women of my time for the asking, why start that now?
With a wraith, with a fragment of my desire?  Why?

His imagination pushed ahead--the old asceticism, the actual
unfamiliarity, triumphed:  God, I might as well go back to the
Riviera and sleep with Janice Caricamento or the Wilburhazy girl.
To belittle all these years with something cheap and easy?

He was still excited, though, and he turned from the veranda and
went up to his room to think.  Being alone in body and spirit
begets loneliness, and loneliness begets more loneliness.

Upstairs he walked around thinking of the matter and laying out his
climbing clothes advantageously on the faint heater; he again
encountered Nicole's telegram, still unopened, with which diurnally
she accompanied his itinerary.  He had delayed opening it before
supper--perhaps because of the garden.  It was a cablegram from
Buffalo, forwarded through Zurich.


"Your father died peacefully tonight.  HOLMES."


He felt a sharp wince at the shock, a gathering of the forces of
resistance; then it rolled up through his loins and stomach and
throat.

He read the message again.  He sat down on the bed, breathing and
staring; thinking first the old selfish child's thought that comes
with the death of a parent, how will it affect me now that this
earliest and strongest of protections is gone?

The atavism passed and he walked the room still, stopping from time
to time to look at the telegram.  Holmes was formally his father's
curate but actually, and for a decade, rector of the church.  How
did he die?  Of old age--he was seventy-five.  He had lived a long
time.

Dick felt sad that he had died alone--he had survived his wife, and
his brothers and sisters; there were cousins in Virginia but they
were poor and not able to come North, and Holmes had had to sign
the telegram.  Dick loved his father--again and again he referred
judgments to what his father would probably have thought or done.
Dick was born several months after the death of two young sisters
and his father, guessing what would be the effect on Dick's mother,
had saved him from a spoiling by becoming his moral guide.  He was
of tired stock yet he raised himself to that effort.

In the summer father and son walked downtown together to have their
shoes shined--Dick in his starched duck sailor suit, his father
always in beautifully cut clerical clothes--and the father was very
proud of his handsome little boy.  He told Dick all he knew about
life, not much but most of it true, simple things, matters of
behavior that came within his clergyman's range.  "Once in a
strange town when I was first ordained, I went into a crowded room
and was confused as to who was my hostess.  Several people I knew
came toward me, but I disregarded them because I had seen a gray-
haired woman sitting by a window far across the room.  I went over
to her and introduced myself.  After that I made many friends in
that town."

His father had done that from a good heart--his father had been
sure of what he was, with a deep pride of the two proud widows who
had raised him to believe that nothing could be superior to "good
instincts," honor, courtesy, and courage.

The father always considered that his wife's small fortune belonged
to his son, and in college and in medical school sent him a check
for all of it four times a year.  He was one of those about whom it
was said with smug finality in the gilded age: "very much the
gentleman, but not much get-up-and-go about him."

. . . Dick sent down for a newspaper.  Still pacing to and from the
telegram open on his bureau, he chose a ship to go to America.
Then he put in a call for Nicole in Zurich, remembering so many
things as he waited, and wishing he had always been as good as he
had intended to be.



XIX


For an hour, tied up with his profound reaction to his father's
death, the magnificent façade of the homeland, the harbor of New
York, seemed all sad and glorious to Dick, but once ashore the
feeling vanished, nor did he find it again in the streets or the
hotels or the trains that bore him first to Buffalo, and then south
to Virginia with his father's body.  Only as the local train
shambled into the low-forested clayland of Westmoreland County, did
he feel once more identified with his surroundings; at the station
he saw a star he knew, and a cold moon bright over Chesapeake Bay;
he heard the rasping wheels of buckboards turning, the lovely
fatuous voices, the sound of sluggish primeval rivers flowing
softly under soft Indian names.

Next day at the churchyard his father was laid among a hundred
Divers, Dorseys, and Hunters.  It was very friendly leaving him
there with all his relations around him.  Flowers were scattered on
the brown unsettled earth.  Dick had no more ties here now and did
not believe he would come back.  He knelt on the hard soil.  These
dead, he knew them all, their weather-beaten faces with blue
flashing eyes, the spare violent bodies, the souls made of new
earth in the forest-heavy darkness of the seventeenth century.

"Good-by, my father--good-by, all my fathers."



On the long-roofed steamship piers one is in a country that is no
longer here and not yet there.  The hazy yellow vault is full of
echoing shouts.  There are the rumble of trucks and the clump of
trunks, the strident chatter of cranes, the first salt smell of the
sea.  One hurries through, even though there's time; the past, the
continent, is behind; the future is the glowing mouth in the side
of the ship; the dim, turbulent alley is too confusedly the
present.

Up the gangplank and the vision of the world adjusts itself,
narrows.  One is a citizen of a commonwealth smaller than Andorra,
no longer sure of anything.  The men at the purser's desk are as
oddly shaped as the cabins; disdainful are the eyes of voyagers and
their friends.  Next the loud mournful whistles, the portentous
vibration and the boat, the human idea--is in motion.  The pier
and its faces slide by and for a moment the boat is a piece
accidentally split off from them; the faces become remote,
voiceless, the pier is one of many blurs along the water front.
The harbor flows swiftly toward the sea.

With it flowed Albert McKisco, labelled by the newspapers as its
most precious cargo.  McKisco was having a vogue.  His novels were
pastiches of the work of the best people of his time, a feat not to
be disparaged, and in addition he possessed a gift for softening
and debasing what he borrowed, so that many readers were charmed by
the ease with which they could follow him.  Success had improved
him and humbled him.  He was no fool about his capacities--he
realized that he possessed more vitality than many men of superior
talent, and he was resolved to enjoy the success he had earned.
"I've done nothing yet," he would say.  "I don't think I've got any
real genius.  But if I keep trying I may write a good book."  Fine
dives have been made from flimsier spring-boards.  The innumerable
snubs of the past were forgotten.  Indeed, his success was founded
psychologically upon his duel with Tommy Barban, upon the basis of
which, as it withered in his memory, he had created, afresh, a new
self-respect.

Spotting Dick Diver the second day out, he eyed him tentatively,
then introduced himself in a friendly way and sat down.  Dick laid
aside his reading and, after the few minutes that it took to
realize the change in McKisco, the disappearance of the man's
annoying sense of inferiority, found himself pleased to talk to
him.  McKisco was "well-informed" on a range of subjects wider than
Goethe's--it was interesting to listen to the innumerable facile
combinations that he referred to as his opinions.  They struck up
an acquaintance, and Dick had several meals with them.  The
McKiscos had been invited to sit at the captain's table but with
nascent snobbery they told Dick that they "couldn't stand that
bunch."

Violet was very grand now, decked out by the grand couturières,
charmed about the little discoveries that well-bred girls make in
their teens.  She could, indeed, have learned them from her mother
in Boise but her soul was born dismally in the small movie houses
of Idaho, and she had had no time for her mother.  Now she
"belonged"--together with several million other people--and she was
happy, though her husband still shushed her when she grew violently
naïve.

The McKiscos got off at Gibraltar.  Next evening in Naples Dick
picked up a lost and miserable family of two girls and their mother
in the bus from the hotel to the station.  He had seen them on the
ship.  An overwhelming desire to help, or to be admired, came over
him: he showed them fragments of gaiety; tentatively he bought them
wine, with pleasure saw them begin to regain their proper egotism.
He pretended they were this and that, and falling in with his own
plot, and drinking too much to sustain the illusion, and all this
time the women, thought only that this was a windfall from heaven.
He withdrew from them as the night waned and the train rocked and
snorted at Cassino and Frosinone.  After weird American partings in
the station at Rome, Dick went to the Hotel Quirinal, somewhat
exhausted.

At the desk he suddenly stared and upped his head.  As if a drink
were acting on him, warming the lining of his stomach, throwing a
flush up into his brain, he saw the person he had come to see, the
person for whom he had made the Mediterranean crossing.

Simultaneously Rosemary saw him, acknowledging him before placing
him; she looked back startled, and, leaving the girl she was with,
she hurried over.  Holding himself erect, holding his breath, Dick
turned to her.  As she came across the lobby, her beauty all
groomed, like a young horse dosed with Black-seed oil, and hoops
varnished, shocked him awake; but it all came too quick for him to
do anything except conceal his fatigue as best he could.  To meet
her starry-eyed confidence he mustered an insincere pantomime
implying, "You WOULD turn up here--of all the people in the world."

Her gloved hands closed over his on the desk; "Dick--we're making
The Grandeur that was Rome--at least we think we are; we may quit
any day."

He looked at her hard, trying to make her a little self-conscious,
so that she would observe less closely his unshaven face, his
crumpled and slept-in collar.  Fortunately, she was in a hurry.

"We begin early because the mists rise at eleven--phone me at two."

In his room Dick collected his faculties.  He left a call for noon,
stripped off his clothes and dove literally into a heavy sleep.

He slept over the phone call but awoke at two, refreshed.
Unpacking his bag, he sent out suits and laundry.  He shaved, lay
for half an hour in a warm bath and had breakfast.  The sun had
dipped into the Via Nazionale and he let it through the portières
with a jingling of old brass rings.  Waiting for a suit to be
pressed, he discovered from the Corriere della Sera that "una
novella di Sinclair Lewis 'Wall Street' nella quale autore analizza
la vita sociale di una piccola citta Americana."  Then he tried to
think about Rosemary.

At first he thought nothing.  She was young and magnetic, but so
was Topsy.  He guessed that she had had lovers and had loved them
in the last four years.  Well, you never knew exactly how much
space you occupied in people's lives.  Yet from this fog his
affection emerged--the best contacts are when one knows the
obstacles and still wants to preserve a relation.  The past drifted
back and he wanted to hold her eloquent giving-of-herself in its
precious shell, till he enclosed it, till it no longer existed
outside him.  He tried to collect all that might attract her--it
was less than it had been four years ago.  Eighteen might look at
thirty-four through a rising mist of adolescence; but twenty-two
would see thirty-eight with discerning clarity.  Moreover, Dick had
been at an emotional peak at the time of the previous encounter;
since then there had been a lesion of enthusiasm.

When the valet returned he put on a white shirt and collar and a
black tie with a pearl; the cords of his reading-glasses passed
through another pearl of the same size that swung a casual inch
below.  After sleep, his face had resumed the ruddy brown of many
Riviera summers, and to limber himself up he stood on his hands on
a chair until his fountain pen and coins fell out.  At three he
called Rosemary and was bidden to come up.  Momentarily dizzy from
his acrobatics, he stopped in the bar for a gin-and-tonic.

"Hi, Doctor Diver!"

Only because of Rosemary's presence in the hotel did Dick place the
man immediately as Collis Clay.  He had his old confidence and an
air of prosperity and big sudden jowls.

"Do you know Rosemary's here?" Collis asked.

"I ran into her."

"I was in Florence and I heard she was here so I came down last
week.  You'd never know Mama's little girl."  He modified the
remark, "I mean she was so carefully brought up and now she's a
woman of the world--if you know what I mean.  Believe me, has she
got some of these Roman boys tied up in bags!  And how!"

"You studying in Florence?"

"Me?  Sure, I'm studying architecture there.  I go back Sunday--I'm
staying for the races."

With difficulty Dick restrained him from adding the drink to the
account he carried in the bar, like a stock-market report.



XX


When Dick got out of the elevator he followed a tortuous corridor
and turned at length toward a distant voice outside a lighted door.
Rosemary was in black pajamas; a luncheon table was still in the
room; she was having coffee.

"You're still beautiful," he said.  "A little more beautiful than
ever."

"Do you want coffee, youngster?"

"I'm sorry I was so unpresentable this morning."

"You didn't look well--you all right now?  Want coffee?"

"No, thanks."

"You're fine again, I was scared this morning.  Mother's coming
over next month, if the company stays.  She always asks me if I've
seen you over here, as if she thought we were living next door.
Mother always liked you--she always felt you were some one I ought
to know."

"Well, I'm glad she still thinks of me."

"Oh, she does," Rosemary reassured him.  "A very great deal."

"I've seen you here and there in pictures," said Dick.  "Once I had
Daddy's Girl run off just for myself!"

"I have a good part in this one if it isn't cut."

She crossed behind him, touching his shoulder as she passed.  She
phoned for the table to be taken away and settled in a big chair.

"I was just a little girl when I met you, Dick.  Now I'm a woman."

"I want to hear everything about you."

"How is Nicole--and Lanier and Topsy?"

"They're fine.  They often speak of you--"

The phone rang.  While she answered it Dick examined two novels--
one by Edna Ferber, one by Albert McKisco.  The waiter came for the
table; bereft of its presence Rosemary seemed more alone in her
black pajamas.

". . . I have a caller. . . .  No, not very well.  I've got to go
to the costumer's for a long fitting. . . .  No, not now . . ."

As though with the disappearance of the table she felt released,
Rosemary smiled at Dick--that smile as if they two together had
managed to get rid of all the trouble in the world and were now at
peace in their own heaven . . .

"That's done," she said.  "Do you realize I've spent the last hour
getting ready for you?"

But again the phone called her.  Dick got up to change his hat from
the bed to the luggage stand, and in alarm Rosemary put her hand
over the mouthpiece of the phone.  "You're not going!"

"No."

When the communication was over he tried to drag the afternoon
together saying:  "I expect some nourishment from people now."

"Me too," Rosemary agreed.  "The man that just phoned me once knew
a second cousin of mine.  Imagine calling anybody up for a reason
like that!"

Now she lowered the lights for love.  Why else should she want to
shut off his view of her?  He sent his words to her like letters,
as though they left him some time before they reached her.

"Hard to sit here and be close to you, and not kiss you."  Then
they kissed passionately in the centre of the floor.  She pressed
against him, and went back to her chair.

It could not go on being merely pleasant in the room.  Forward or
backward; when the phone rang once more he strolled into the
bedchamber and lay down on her bed, opening Albert McKisco's novel.
Presently Rosemary came in and sat beside him.

"You have the longest eyelashes," she remarked.

"We are now back at the Junior Prom.  Among those present are Miss
Rosemary Hoyt, the eyelash fancier--"

She kissed him and he pulled her down so that they lay side by
side, and then they kissed till they were both breathless.  Her
breathing was young and eager and exciting.  Her lips were faintly
chapped but soft in the corners.

When they were still limbs and feet and clothes, struggles of his
arms and back, and her throat and breasts, she whispered, "No, not
now--those things are rhythmic."

Disciplined he crushed his passion into a corner of his mind, but
bearing up her fragility on his arms until she was poised half a
foot above him, he said lightly:

"Darling--that doesn't matter."

Her face had changed with his looking up at it; there was the
eternal moonlight in it.

"That would be poetic justice if it should be you," she said.  She
twisted away from him, walked to the mirror, and boxed her
disarranged hair with her hands.  Presently she drew a chair close
to the bed and stroked his cheek.

"Tell me the truth about you," he demanded.

"I always have."

"In a way--but nothing hangs together."

They both laughed but he pursued.

"Are you actually a virgin?"

"No-o-o!" she sang.  "I've slept with six hundred and forty men--if
that's the answer you want."

"It's none of my business."

"Do you want me for a case in psychology?"

"Looking at you as a perfectly normal girl of twenty-two, living in
the year nineteen twenty-eight, I guess you've taken a few shots at
love."

"It's all been--abortive," she said.

Dick couldn't believe her.  He could not decide whether she was
deliberately building a barrier between them or whether this was
intended to make an eventual surrender more significant.

"Let's go walk in the Pincio," he suggested.

He shook himself straight in his clothes and smoothed his hair.  A
moment had come and somehow passed.  For three years Dick had been
the ideal by which Rosemary measured other men and inevitably his
stature had increased to heroic size.  She did not want him to be
like other men, yet here were the same exigent demands, as if he
wanted to take some of herself away, carry it off in his pocket.

Walking on the greensward between cherubs and philosophers, fauns
and falling water, she took his arm snugly, settling into it with a
series of little readjustments, as if she wanted it to be right
because it was going to be there forever.  She plucked a twig and
broke it, but she found no spring in it.  Suddenly seeing what she
wanted in Dick's face she took his gloved hand and kissed it.  Then
she cavorted childishly for him until he smiled and she laughed and
they began having a good time.

"I can't go out with you to-night, darling, because I promised some
people a long time ago.  But if you'll get up early I'll take you
out to the set to-morrow."

He dined alone at the hotel, went to bed early, and met Rosemary in
the lobby at half-past six.  Beside him in the car she glowed away
fresh and new in the morning sunshine.  They went out through the
Porta San Sebastiano and along the Appian Way until they came to
the huge set of the forum, larger than the forum itself.  Rosemary
turned him over to a man who led him about the great props; the
arches and tiers of seats and the sanded arena.  She was working on
a stage which represented a guard-room for Christian prisoners, and
presently they went there and watched Nicotera, one of many hopeful
Valentinos, strut and pose before a dozen female "captives," their
eyes melancholy and startling with mascara.

Rosemary appeared in a knee-length tunic.

"Watch this," she whispered to Dick.  "I want your opinion.
Everybody that's seen the rushes says--"

"What are the rushes?"

"When they run off what they took the day before.  They say it's
the first thing I've had sex appeal in."

"I don't notice it."

"You wouldn't!  But I have."

Nicotera in his leopard skin talked attentively to Rosemary while
the electrician discussed something with the director, meanwhile
leaning on him.  Finally the director pushed his hand off roughly
and wiped a sweating forehead, and Dick's guide remarked:  "He's on
the hop again, and how!"

"Who?" asked Dick, but before the man could answer the director
walked swiftly over to them.

"Who's on the hop--you're on the hop yourself."  He spoke
vehemently to Dick, as if to a jury.  "When he's on the hop he
always thinks everybody else is, and how!"  He glared at the guide
a moment longer, then he clapped his hands:  "All right--everybody
on the set."

It was like visiting a great turbulent family.  An actress
approached Dick and talked to him for five minutes under the
impression that he was an actor recently arrived from London.
Discovering her mistake she scuttled away in panic.  The majority
of the company felt either sharply superior or sharply inferior to
the world outside, but the former feeling prevailed.  They were
people of bravery and industry; they were risen to a position of
prominence in a nation that for a decade had wanted only to be
entertained.

The session ended as the light grew misty--a fine light for
painters, but, for the camera, not to be compared with the clear
California air.  Nicotera followed Rosemary to the car and
whispered something to her--she looked at him without smiling as
she said good-by.

Dick and Rosemary had luncheon at the Castelli dei Cæsari, a
splendid restaurant in a high-terraced villa overlooking the ruined
forum of an undetermined period of the decadence.  Rosemary took a
cocktail and a little wine, and Dick took enough so that his
feeling of dissatisfaction left him.  Afterward they drove back to
the hotel, all flushed and happy, in a sort of exalted quiet.  She
wanted to be taken and she was, and what had begun with a childish
infatuation on a beach was accomplished at last.



XXI


Rosemary had another dinner date, a birthday party for a member of
the company.  Dick ran into Collis Clay in the lobby, but he wanted
to dine alone, and pretended an engagement at the Excelsior.  He
drank a cocktail with Collis and his vague dissatisfaction
crystallized as impatience--he no longer had an excuse for playing
truant to the clinic.  This was less an infatuation than a romantic
memory.  Nicole was his girl--too often he was sick at heart about
her, yet she was his girl.  Time with Rosemary was self-indulgence--
time with Collis was nothing plus nothing.

In the doorway of the Excelsior he ran into Baby Warren.  Her large
beautiful eyes, looking precisely like marbles, stared at him with
surprise and curiosity.  "I thought you were in America, Dick!  Is
Nicole with you?"

"I came back by way of Naples."

The black band on his arm reminded her to say:  "I'm so sorry to
hear of your trouble."

Inevitably they dined together.

"Tell me about everything," she demanded.

Dick gave her a version of the facts, and Baby frowned.  She found
it necessary to blame some one for the catastrophe in her sister's
life.

"Do you think Doctor Dohmler took the right course with her from
the first?"

"There's not much variety in treatment any more--of course you try
to find the right personality to handle a particular case."

"Dick, I don't pretend to advise you or to know much about it but
don't you think a change might be good for her--to get out of that
atmosphere of sickness and live in the world like other people?"

"But you were keen for the clinic," he reminded her.  "You told me
you'd never feel really safe about her--"

"That was when you were leading that hermit's life on the Riviera,
up on a hill way off from anybody.  I didn't mean to go back to
that life.  I meant, for instance, London.  The English are the
best-balanced race in the world."

"They are not," he disagreed.

"They are.  I know them, you see.  I meant it might be nice for you
to take a house in London for the spring season--I know a dove of a
house in Talbot Square you could get, furnished.  I mean, living
with sane, well-balanced English people."

She would have gone on to tell him all the old propaganda stories
of 1914 if he had not laughed and said:

"I've been reading a book by Michael Arlen and if that's--"

She ruined Michael Arlen with a wave of her salad spoon.

"He only writes about degenerates.  I mean the worthwhile English."

As she thus dismissed her friends they were replaced in Dick's mind
only by a picture of the alien, unresponsive faces that peopled the
small hotels of Europe.

"Of course it's none of my business," Baby repeated, as a
preliminary to a further plunge, "but to leave her alone in an
atmosphere like that--"

"I went to America because my father died."

"I understand that, I told you how sorry I was."  She fiddled with
the glass grapes on her necklace.  "But there's so MUCH money now.
Plenty for everything, and it ought to be used to get Nicole well."

"For one thing I can't see myself in London."

"Why not?  I should think you could work there as well as anywhere
else."

He sat back and looked at her.  If she had ever suspected the
rotted old truth, the real reason for Nicole's illness, she had
certainly determined to deny it to herself, shoving it back in a
dusty closet like one of the paintings she bought by mistake.

They continued the conversation in the Ulpia, where Collis Clay
came over to their table and sat down, and a gifted guitar player
thrummed and rumbled "Suona Fanfara Mia" in the cellar piled with
wine casks.

"It's possible that I was the wrong person for Nicole," Dick said.
"Still she would probably have married some one of my type, some
one she thought she could rely on--indefinitely."

"You think she'd be happier with somebody else?" Baby thought aloud
suddenly.  "Of course it could be arranged."

Only as she saw Dick bend forward with helpless laughter did she
realize the preposterousness of her remark.

"Oh, you understand," she assured him.  "Don't think for a moment
that we're not grateful for all you've done.  And we know you've
had a hard time--"

"For God's sake," he protested.  "If I didn't love Nicole it might
be different."

"But you do love Nicole?" she demanded in alarm.

Collis was catching up with the conversation now and Dick switched
it quickly:  "Suppose we talk about something else--about you, for
instance.  Why don't you get married?  We heard you were engaged to
Lord Paley, the cousin of the--"

"Oh, no."  She became coy and elusive.  "That was last year."

"Why don't you marry?" Dick insisted stubbornly.

"I don't know.  One of the men I loved was killed in the war, and
the other one threw me over."

"Tell me about it.  Tell me about your private life, Baby, and your
opinions.  You never do--we always talk about Nicole."

"Both of them were Englishmen.  I don't think there's any higher
type in the world than a first-rate Englishman, do you?  If there
is I haven't met him.  This man--oh, it's a long story.  I hate
long stories, don't you?"

"And how!" said Collis.

"Why, no--I like them if they're good."

"That's something you do so well, Dick.  You can keep a party
moving by just a little sentence or a saying here and there.  I
think that's a wonderful talent."

"It's a trick," he said gently.  That made three of her opinions he
disagreed with.

"Of course I like formality--I like things to be just so, and on
the grand scale.  I know you probably don't but you must admit it's
a sign of solidity in me."

Dick did not even bother to dissent from this.

"Of course I know people say, Baby Warren is racing around over
Europe, chasing one novelty after another, and missing the best
things in life, but I think on the contrary that I'm one of the few
people who really go after the best things.  I've known the most
interesting people of my time."  Her voice blurred with the tinny
drumming of another guitar number, but she called over it, "I've
made very few big mistakes--"

"--Only the very big ones, Baby."

She had caught something facetious in his eye and she changed the
subject.  It seemed impossible for them to hold anything in common.
But he admired something in her, and he deposited her at the
Excelsior with a series of compliments that left her shimmering.



Rosemary insisted on treating Dick to lunch next day.  They went to
a little trattoria kept by an Italian who had worked in America,
and ate ham and eggs and waffles.  Afterward, they went to the
hotel.  Dick's discovery that he was not in love with her, nor she
with him, had added to rather than diminished his passion for her.
Now that he knew he would not enter further into her life, she
became the strange woman for him.  He supposed many men meant no
more than that when they said they were in love--not a wild
submergence of soul, a dipping of all colors into an obscuring dye,
such as his love for Nicole had been.  Certain thoughts about
Nicole, that she should die, sink into mental darkness, love
another man, made him physically sick.

Nicotera was in Rosemary's sitting-room, chattering about a
professional matter.  When Rosemary gave him his cue to go, he left
with humorous protests and a rather insolent wink at Dick.  As
usual the phone clamored and Rosemary was engaged at it for ten
minutes, to Dick's increasing impatience.

"Let's go up to my room," he suggested, and she agreed.

She lay across his knees on a big sofa; he ran his fingers through
the lovely forelocks of her hair.

"Let me be curious about you again?" he asked.

"What do you want to know?"

"About men.  I'm curious, not to say prurient."

"You mean how long after I met you?"

"Or before."

"Oh, no."  She was shocked.  "There was nothing before.  You were
the first man I cared about.  You're still the only man I really
care about."  She considered.  "It was about a year, I think."

"Who was it?"

"Oh, a man."

He closed in on her evasion.

"I'll bet I can tell you about it: the first affair was
unsatisfactory and after that there was a long gap.  The second was
better, but you hadn't been in love with the man in the first
place.  The third was all right--"

Torturing himself he ran on.  "Then you had one real affair that
fell of its own weight, and by that time you were getting afraid
that you wouldn't have anything to give to the man you finally
loved."  He felt increasingly Victorian.  "Afterwards there were
half a dozen just episodic affairs, right up to the present.  Is
that close?"

She laughed between amusement and tears.

"It's about as wrong as it could be," she said, to Dick's relief.
"But some day I'm going to find somebody and love him and love him
and never let him go."

Now his phone rang and Dick recognized Nicotera's voice, asking for
Rosemary.  He put his palm over the transmitter.

"Do you want to talk to him?"

She went to the phone and jabbered in a rapid Italian Dick could
not understand.

"This telephoning takes time," he said.  "It's after four and I
have an engagement at five.  You better go play with Signor
Nicotera."

"Don't be silly."

"Then I think that while I'm here you ought to count him out."

"It's difficult."  She was suddenly crying.  "Dick, I do love you,
never anybody like you.  But what have you got for me?"

"What has Nicotera got for anybody?"

"That's different."

--Because youth called to youth.

"He's a spic!" he said.  He was frantic with jealousy, he didn't
want to be hurt again.

"He's only a baby," she said, sniffling.  "You know I'm yours
first."

In reaction he put his arms about her but she relaxed wearily
backward; he held her like that for a moment as in the end of an
adagio, her eyes closed, her hair falling straight back like that
of a girl drowned.

"Dick, let me go.  I never felt so mixed up in my life."

He was a gruff red bird and instinctively she drew away from him as
his unjustified jealousy began to snow over the qualities of
consideration and understanding with which she felt at home.

"I want to know the truth," he said.

"Yes, then.  We're a lot together, he wants to marry me, but I
don't want to.  What of it?  What do you expect me to do?  You
never asked me to marry you.  Do you want me to play around forever
with half-wits like Collis Clay?"

"You were with Nicotera last night?"

"That's none of your business," she sobbed.  "Excuse me, Dick, it
is your business.  You and Mother are the only two people in the
world I care about."

"How about Nicotera?"

"How do I know?"

She had achieved the elusiveness that gives hidden significance to
the least significant remarks.

"Is it like you felt toward me in Paris?"

"I feel comfortable and happy when I'm with you.  In Paris it was
different.  But you never know how you once felt.  Do you?"

He got up and began collecting his evening clothes--if he had to
bring all the bitterness and hatred of the world into his heart, he
was not going to be in love with her again.

"I don't care about Nicotera!" she declared.  "But I've got to go
to Livorno with the company to-morrow.  Oh, why did this have to
happen?"  There was a new flood of tears.  "It's such a shame.  Why
did you come here?  Why couldn't we just have the memory anyhow?  I
feel as if I'd quarrelled with Mother."

As he began to dress, she got up and went to the door.

"I won't go to the party to-night."  It was her last effort.  "I'll
stay with you.  I don't want to go anyhow."

The tide began to flow again, but he retreated from it.

"I'll be in my room," she said.  "Good-by, Dick."

"Good-by."

"Oh, such a shame, such a shame.  Oh, such a shame.  What's it all
about anyhow?"

"I've wondered for a long time."

"But why bring it to me?"

"I guess I'm the Black Death," he said slowly.  "I don't seem to
bring people happiness any more."



XXII


There were five people in the Quirinal bar after dinner, a high-
class Italian frail who sat on a stool making persistent
conversation against the bartender's bored:  "Si . . . Si . . .
Si," a light, snobbish Egyptian who was lonely but chary of the
woman, and the two Americans.

Dick was always vividly conscious of his surroundings, while Collis
Clay lived vaguely, the sharpest impressions dissolving upon a
recording apparatus that had early atrophied, so the former talked
and the latter listened, like a man sitting in a breeze.

Dick, worn away by the events of the afternoon, was taking it out
on the inhabitants of Italy.  He looked around the bar as if he
hoped an Italian had heard him and would resent his words.

"This afternoon I had tea with my sister-in-law at the Excelsior.
We got the last table and two men came up and looked around for a
table and couldn't find one.  So one of them came up to us and
said, 'Isn't this table reserved for the Princess Orsini?' and I
said:  'There was no sign on it,' and he said:  'But I think it's
reserved for the Princess Orsini.'  I couldn't even answer him."

"What'd he do?"

"He retired."  Dick switched around in his chair.  "I don't like
these people.  The other day I left Rosemary for two minutes in
front of a store and an officer started walking up and down in
front of her, tipping his hat."

"I don't know," said Collis after a moment.  "I'd rather be here
than up in Paris with somebody picking your pocket every minute."

He had been enjoying himself, and he held out against anything that
threatened to dull his pleasure.

"I don't know," he persisted.  "I don't mind it here."

Dick evoked the picture that the few days had imprinted on his
mind, and stared at it.  The walk toward the American Express past
the odorous confectioneries of the Via Nationale, through the foul
tunnel up to the Spanish Steps, where his spirit soared before the
flower stalls and the house where Keats had died.  He cared only
about people; he was scarcely conscious of places except for their
weather, until they had been invested with color by tangible
events.  Rome was the end of his dream of Rosemary.

A bell-boy came in and gave him a note.

"I did not go to the party," it said.  "I am in my room.  We leave
for Livorno early in the morning."

Dick handed the note and a tip to the boy.

"Tell Miss Hoyt you couldn't find me."  Turning to Collis he
suggested the Bonbonieri.

They inspected the tart at the bar, granting her the minimum of
interest exacted by her profession, and she stared back with bright
boldness; they went through the deserted lobby oppressed by
draperies holding Victorian dust in stuffy folds, and they nodded
at the night concierge who returned the gesture with the bitter
servility peculiar to night servants.  Then in a taxi they rode
along cheerless streets through a dank November night.  There were
no women in the streets, only pale men with dark coats buttoned to
the neck, who stood in groups beside shoulders of cold stone.

"My God!" Dick sighed.

"What's a matter?"

"I was thinking of that man this afternoon:  'This table is
reserved for the Princess Orsini.'  Do you know what these old
Roman families are?  They're bandits, they're the ones who got
possession of the temples and palaces after Rome went to pieces and
preyed on the people."

"I like Rome," insisted Collis.  "Why won't you try the races?"

"I don't like races."

"But all the women turn out--"

"I know I wouldn't like anything here.  I like France, where
everybody thinks he's Napoleon--down here everybody thinks he's
Christ."

At the Bonbonieri they descended to a panelled cabaret, hopelessly
impermanent amid the cold stone.  A listless band played a tango
and a dozen couples covered the wide floor with those elaborate and
dainty steps so offensive to the American eye.  A surplus of
waiters precluded the stir and bustle that even a few busy men can
create; over the scene as its form of animation brooded an air of
waiting for something, for the dance, the night, the balance of
forces which kept it stable, to cease.  It assured the impressionable
guest that whatever he was seeking he would not find it here.

This was plain as plain to Dick.  He looked around, hoping his eye
would catch on something, so that spirit instead of imagination
could carry on for an hour.  But there was nothing and after a
moment he turned back to Collis.  He had told Collis some of his
current notions, and he was bored with his audience's short memory
and lack of response.  After half an hour of Collis he felt a
distinct lesion of his own vitality.

They drank a bottle of Italian mousseaux, and Dick became pale and
somewhat noisy.  He called the orchestra leader over to their
table; this was a Bahama Negro, conceited and unpleasant, and in a
few minutes there was a row.

"You asked me to sit down."

"All right.  And I gave you fifty lire, didn't I?"

"All right.  All right.  All right."

"All right, I gave you fifty lire, didn't I?  Then you come up and
asked me to put some more in the horn!"

"You asked me to sit down, didn't you?  Didn't you?"

"I asked you to sit down but I gave you fifty lire, didn't I?"

"All right.  All right."

The Negro got up sourly and went away, leaving Dick in a still more
evil humor.  But he saw a girl smiling at him from across the room
and immediately the pale Roman shapes around him receded into
decent, humble perspective.  She was a young English girl, with
blonde hair and a healthy, pretty English face and she smiled at
him again with an invitation he understood, that denied the flesh
even in the act of tendering it.

"There's a quick trick or else I don't know bridge," said Collis.

Dick got up and walked to her across the room.

"Won't you dance?"

The middle-aged Englishman with whom she was sitting said, almost
apologetically:  "I'm going out soon."

Sobered by excitement Dick danced.  He found in the girl a
suggestion of all the pleasant English things; the story of safe
gardens ringed around by the sea was implicit in her bright voice
and as he leaned back to look at her, he meant what he said to her
so sincerely that his voice trembled.  When her current escort
should leave, she promised to come and sit with them.  The
Englishman accepted her return with repeated apologies and smiles.

Back at his table Dick ordered another bottle of spumante.

"She looks like somebody in the movies," he said.  "I can't think
who."  He glanced impatiently over his shoulder.  "Wonder what's
keeping her?"

"I'd like to get in the movies," said Collis thoughtfully.  "I'm
supposed to go into my father's business but it doesn't appeal to
me much.  Sit in an office in Birmingham for twenty years--"

His voice resisted the pressure of materialistic civilization.

"Too good for it?" suggested Dick.

"No, I don't mean that."

"Yes, you do."

"How do you know what I mean?  Why don't you practise as a doctor,
if you like to work so much?"

Dick had made them both wretched by this time, but simultaneously
they had become vague with drink and in a moment they forgot;
Collis left, and they shook hands warmly.

"Think it over," said Dick sagely.

"Think what over?"

"You know."  It had been something about Collis going into his
father's business--good sound advice.

Clay walked off into space.  Dick finished his bottle and then
danced with the English girl again, conquering his unwilling body
with bold revolutions and stern determined marches down the floor.
The most remarkable thing suddenly happened.  He was dancing with
the girl, the music stopped--and she had disappeared.

"Have you seen her?"

"Seen who?"

"The girl I was dancing with.  Su'nly disappeared.  Must be in the
building."

"No!  No!  That's the ladies' room."

He stood up by the bar.  There were two other men there, but he
could think of no way of starting a conversation.  He could have
told them all about Rome and the violent origins of the Colonna and
Gaetani families but he realized that as a beginning that would be
somewhat abrupt.  A row of Yenci dolls on the cigar counter fell
suddenly to the floor; there was a subsequent confusion and he had
a sense of having been the cause of it, so he went back to the
cabaret and drank a cup of black coffee.  Collis was gone and the
English girl was gone and there seemed nothing to do but go back to
the hotel and lie down with his black heart.  He paid his check and
got his hat and coat.

There was dirty water in the gutters and between the rough
cobblestones; a marshy vapor from the Campagna, a sweat of
exhausted cultures tainted the morning air.  A quartet of taxi-
drivers, their little eyes bobbing in dark pouches, surrounded him.
One who leaned insistently in his face he pushed harshly away.

"Quanto a Hotel Quirinal?"

"Cento lire."

Six dollars.  He shook his head and offered thirty lire which was
twice the day-time fare, but they shrugged their shoulders as one
pair, and moved off.

"Trente-cinque lire e mancie," he said firmly.

"Cento lire."

He broke into English.

"To go half a mile?  You'll take me for forty lire."

"Oh, no."

He was very tired.  He pulled open the door of a cab and got in.

"Hotel Quirinal!" he said to the driver who stood obstinately
outside the window.  "Wipe that sneer off your face and take me to
the Quirinal."

"Ah, no."

Dick got out.  By the door of the Bonbonieri some one was arguing
with the taxi-drivers, some one who now tried to explain their
attitude to Dick; again one of the men pressed close, insisting and
gesticulating and Dick shoved him away.

"I want to go to the Quirinal Hotel."

"He says wan huner lire," explained the interpreter.

"I understand.  I'll give him fif'y lire.  Go on away."  This last
to the insistent man who had edged up once more.  The man looked at
him and spat contemptuously.

The passionate impatience of the week leaped up in Dick and clothed
itself like a flash in violence, the honorable, the traditional
resource of his land; he stepped forward and slapped the man's
face.

They surged about him, threatening, waving their arms, trying
ineffectually to close in on him--with his back against the wall
Dick hit out clumsily, laughing a little and for a few minutes the
mock fight, an affair of foiled rushes and padded, glancing blows,
swayed back and forth in front of the door.  Then Dick tripped and
fell; he was hurt somewhere but he struggled up again wrestling in
arms that suddenly broke apart.  There was a new voice and a new
argument but he leaned against the wall, panting and furious at the
indignity of his position.  He saw there was no sympathy for him
but he was unable to believe that he was wrong.

They were going to the police station and settle it there.  His hat
was retrieved and handed to him, and with some one holding his arm
lightly he strode around the corner with the taxi-men and entered a
bare barrack where carabinieri lounged under a single dim light.

At a desk sat a captain, to whom the officious individual who had
stopped the battle spoke at length in Italian, at times pointing at
Dick, and letting himself be interrupted by the taxi-men who
delivered short bursts of invective and denunciation.  The captain
began to nod impatiently.  He held up his hand and the hydra-headed
address, with a few parting exclamations, died away.  Then he
turned to Dick.

"Spick Italiano?" he asked.

"No."

"Spick Français?"

"Oui," said Dick, glowering.

"Alors.  Écoute.  Va au Quirinal.  Espèce d'endormi.  Écoute: vous
êtes saoûl.  Payez ce que le chauffeur demande.  Comprenez-vous?"

Diver shook his head.

"Non, je ne veux pas."

"COME?"

"Je paierai quarante lires.  C'est bien assez."

The captain stood up.

"Écoute!" he cried portentously.  "Vous êtes saoûl.  Vous avez
battu le chauffeur.  Comme ci, comme ça."  He struck the air
excitedly with right hand and left, "C'est bon que je vous donne la
liberté.  Payez ce qu'il a dit--cento lire.  Va au Quirinal."

Raging with humiliation, Dick stared back at him.

"All right."  He turned blindly to the door--before him, leering
and nodding, was the man who had brought him to the police station.
"I'll go home," he shouted, "but first I'll fix this baby."

He walked past the staring carabinieri and up to the grinning face,
hit it with a smashing left beside the jaw.  The man dropped to the
floor.

For a moment he stood over him in savage triumph--but even as a
first pang of doubt shot through him the world reeled; he was
clubbed down, and fists and boots beat on him in a savage tattoo.
He felt his nose break like a shingle and his eyes jerk as if they
had snapped back on a rubber band into his head.  A rib splintered
under a stamping heel.  Momentarily he lost consciousness, regained
it as he was raised to a sitting position and his wrists jerked
together with handcuffs.  He struggled automatically.  The
plainclothes lieutenant whom he had knocked down, stood dabbing his
jaw with a handkerchief and looking into it for blood; he came over
to Dick, poised himself, drew back his arm and smashed him to the
floor.

When Doctor Diver lay quite still a pail of water was sloshed over
him.  One of his eyes opened dimly as he was being dragged along by
the wrists through a bloody haze and he made out the human and
ghastly face of one of the taxi-drivers.

"Go to the Excelsior hotel," he cried faintly.  "Tell Miss Warren.
Two hundred lire!  Miss Warren.  Due centi lire!  Oh, you dirty--
you God--"

Still he was dragged along through the bloody haze, choking and
sobbing, over vague irregular surfaces into some small place where
he was dropped upon a stone floor.  The men went out, a door
clanged, he was alone.



XXIII


Until one o'clock Baby Warren lay in bed, reading one of Marion
Crawford's curiously inanimate Roman stories; then she went to a
window and looked down into the street.  Across from the hotel two
carabinieri, grotesque in swaddling capes and harlequin hats, swung
voluminously from this side and that, like mains'ls coming about,
and watching them she thought of the guards' officer who had stared
at her so intensely at lunch.  He had possessed the arrogance of a
tall member of a short race, with no obligation save to be tall.
Had he come up to her and said:  "Let's go along, you and I," she
would have answered:  "Why not?"--at least it seemed so now, for
she was still disembodied by an unfamiliar background.

Her thoughts drifted back slowly through the guardsman to the two
carabinieri, to Dick--she got into bed and turned out the light.

A little before four she was awakened by a brusque knocking.

"Yes--what is it?"

"It's the concierge, Madame."

She pulled on her kimono and faced him sleepily.

"Your friend name Deever he's in trouble.  He had trouble with the
police, and they have him in the jail.  He sent a taxi up to tell,
the driver says that he promised him two hundred lire."  He paused
cautiously for this to be approved.  "The driver says Mr. Deever in
the bad trouble.  He had a fight with the police and is terribly
bad hurt."

"I'll be right down."

She dressed to an accompaniment of anxious heartbeats and ten
minutes later stepped out of the elevator into the dark lobby.  The
chauffeur who brought the message was gone; the concierge hailed
another one and told him the location of the jail.  As they rode,
the darkness lifted and thinned outside and Baby's nerves, scarcely
awake, cringed faintly at the unstable balance between night and
day.  She began to race against the day; sometimes on the broad
avenues she gained but whenever the thing that was pushing up
paused for a moment, gusts of wind blew here and there impatiently
and the slow creep of light began once more.  The cab went past a
loud fountain splashing in a voluminous shadow, turned into an
alley so curved that the buildings were warped and strained
following it, bumped and rattled over cobblestones, and stopped
with a jerk where two sentry boxes were bright against a wall of
green damp.  Suddenly from the violet darkness of an archway came
Dick's voice, shouting and screaming.

"Are there any English?  Are there any Americans?  Are there any
English?  Are there any--oh, my God!  You dirty Wops!"

His voice died away and she heard a dull sound of beating on the
door.  Then the voice began again.

"Are there any Americans?  Are there any English?"

Following the voice she ran through the arch into a court, whirled
about in momentary confusion and located the small guard-room
whence the cries came.  Two carabinieri started to their feet, but
Baby brushed past them to the door of the cell.

"Dick!" she called.  "What's the trouble?"

"They've put out my eye," he cried.  "They handcuffed me and then
they beat me, the goddamn--the--"

Flashing around Baby took a step toward the two carabinieri.

"What have you done to him?" she whispered so fiercely that they
flinched before her gathering fury.

"Non capisco inglese."

In French she execrated them; her wild, confident rage filled the
room, enveloped them until they shrank and wriggled from the
garments of blame with which she invested them.  "Do something!  Do
something!"

"We can do nothing until we are ordered."

"Bene.  BAY-NAY!  BENE!"

Once more Baby let her passion scorch around them until they
sweated out apologies for their impotence, looking at each other
with the sense that something had after all gone terribly wrong.
Baby went to the cell door, leaned against it, almost caressing it,
as if that could make Dick feel her presence and power, and cried:
"I'm going to the Embassy, I'll be back."  Throwing a last glance
of infinite menace at the carabinieri she ran out.

She drove to the American Embassy where she paid off the taxi-
driver upon his insistence.  It was still dark when she ran up the
steps and pressed the bell.  She had pressed it three times before
a sleepy English porter opened the door to her.

"I want to see some one," she said.  "Any one--but right away."

"No one's awake, Madame.  We don't open until nine o'clock."

Impatiently she waved the hour away.

"This is important.  A man--an American has been terribly beaten.
He's in an Italian jail."

"No one's awake now.  At nine o'clock--"

"I can't wait.  They've put out a man's eye--my brother-in-law, and
they won't let him out of jail.  I must talk to some one--can't you
see?  Are you crazy?  Are you an idiot, you stand there with that
look in your face?"

"Hime unable to do anything, Madame."

"You've got to wake some one up!"  She seized him by the shoulders
and jerked him violently.  "It's a matter of life and death.  If
you won't wake some one a terrible thing will happen to you--"

"Kindly don't lay hands on me, Madame."

From above and behind the porter floated down a weary Groton voice.

"What is it there?"

The porter answered with relief.

"It's a lady, sir, and she has shook me."  He had stepped back to
speak and Baby pushed forward into the hall.  On an upper landing,
just aroused from sleep and wrapped in a white embroidered Persian
robe, stood a singular young man.  His face was of a monstrous and
unnatural pink, vivid yet dead, and over his mouth was fastened
what appeared to be a gag.  When he saw Baby he moved his head back
into a shadow.

"What is it?" he repeated.

Baby told him, in her agitation edging forward to the stairs.  In
the course of her story she realized that the gag was in reality a
mustache bandage and that the man's face was covered with pink cold
cream, but the fact fitted quietly into the nightmare.  The thing
to do, she cried passionately, was for him to come to the jail with
her at once and get Dick out.

"It's a bad business," he said.

"Yes," she agreed conciliatingly.  "Yes?"

"This trying to fight the police."  A note of personal affront
crept into his voice, "I'm afraid there's nothing to be done until
nine o'clock."

"Till nine o'clock," she repeated aghast.  "But you can do
something, certainly!  You can come to the jail with me and see
that they don't hurt him any more."

"We aren't permitted to do anything like that.  The Consulate
handles these things.  The Consulate will be open at nine."

His face, constrained to impassivity by the binding strap,
infuriated Baby.

"I can't wait until nine.  My brother-in-law says they've put his
eye out--he's seriously hurt!  I have to get to him.  I have to
find a doctor."  She let herself go and began to cry angrily as she
talked, for she knew that he would respond to her agitation rather
than her words.  "You've got to do something about this.  It's your
business to protect American citizens in trouble."

But he was of the Eastern seaboard and too hard for her.  Shaking
his head patiently at her failure to understand his position he
drew the Persian robe closer about him and came down a few steps.

"Write down the address of the Consulate for this lady," he said to
the porter, "and look up Doctor Colazzo's address and telephone
number and write that down too."  He turned to Baby, with the
expression of an exasperated Christ.  "My dear lady, the diplomatic
corps represents the Government of the United States to the
Government of Italy.  It has nothing to do with the protection of
citizens, except under specific instructions from the State
Department.  Your brother-in-law has broken the laws of this
country and been put in jail, just as an Italian might be put in
jail in New York.  The only people who can let him go are the
Italian courts and if your brother-in-law has a case you can get
aid and advice from the Consulate, which protects the rights of
American citizens.  The consulate does not open until nine o'clock.
Even if it were my brother I couldn't do anything--"

"Can you phone the Consulate?" she broke in.

"We can't interfere with the Consulate.  When the Consul gets there
at nine--"

"Can you give me his home address?"

After a fractional pause the man shook his head.  He took the
memorandum from the porter and gave it to her.

"Now I'll ask you to excuse me."

He had manoeuvred her to the door: for an instant the violet dawn
fell shrilly upon his pink mask and upon the linen sack that
supported his mustache; then Baby was standing on the front steps
alone.  She had been in the embassy ten minutes.

The piazza whereon it faced was empty save for an old man gathering
cigarette butts with a spiked stick.  Baby caught a taxi presently
and went to the Consulate but there was no one there save a trio of
wretched women scrubbing the stairs.  She could not make them
understand that she wanted the Consul's home address--in a sudden
resurgence of anxiety she rushed out and told the chauffeur to take
her to the jail.  He did not know where it was, but by the use of
the words semper dritte, dextra and sinestra she manoeuvred him to
its approximate locality, where she dismounted and explored a
labyrinth of familiar alleys.  But the buildings and the alleys all
looked alike.  Emerging from one trail into the Piazzo d'Espagna
she saw the American Express Company and her heart lifted at the
word "American" on the sign.  There was a light in the window and
hurrying across the square she tried the door, but it was locked,
and inside the clock stood at seven.  Then she thought of Collis
Clay.

She remembered the name of his hotel, a stuffy villa sealed in red
plush across from the Excelsior.  The woman on duty at the office
was not disposed to help her--she had no authority to disturb Mr.
Clay, and refused to let Miss Warren go up to his room alone;
convinced finally that this was not an affair of passion she
accompanied her.

Collis lay naked upon his bed.  He had come in tight and,
awakening, it took him some moments to realize his nudity.  He
atoned for it by an excess of modesty.  Taking his clothes into the
bathroom he dressed in haste, muttering to himself "Gosh.  She
certainly musta got a good look at me."  After some telephoning, he
and Baby found the jail and went to it.

The cell door was open and Dick was slumped on a chair in the
guard-room.  The carabinieri had washed some of the blood from his
face, brushed him and set his hat concealingly upon his head.

Baby stood in the doorway trembling.

"Mr. Clay will stay with you," she said.  "I want to get the Consul
and a doctor."

"All right."

"Just stay quiet."

"All right."

"I'll be back."

She drove to the Consulate; it was after eight now, and she was
permitted to sit in the ante-room.  Toward nine the Consul came in
and Baby, hysterical with impotence and exhaustion, repeated her
story.  The Consul was disturbed.  He warned her against getting
into brawls in strange cities, but he was chiefly concerned that
she should wait outside--with despair she read in his elderly eye
that he wanted to be mixed up as little as possible in this
catastrophe.  Waiting on his action, she passed the minutes by
phoning a doctor to go to Dick.  There were other people in the
ante-room and several were admitted to the Consul's office.  After
half an hour she chose the moment of some one's coming out and
pushed past the secretary into the room.

"This is outrageous!  An American has been beaten half to death and
thrown into prison and you make no move to help."

"Just a minute, Mrs--"

"I've waited long enough.  You come right down to the jail and get
him out!"

"Mrs--"

"We're people of considerable standing in America--"  Her mouth
hardened as she continued.  "If it wasn't for the scandal we can--I
shall see that your indifference to this matter is reported in the
proper quarter.  If my brother-in-law were a British citizen he'd
have been free hours ago, but you're more concerned with what the
police will think than about what you're here for."

"Mrs.--"

"You put on your hat and come with me right away."

The mention of his hat alarmed the Consul who began to clean his
spectacles hurriedly and to ruffle his papers.  This proved of no
avail: the American Woman, aroused, stood over him; the clean-
sweeping irrational temper that had broken the moral back of a race
and made a nursery out of a continent, was too much for him.  He
rang for the vice-consul--Baby had won.



Dick sat in the sunshine that fell profusely through the guard-room
window.  Collis was with him and two carabinieri, and they were
waiting for something to happen.  With the narrowed vision of his
one eye Dick could see the carabinieri; they were Tuscan peasants
with short upper lips and he found it difficult to associate them
with the brutality of last night.  He sent one of them to fetch him
a glass of beer.

The beer made him light-headed and the episode was momentarily
illumined by a ray of sardonic humor.  Collis was under the
impression that the English girl had something to do with the
catastrophe, but Dick was sure she had disappeared long before it
happened.  Collis was still absorbed by the fact that Miss Warren
had found him naked on his bed.

Dick's rage had retreated into him a little and he felt a vast
criminal irresponsibility.  What had happened to him was so awful
that nothing could make any difference unless he could choke it to
death, and, as this was unlikely, he was hopeless.  He would be a
different person henceforward, and in his raw state he had bizarre
feelings of what the new self would be.  The matter had about it
the impersonal quality of an act of God.  No mature Aryan is able
to profit by a humiliation; when he forgives it has become part of
his life, he has identified himself with the thing which has
humiliated him--an upshot that in this case was impossible.

When Collis spoke of retribution, Dick shook his head and was
silent.  A lieutenant of carabinieri, pressed, burnished, vital,
came into the room like three men and the guards jumped to
attention.  He seized the empty beer bottle and directed a stream
of scolding at his men.  The new spirit was in him, and the first
thing was to get the beer bottle out of the guard-room.  Dick
looked at Collis and laughed.

The vice-consul, an over-worked young man named Swanson, arrived,
and they started to the court; Collis and Swanson on either side of
Dick and the two carabinieri close behind.  It was a yellow, hazy
morning; the squares and arcades were crowded and Dick, pulling his
hat low over his head, walked fast, setting the pace, until one of
the short-legged carabinieri ran alongside and protested.  Swanson
arranged matters.

"I've disgraced you, haven't I?" said Dick jovially.

"You're liable to get killed fighting Italians," replied Swanson
sheepishly.  "They'll probably let you go this time but if you were
an Italian you'd get a couple of months in prison.  And how!"

"Have you ever been in prison?"

Swanson laughed.

"I like him," announced Dick to Clay.  "He's a very likeable young
man and he gives people excellent advice, but I'll bet he's been to
jail himself.  Probably spent weeks at a time in jail."

Swanson laughed.

"I mean you want to be careful.  You don't know how these people
are."

"Oh, I know how they are," broke out Dick, irritably.  "They're god
damn stinkers."  He turned around to the carabinieri:  "Did you get
that?"

"I'm leaving you here," Swanson said quickly.  "I told your sister-
in-law I would--our lawyer will meet you upstairs in the courtroom.
You want to be careful."

"Good-by."  Dick shook hands politely.  "Thank you very much.  I
feel you have a future--"

With another smile Swanson hurried away, resuming his official
expression of disapproval.

Now they came into a courtyard on all four sides of which outer
stairways mounted to the chambers above.  As they crossed the flags
a groaning, hissing, booing sound went up from the loiterers in the
courtyard, voices full of fury and scorn.  Dick stared about.

"What's that?" he demanded, aghast.

One of the carabinieri spoke to a group of men and the sound died
away.

They came into the court-room.  A shabby Italian lawyer from the
Consulate spoke at length to the judge while Dick and Collis waited
aside.  Some one who knew English turned from the window that gave
on the yard and explained the sound that had accompanied their
passage through.  A native of Frascati had raped and slain a five-
year-old child and was to be brought in that morning--the crowd had
assumed it was Dick.

In a few minutes the lawyer told Dick that he was freed--the court
considered him punished enough.

"Enough!" Dick cried.  "Punished for what?"

"Come along," said Collis.  "You can't do anything now."

"But what did I do, except get into a fight with some taxi-men?"

"They claim you went up to a detective as if you were going to
shake hands with him and hit him--"

"That's not true!  I told him I was going to hit him--I didn't know
he was a detective."

"You better go along," urged the lawyer.

"Come along."  Collis took his arm and they descended the steps.

"I want to make a speech," Dick cried.  "I want to explain to these
people how I raped a five-year-old girl.  Maybe I did--"

"Come along."

Baby was waiting with a doctor in a taxi-cab.  Dick did not want to
look at her and he disliked the doctor, whose stern manner revealed
him as one of that least palpable of European types, the Latin
moralist.  Dick summed up his conception of the disaster, but no
one had much to say.  In his room in the Quirinal the doctor washed
off the rest of the blood and the oily sweat, set his nose, his
fractured ribs and fingers, disinfected the smaller wounds and put
a hopeful dressing on the eye.  Dick asked for a quarter of a grain
of morphine, for he was still wide awake and full of nervous
energy.  With the morphine he fell asleep; the doctor and Collis
left and Baby waited with him until a woman could arrive from the
English nursing home.  It had been a hard night but she had the
satisfaction of feeling that, whatever Dick's previous record was,
they now possessed a moral superiority over him for as long as he
proved of any use.



BOOK 3



I


Frau Kaethe Gregorovius overtook her husband on the path of their
villa.

"How was Nicole?" she asked mildly; but she spoke out of breath,
giving away the fact that she had held the question in her mind
during her run.

Franz looked at her in surprise.

"Nicole's not sick.  What makes you ask, dearest one?"

"You see her so much--I thought she must be sick."

"We will talk of this in the house."

Kaethe agreed meekly.  His study was over in the administration
building and the children were with their tutor in the living-room;
they went up to the bedroom.

"Excuse me, Franz," said Kaethe before he could speak.  "Excuse me,
dear, I had no right to say that.  I know my obligations and I am
proud of them.  But there is a bad feeling between Nicole and me."

"Birds in their little nests agree," Franz thundered.  Finding the
tone inappropriate to the sentiment he repeated his command in the
spaced and considered rhythm with which his old master, Doctor
Dohmler, could cast significance on the tritest platitude.  "Birds--
in--their--nests--AGREE!"

"I realize that.  You haven't seen me fail in courtesy toward
Nicole."

"I see you failing in common sense.  Nicole is half a patient--she
will possibly remain something of a patient all her life.  In the
absence of Dick I am responsible."  He hesitated; sometimes as a
quiet joke he tried to keep news from Kaethe.  "There was a cable
from Rome this morning.  Dick has had grippe and is starting home
to-morrow."

Relieved, Kaethe pursued her course in a less personal tone:

"I think Nicole is less sick than any one thinks--she only
cherishes her illness as an instrument of power.  She ought to be
in the cinema, like your Norma Talmadge--that's where all American
women would be happy."

"Are you jealous of Norma Talmadge, on a film?"

"I don't like Americans.  They're selfish, SELF-ish!"

"You like Dick?"

"I like him," she admitted.  "He's different, he thinks of others."

--And so does Norma Talmadge, Franz said to himself.  Norma
Talmadge must be a fine, noble woman beyond her loveliness.  They
must compel her to play foolish rôles; Norma Talmadge must be a
woman whom it would be a great privilege to know.

Kaethe had forgotten about Norma Talmadge, a vivid shadow that she
had fretted bitterly upon one night as they were driving home from
the movies in Zurich.

"--Dick married Nicole for her money," she said.  "That was his
weakness--you hinted as much yourself one night."

"You're being malicious."

"I shouldn't have said that," she retracted.  "We must all live
together like birds, as you say.  But it's difficult when Nicole
acts as--when Nicole pulls herself back a little, as if she were
holding her breath--as if I SMELT bad!"

Kaethe had touched a material truth.  She did most of her work
herself, and, frugal, she bought few clothes.  An American
shopgirl, laundering two changes of underwear every night, would
have noticed a hint of yesterday's reawakened sweat about Kaethe's
person, less a smell than an ammoniacal reminder of the eternity of
toil and decay.  To Franz this was as natural as the thick dark
scent of Kaethe's hair, and he would have missed it equally; but to
Nicole, born hating the smell of a nurse's fingers dressing her, it
was an offense only to be endured.

"And the children," Kaethe continued.  "She doesn't like them to
play with our children--" but Franz had heard enough:

"Hold your tongue--that kind of talk can hurt me professionally,
since we owe this clinic to Nicole's money.  Let us have lunch."

Kaethe realized that her outburst had been ill-advised, but Franz's
last remark reminded her that other Americans had money, and a week
later she put her dislike of Nicole into new words.

The occasion was the dinner they tendered the Divers upon Dick's
return.  Hardly had their footfalls ceased on the path when she
shut the door and said to Franz:

"Did you see around his eyes?  He's been on a debauch!"

"Go gently," Franz requested.  "Dick told me about that as soon as
he came home.  He was boxing on the trans-Atlantic ship.  The
American passengers box a lot on these trans-Atlantic ships."

"I believe that?" she scoffed.  "It hurts him to move one of his
arms and he has an unhealed scar on his temple--you can see where
the hair's been cut away."

Franz had not noticed these details.

"But what?" Kaethe demanded.  "Do you think that sort of thing does
the Clinic any good?  The liquor I smelt on him tonight, and
several other times since he's been back."

She slowed her voice to fit the gravity of what she was about to
say:  "Dick is no longer a serious man."

Franz rocked his shoulders up the stairs, shaking off her
persistence.  In their bedroom he turned on her.

"He is most certainly a serious man and a brilliant man.  Of all
the men who have recently taken their degrees in neuropathology in
Zurich, Dick has been regarded as the most brilliant--more
brilliant than I could ever be."

"For shame!"

"It's the truth--the shame would be not to admit it.  I turn to
Dick when cases are highly involved.  His publications are still
standard in their line--go into any medical library and ask.  Most
students think he's an Englishman--they don't believe that such
thoroughness could come out of America."  He groaned domestically,
taking his pajamas from under the pillow, "I can't understand why
you talk this way, Kaethe--I thought you liked him."

"For shame!" Kaethe said.  "You're the solid one, you do the work.
It's a case of hare and tortoise--and in my opinion the hare's race
is almost done."

"Tch!  Tch!"

"Very well, then.  It's true."

With his open hand he pushed down air briskly.

"Stop!"

The upshot was that they had exchanged viewpoints like debaters.
Kaethe admitted to herself that she had been too hard on Dick, whom
she admired and of whom she stood in awe, who had been so
appreciative and understanding of herself.  As for Franz, once
Kaethe's idea had had time to sink in, he never after believed that
Dick was a serious person.  And as time went on he convinced
himself that he had never thought so.



II


Dick told Nicole an expurgated version of the catastrophe in Rome--
in his version he had gone philanthropically to the rescue of a
drunken friend.  He could trust Baby Warren to hold her tongue,
since he had painted the disastrous effect of the truth upon
Nicole.  All this, however, was a low hurdle compared to the
lingering effect of the episode upon him.

In reaction he took himself for an intensified beating in his work,
so that Franz, trying to break with him, could find no basis on
which to begin a disagreement.  No friendship worth the name was
ever destroyed in an hour without some painful flesh being torn--so
Franz let himself believe with ever-increasing conviction that Dick
travelled intellectually and emotionally at such a rate of speed
that the vibrations jarred him--this was a contrast that had
previously been considered a virtue in their relation.  So, for the
shoddiness of needs, are shoes made out of last year's hide.

Yet it was May before Franz found an opportunity to insert the
first wedge.  Dick came into his office white and tired one noon
and sat down, saying:

"Well, she's gone."

"She's dead?"

"The heart quit."

Dick sat exhausted in the chair nearest the door.  During three
nights he had remained with the scabbed anonymous woman-artist he
had come to love, formally to portion out the adrenaline, but
really to throw as much wan light as he could into the darkness
ahead.

Half appreciating his feeling, Franz travelled quickly over an
opinion:

"It was neuro-syphilis.  All the Wassermans we took won't tell me
differently.  The spinal fluid--"

"Never mind," said Dick.  "Oh, God, never mind!  If she cared
enough about her secret to take it away with her, let it go at
that."

"You better lay off for a day."

"Don't worry, I'm going to."

Franz had his wedge; looking up from the telegram that he was
writing to the woman's brother he inquired:  "Or do you want to
take a little trip?"

"Not now."

"I don't mean a vacation.  There's a case in Lausanne.  I've been
on the phone with a Chilian all morning--"

"She was so damn brave," said Dick.  "And it took her so long."
Franz shook his head sympathetically and Dick got himself together.
"Excuse me for interrupting you."

"This is just a change--the situation is a father's problem with
his son--the father can't get the son up here.  He wants somebody
to come down there."

"What is it?  Alcoholism?  Homosexuality?  When you say Lausanne--"

"A little of everything."

"I'll go down.  Is there any money in it?"

"Quite a lot, I'd say.  Count on staying two or three days, and get
the boy up here if he needs to be watched.  In any case take your
time, take your ease; combine business with pleasure."

After two hours' train sleep Dick felt renewed, and he approached
the interview with Señor Pardo y Cuidad Real in good spirits.

These interviews were much of a type.  Often the sheer hysteria of
the family representative was as interesting psychologically as the
condition of the patient.  This one was no exception: Señor Pardo y
Cuidad Real, a handsome iron-gray Spaniard, noble of carriage, with
all the appurtenances of wealth and power, raged up and down his
suite in the Hôtel de Trois Mondes and told the story of his son
with no more self-control than a drunken woman.

"I am at the end of my invention.  My son is corrupt.  He was
corrupt at Harrow, he was corrupt at King's College, Cambridge.
He's incorrigibly corrupt.  Now that there is this drinking it is
more and more obvious how he is, and there is continual scandal.  I
have tried everything--I worked out a plan with a doctor friend of
mine, sent them together for a tour of Spain.  Every evening
Francisco had an injection of cantharides and then the two went
together to a reputable bordello--for a week or so it seemed to
work but the result was nothing.  Finally last week in this very
room, rather in that bathroom--" he pointed at it, "--I made
Francisco strip to the waist and lashed him with a whip--"

Exhausted with his emotion he sat down and Dick spoke:

"That was foolish--the trip to Spain was futile also--"  He
struggled against an upsurging hilarity--that any reputable medical
man should have lent himself to such an amateurish experiment!
"--Señor, I must tell you that in these cases we can promise
nothing.  In the case of the drinking we can often accomplish
something--with proper co-operation.  The first thing is to see
the boy and get enough of his confidence to find whether he has
any insight into the matter."

--The boy, with whom he sat on the terrace, was about twenty,
handsome and alert.

"I'd like to know your attitude," Dick said.  "Do you feel that the
situation is getting worse?  And do you want to do anything about
it?"

"I suppose I do," said Francisco, "I am very unhappy."

"Do you think it's from the drinking or from the abnormality?"

"I think the drinking is caused by the other."  He was serious for
a while--suddenly an irrepressible facetiousness broke through and
he laughed, saying, "It's hopeless.  At King's I was known as the
Queen of Chili.  That trip to Spain--all it did was to make me
nauseated by the sight of a woman."

Dick caught him up sharply.

"If you're happy in this mess, then I can't help you and I'm
wasting my time."

"No, let's talk--I despise most of the others so."  There was some
manliness in the boy, perverted now into an active resistance to
his father.  But he had that typically roguish look in his eyes
that homosexuals assume in discussing the subject.

"It's a hole-and-corner business at best," Dick told him.  "You'll
spend your life on it, and its consequences, and you won't have
time or energy for any other decent or social act.  If you want to
face the world you'll have to begin by controlling your sensuality--
and, first of all, the drinking that provokes it--"

He talked automatically, having abandoned the case ten minutes
before.  They talked pleasantly through another hour about the
boy's home in Chili and about his ambitions.  It was as close as
Dick had ever come to comprehending such a character from any but
the pathological angle--he gathered that this very charm made it
possible for Francisco to perpetrate his outrages, and, for Dick,
charm always had an independent existence, whether it was the mad
gallantry of the wretch who had died in the clinic this morning, or
the courageous grace which this lost young man brought to a drab
old story.  Dick tried to dissect it into pieces small enough to
store away--realizing that the totality of a life may be different
in quality from its segments, and also that life during the forties
seemed capable of being observed only in segments.  His love for
Nicole and Rosemary, his friendship with Abe North, with Tommy
Barban in the broken universe of the war's ending--in such contacts
the personalities had seemed to press up so close to him that he
became the personality itself--there seemed some necessity of
taking all or nothing; it was as if for the remainder of his life
he was condemned to carry with him the egos of certain people,
early met and early loved, and to be only as complete as they were
complete themselves.  There was some element of loneliness
involved--so easy to be loved--so hard to love.

As he sat on the veranda with young Francisco, a ghost of the past
swam into his ken.  A tall, singularly swaying male detached
himself from the shrubbery and approached Dick and Francisco with
feeble resolution.  For a moment he formed such an apologetic part
of the vibrant landscape that Dick scarcely remarked him--then Dick
was on his feet, shaking hands with an abstracted air, thinking,
"My God, I've stirred up a nest!" and trying to collect the man's
name.

"This is Doctor Diver, isn't it?"

"Well, well--Mr. Dumphry, isn't it?"

"Royal Dumphry.  I had the pleasure of having dinner one night in
that lovely garden of yours."

"Of course."  Trying to dampen Mr. Dumphry's enthusiasm, Dick went
into impersonal chronology.  "It was in nineteen--twenty-four--or
twenty-five--"

He had remained standing, but Royal Dumphry, shy as he had seemed
at first, was no laggard with his pick and spade; he spoke to
Francisco in a flip, intimate manner, but the latter, ashamed of
him, joined Dick in trying to freeze him away.

"Doctor Diver--one thing I want to say before you go.  I've never
forgotten that evening in your garden--how nice you and your wife
were.  To me it's one of the finest memories in my life, one of the
happiest ones.  I've always thought of it as the most civilized
gathering of people that I have ever known."

Dick continued a crab-like retreat toward the nearest door of the
hotel.

"I'm glad you remembered it so pleasantly.  Now I've got to see--"

"I understand," Royal Dumphry pursued sympathetically.  "I hear
he's dying."

"Who's dying?"

"Perhaps I shouldn't have said that--but we have the same
physician."

Dick paused, regarding him in astonishment.  "Who're you talking
about?"

"Why, your wife's father--perhaps I--"

"My WHAT?"

"I suppose--you mean I'm the first person--"

"You mean my wife's father is here, in Lausanne?"

"Why, I thought you knew--I thought that was why you were here."

"What doctor is taking care of him?"

Dick scrawled the name in a notebook, excused himself, and hurried
to a telephone booth.

It was convenient for Doctor Dangeu to see Doctor Diver at his
house immediately.

Doctor Dangeu was a young Génevois; for a moment he was afraid that
he was going to lose a profitable patient, but, when Dick reassured
him, he divulged the fact that Mr. Warren was indeed dying.

"He is only fifty but the liver has stopped restoring itself; the
precipitating factor is alcoholism."

"Doesn't respond?"

"The man can take nothing except liquids--I give him three days, or
at most, a week."

"Does his elder daughter, Miss Warren, know his condition?"

"By his own wish no one knows except the man-servant.  It was only
this morning I felt I had to tell him--he took it excitedly,
although he has been in a very religious and resigned mood from the
beginning of his illness."

Dick considered:  "Well--" he decided slowly, "in any case I'll
take care of the family angle.  But I imagine they would want a
consultation."

"As you like."

"I know I speak for them when I ask you to call in one of the best-
known medicine men around the lake--Herbrugge, from Geneva."

"I was thinking of Herbrugge."

"Meanwhile I'm here for a day at least and I'll keep in touch with
you."

That evening Dick went to Señor Pardo y Cuidad Real and they
talked.

"We have large estates in Chili--" said the old man.  "My son could
well be taking care of them.  Or I can get him in any one of a
dozen enterprises in Paris--"  He shook his head and paced across
the windows against a spring rain so cheerful that it didn't even
drive the swans to cover, "My only son!  Can't you take him with
you?"

The Spaniard knelt suddenly at Dick's feet.

"Can't you cure my only son?  I believe in you--you can take him
with you, cure him."

"It's impossible to commit a person on such grounds.  I wouldn't if
I could."

The Spaniard got up from his knees.

"I have been hasty--I have been driven--"

Descending to the lobby Dick met Doctor Dangeu in the elevator.

"I was about to call your room," the latter said.  "Can we speak
out on the terrace?"

"Is Mr. Warren dead?" Dick demanded.

"He is the same--the consultation is in the morning.  Meanwhile he
wants to see his daughter--your wife--with the greatest fervor.  It
seems there was some quarrel--"

"I know all about that."

The doctors looked at each other, thinking.

"Why don't you talk to him before you make up your mind?" Dangeu
suggested.  "His death will be graceful--merely a weakening and
sinking."

With an effort Dick consented.

"All right."

The suite in which Devereux Warren was gracefully weakening and
sinking was of the same size as that of the Señor Pardo y Cuidad
Real--throughout this hotel there were many chambers wherein rich
ruins, fugitives from justice, claimants to the thrones of
mediatized principalities, lived on the derivatives of opium or
barbitol listening eternally as to an inescapable radio, to the
coarse melodies of old sins.  This corner of Europe does not so
much draw people as accept them without inconvenient questions.
Routes cross here--people bound for private sanitariums or
tuberculosis resorts in the mountains, people who are no longer
persona gratis in France or Italy.

The suite was darkened.  A nun with a holy face was nursing the man
whose emaciated fingers stirred a rosary on the white sheet.  He
was still handsome and his voice summoned up a thick burr of
individuality as he spoke to Dick, after Dangeu had left them
together.

"We get a lot of understanding at the end of life.  Only now,
Doctor Diver, do I realize what it was all about."

Dick waited.

"I've been a bad man.  You must know how little right I have to see
Nicole again, yet a Bigger Man than either of us says to forgive
and to pity."  The rosary slipped from his weak hands and slid off
the smooth bed covers.  Dick picked it up for him.  "If I could see
Nicole for ten minutes I would go happy out of the world."

"It's not a decision I can make for myself," said Dick.  "Nicole is
not strong."  He made his decision but pretended to hesitate.  "I
can put it up to my professional associate."

"What your associate says goes with me--very well, Doctor.  Let me
tell you my debt to you is so large--"

Dick stood up quickly.

"I'll let you know the result through Doctor Dangeu."

In his room he called the clinic on the Zugersee.  After a long
time Kaethe answered from her own house.

"I want to get in touch with Franz."

"Franz is up on the mountain.  I'm going up myself--is it something
I can tell him, Dick?"

"It's about Nicole--her father is dying here in Lausanne.  Tell
Franz that, to show him it's important; and ask him to phone me
from up there."

"I will."

"Tell him I'll be in my room here at the hotel from three to five,
and again from seven to eight, and after that to page me in the
dining-room."

In plotting these hours he forgot to add that Nicole was not to be
told; when he remembered it he was talking into a dead telephone.
Certainly Kaethe should realize.

. . . Kaethe had no exact intention of telling Nicole about the
call when she rode up the deserted hill of mountain wild-flowers
and secret winds, where the patients were taken to ski in winter
and to climb in spring.  Getting off the train she saw Nicole
shepherding the children through some organized romp.  Approaching,
she drew her arm gently along Nicole's shoulder, saying:  "You are
clever with children--you must teach them more about swimming in
the summer."

In the play they had grown hot, and Nicole's reflex in drawing away
from Kaethe's arm was automatic to the point of rudeness.  Kaethe's
hand fell awkwardly into space, and then she too reacted, verbally,
and deplorably.

"Did you think I was going to embrace you?" she demanded sharply.
"It was only about Dick, I talked on the phone to him and I was
sorry--"

"Is anything the matter with Dick?"

Kaethe suddenly realized her error, but she had taken a tactless
course and there was no choice but to answer as Nicole pursued her
with reiterated questions: ". . . then why were you sorry?"

"Nothing about Dick.  I must talk to Franz."

"It is about Dick."

There was terror in her face and collaborating alarm in the faces
of the Diver children, near at hand.  Kaethe collapsed with:  "Your
father is ill in Lausanne--Dick wants to talk to Franz about it."

"Is he very sick?" Nicole demanded--just as Franz came up with his
hearty hospital manner.  Gratefully Kaethe passed the remnant of
the buck to him--but the damage was done.

"I'm going to Lausanne," announced Nicole.

"One minute," said Franz.  "I'm not sure it's advisable.  I must
first talk on the phone to Dick."

"Then I'll miss the train down," Nicole protested, "and then I'll
miss the three o'clock from Zurich!  If my father is dying I must--"
She left this in the air, afraid to formulate it.  "I MUST go.
I'll have to run for the train."  She was running even as she spoke
toward the sequence of flat cars that crowned the bare hill with
bursting steam and sound.  Over her shoulder she called back, "If
you phone Dick tell him I'm coming, Franz!" . . .

. . . Dick was in his own room in the hotel reading The New York
Herald when the swallow-like nun rushed in--simultaneously the
phone rang.

"Is he dead?" Dick demanded of the nun, hopefully.

"Monsieur, il est parti--he has gone away."

"Com-MENT?"

"Il est parti--his man and his baggage have gone away too!"

It was incredible.  A man in that condition to arise and depart.

Dick answered the phone-call from Franz.  "You shouldn't have told
Nicole," he protested.

"Kaethe told her, very unwisely."

"I suppose it was my fault.  Never tell a thing to a woman till
it's done.  However, I'll meet Nicole . . . say, Franz, the
craziest thing has happened down here--the old boy took up his bed
and walked. . . ."

"At what?  What did you say?"

"I say he walked, old Warren--he walked!"

"But why not?"

"He was supposed to be dying of general collapse . . . he got up
and walked away, back to Chicago, I guess. . . .  I don't know, the
nurse is here now. . . .  I don't know, Franz--I've just heard
about it. . . .  Call me later."

He spent the better part of two hours tracing Warren's movements.
The patient had found an opportunity between the change of day and
night nurses to resort to the bar where he had gulped down four
whiskeys; he paid his hotel bill with a thousand dollar note,
instructing the desk that the change should be sent after him, and
departed, presumably for America.  A last minute dash by Dick and
Dangeu to overtake him at the station resulted only in Dick's
failing to meet Nicole; when they did meet in the lobby of the
hotel she seemed suddenly tired, and there was a tight purse to her
lips that disquieted him.

"How's father?" she demanded.

"He's much better.  He seemed to have a good deal of reserve energy
after all."  He hesitated, breaking it to her easy.  "In fact he
got up and went away."

Wanting a drink, for the chase had occupied the dinner hour, he led
her, puzzled, toward the grill, and continued as they occupied two
leather easy-chairs and ordered a high-ball and a glass of beer:
"The man who was taking care of him made a wrong prognosis or
something--wait a minute, I've hardly had time to think the thing
out myself."

"He's GONE?"

"He got the evening train for Paris."

They sat silent.  From Nicole flowed a vast tragic apathy.

"It was instinct," Dick said, finally.  "He was really dying, but
he tried to get a resumption of rhythm--he's not the first person
that ever walked off his death-bed--like an old clock--you know,
you shake it and somehow from sheer habit it gets going again.  Now
your father--"

"Oh, don't tell me," she said.

"His principal fuel was fear," he continued.  "He got afraid, and
off he went.  He'll probably live till ninety--"

"Please don't tell me any more," she said.  "Please don't--I
couldn't stand any more."

"All right.  The little devil I came down to see is hopeless.  We
may as well go back to-morrow."

"I don't see why you have to--come in contact with all this," she
burst forth.

"Oh, don't you?  Sometimes I don't either."

She put her hand on his.

"Oh, I'm sorry I said that, Dick."

Some one had brought a phonograph into the bar and they sat
listening to The Wedding of the Painted Doll.



III


One morning a week later, stopping at the desk for his mail, Dick
became aware of some extra commotion outside: Patient Von Cohn
Morris was going away.  His parents, Australians, were putting his
baggage vehemently into a large limousine, and beside them stood
Doctor Ladislau protesting with ineffectual attitudes against the
violent gesturings of Morris, senior.  The young man was regarding
his embarkation with aloof cynicism as Doctor Diver approached.

"Isn't this a little sudden, Mr. Morris?"

Mr. Morris started as he saw Dick--his florid face and the large
checks on his suit seemed to turn off and on like electric lights.
He approached Dick as though to strike him.

"High time we left, we and those who have come with us," he began,
and paused for breath.  "It is high time, Doctor Diver.  High
time."

"Will you come in my office?" Dick suggested.

"Not I!  I'll talk to you, but I'm washing my hands of you and your
place."

He shook his finger at Dick.  "I was just telling this doctor here.
We've wasted our time and our money."

Doctor Ladislau stirred in a feeble negative, signalling up a vague
Slavic evasiveness.  Dick had never liked Ladislau.  He managed to
walk the excited Australian along the path in the direction of his
office, trying to persuade him to enter; but the man shook his
head.

"It's you, Doctor Diver, YOU, the very man.  I went to Doctor
Ladislau because you were not to be found, Doctor Diver, and
because Doctor Gregorovius is not expected until the nightfall, and
I would not wait.  No, sir!  I would not wait a minute after my son
told me the truth."

He came up menacingly to Dick, who kept his hands loose enough to
drop him if it seemed necessary.  "My son is here for alcoholism,
and he told us he smelt liquor on your breath.  Yes, sir!"  He made
a quick, apparently unsuccessful sniff.  "Not once, but twice Von
Cohn says he has smelt liquor on your breath.  I and my lady have
never touched a drop of it in our lives.  We hand Von Cohn to you
to be cured, and within a month he twice smells liquor on your
breath!  What kind of cure is that there?"

Dick hesitated; Mr. Morris was quite capable of making a scene on
the clinic drive.

"After all, Mr. Morris, some people are not going to give up what
they regard as food because of your son--"

"But you're a doctor, man!" cried Morris furiously.  "When the
workmen drink their beer that's bad 'cess to them--but you're here
supposing to cure--"

"This has gone too far.  Your son came to us because of
kleptomania."

"What was behind it?"  The man was almost shrieking.  "Drink--black
drink.  Do you know what color black is?  It's black!  My own uncle
was hung by the neck because of it, you hear?  My son comes to a
sanitarium, and a doctor reeks of it!"

"I must ask you to leave."

"You ASK me!  We ARE leaving!"

"If you could be a little temperate we could tell you the results
of the treatment to date.  Naturally, since you feel as you do, we
would not want your son as a patient--"

"You dare to use the word temperate to me?"

Dick called to Doctor Ladislau and as he approached, said:  "Will
you represent us in saying good-by to the patient and to his
family?"

He bowed slightly to Morris and went into his office, and stood
rigid for a moment just inside the door.  He watched until they
drove away, the gross parents, the bland, degenerate offspring: it
was easy to prophesy the family's swing around Europe, bullying
their betters with hard ignorance and hard money.  But what
absorbed Dick after the disappearance of the caravan was the
question as to what extent he had provoked this.  He drank claret
with each meal, took a nightcap, generally in the form of hot rum,
and sometimes he tippled with gin in the afternoons--gin was the
most difficult to detect on the breath.  He was averaging a half-
pint of alcohol a day, too much for his system to burn up.

Dismissing a tendency to justify himself, he sat down at his desk
and wrote out, like a prescription, a régime that would cut his
liquor in half.  Doctors, chauffeurs, and Protestant clergymen
could never smell of liquor, as could painters, brokers, cavalry
leaders; Dick blamed himself only for indiscretion.  But the matter
was by no means clarified half an hour later when Franz, revivified
by an Alpine fortnight, rolled up the drive, so eager to resume
work that he was plunged in it before he reached his office.  Dick
met him there.

"How was Mount Everest?"

"We could very well have done Mount Everest the rate we were doing.
We thought of it.  How goes it all?  How is my Kaethe, how is your
Nicole?"

"All goes smooth domestically.  But my God, Franz, we had a rotten
scene this morning."

"How?  What was it?"

Dick walked around the room while Franz got in touch with his villa
by telephone.  After the family exchange was over, Dick said:  "The
Morris boy was taken away--there was a row."

Franz's buoyant face fell.

"I knew he'd left.  I met Ladislau on the veranda."

"What did Ladislau say?"

"Just that young Morris had gone--that you'd tell me about it.
What about it?"

"The usual incoherent reasons."

"He was a devil, that boy."

"He was a case for anesthesia," Dick agreed.  "Anyhow, the father
had beaten Ladislau into a colonial subject by the time I came
along.  What about Ladislau?  Do we keep him?  I say no--he's not
much of a man, he can't seem to cope with anything."  Dick
hesitated on the verge of the truth, swung away to give himself
space within which to recapitulate.  Franz perched on the edge of a
desk, still in his linen duster and travelling gloves.  Dick said:

"One of the remarks the boy made to his father was that your
distinguished collaborator was a drunkard.  The man is a fanatic,
and the descendant seems to have caught traces of vin-du-pays on
me."

Franz sat down, musing on his lower lip.  "You can tell me at
length," he said finally.

"Why not now?" Dick suggested.  "You must know I'm the last man to
abuse liquor."  His eyes and Franz's glinted on each other, pair on
pair.  "Ladislau let the man get so worked up that I was on the
defensive.  It might have happened in front of patients, and you
can imagine how hard it could be to defend yourself in a situation
like that!"

Franz took off his gloves and coat.  He went to the door and told
the secretary, "Don't disturb us."  Coming back into the room he
flung himself at the long table and fooled with his mail, reasoning
as little as is characteristic of people in such postures, rather
summoning up a suitable mask for what he had to say.

"Dick, I know well that you are a temperate, well-balanced man,
even though we do not entirely agree on the subject of alcohol.
But a time has come--Dick, I must say frankly that I have been
aware several times that you have had a drink when it was not the
moment to have one.  There is some reason.  Why not try another
leave of abstinence?"

"Absence," Dick corrected him automatically.  "It's no solution for
me to go away."

They were both chafed, Franz at having his return marred and
blurred.

"Sometimes you don't use your common sense, Dick."

"I never understood what common sense meant applied to complicated
problems--unless it means that a general practitioner can perform a
better operation than a specialist."

He was seized by an overwhelming disgust for the situation.  To
explain, to patch--these were not natural functions at their age--
better to continue with the cracked echo of an old truth in the
ears.

"This is no go," he said suddenly.

"Well, that's occurred to me," Franz admitted.  "Your heart isn't
in this project any more, Dick."

"I know.  I want to leave--we could strike some arrangement about
taking Nicole's money out gradually."

"I have thought about that too, Dick--I have seen this coming.  I
am able to arrange other backing, and it will be possible to take
all your money out by the end of the year."

Dick had not intended to come to a decision so quickly, nor was he
prepared for Franz's so ready acquiescence in the break, yet he was
relieved.  Not without desperation he had long felt the ethics of
his profession dissolving into a lifeless mass.



IV


The Divers would return to the Riviera, which was home.  The Villa
Diana had been rented again for the summer, so they divided the
intervening time between German spas and French cathedral towns
where they were always happy for a few days.  Dick wrote a little
with no particular method; it was one of those parts of life that
is an awaiting; not upon Nicole's health, which seemed to thrive on
travel, nor upon work, but simply an awaiting.  The factor that
gave purposefulness to the period was the children.

Dick's interest in them increased with their ages, now eleven and
nine.  He managed to reach them over the heads of employees on the
principle that both the forcing of children and the fear of
forcing them were inadequate substitutes for the long, careful
watchfulness, the checking and balancing and reckoning of accounts,
to the end that there should be no slip below a certain level of
duty.  He came to know them much better than Nicole did, and in
expansive moods over the wines of several countries he talked and
played with them at length.  They had that wistful charm, almost
sadness, peculiar to children who have learned early not to cry or
laugh with abandon; they were apparently moved to no extremes of
emotion, but content with a simple regimentation and the simple
pleasures allowed them.  They lived on the even tenor found
advisable in the experience of old families of the Western world,
brought up rather than brought out.  Dick thought, for example,
that nothing was more conducive to the development of observation
than compulsory silence.

Lanier was an unpredictable boy with an inhuman curiosity.  "Well,
how many Pomeranians would it take to lick a lion, father?" was
typical of the questions with which he harassed Dick.  Topsy was
easier.  She was nine and very fair and exquisitely made like
Nicole, and in the past Dick had worried about that.  Lately she
had become as robust as any American child.  He was satisfied with
them both, but conveyed the fact to them only in a tacit way.  They
were not let off breaches of good conduct--"Either one learns
politeness at home," Dick said, "or the world teaches it to you
with a whip and you may get hurt in the process.  What do I care
whether Topsy 'adores' me or not?  I'm not bringing her up to be my
wife."

Another element that distinguished this summer and autumn for the
Divers was a plenitude of money.  Due to the sale of their interest
in the clinic, and to developments in America, there was now so
much that the mere spending of it, the care of goods, was an
absorption in itself.  The style in which they travelled seemed
fabulous.

Regard them, for example, as the train slows up at Boyen where they
are to spend a fortnight visiting.  The shifting from the wagon-lit
has begun at the Italian frontier.  The governess's maid and Madame
Diver's maid have come up from second class to help with the
baggage and the dogs.  Mlle. Bellois will superintend the hand-
luggage, leaving the Sealyhams to one maid and the pair of Pekinese
to the other.  It is not necessarily poverty of spirit that makes a
woman surround herself with life--it can be a superabundance of
interest, and, except during her flashes of illness, Nicole was
capable of being curator of it all.  For example with the great
quantity of heavy baggage--presently from the van would be unloaded
four wardrobe trunks, a shoe trunk, three hat trunks, and two hat
boxes, a chest of servants' trunks, a portable filing-cabinet, a
medicine case, a spirit lamp container, a picnic set, four tennis
rackets in presses and cases, a phonograph, a typewriter.
Distributed among the spaces reserved for family and entourage were
two dozen supplementary grips, satchels and packages, each one
numbered, down to the tag on the cane case.  Thus all of it could
be checked up in two minutes on any station platform, some for
storage, some for accompaniment from the "light trip list" or the
"heavy trip list," constantly revised, and carried on metal-edged
plaques in Nicole's purse.  She had devised the system as a child
when travelling with her failing mother.  It was equivalent to the
system of a regimental supply officer who must think of the bellies
and equipment of three thousand men.

The Divers flocked from the train into the early gathered twilight
of the valley.  The village people watched the debarkation with an
awe akin to that which followed the Italian pilgrimages of Lord
Byron a century before.  Their hostess was the Contessa di
Minghetti, lately Mary North.  The journey that had begun in a room
over the shop of a paperhanger in Newark had ended in an
extraordinary marriage.

"Conte di Minghetti" was merely a papal title--the wealth of Mary's
husband flowed from his being ruler-owner of manganese deposits in
southwestern Asia.  He was not quite light enough to travel in a
pullman south of Mason-Dixon; he was of the Kyble-Berber-Sabaean-
Hindu strain that belts across north Africa and Asia, more
sympathetic to the European than the mongrel faces of the ports.

When these princely households, one of the East, one of the West,
faced each other on the station platform, the splendor of the
Divers seemed pioneer simplicity by comparison.  Their hosts were
accompanied by an Italian major-domo carrying a staff, by a quartet
of turbaned retainers on motorcycles, and by two half-veiled
females who stood respectfully a little behind Mary and salaamed at
Nicole, making her jump with the gesture.

To Mary as well as to the Divers the greeting was faintly comic;
Mary gave an apologetic, belittling giggle; yet her voice, as she
introduced her husband by his Asiatic title, flew proud and high.

In their rooms as they dressed for dinner, Dick and Nicole grimaced
at each other in an awed way: such rich as want to be thought
democratic pretend in private to be swept off their feet by swank.

"Little Mary North knows what she wants," Dick muttered through his
shaving cream.  "Abe educated her, and now she's married to a
Buddha.  If Europe ever goes Bolshevik she'll turn up as the bride
of Stalin."

Nicole looked around from her dressing-case.  "Watch your tongue,
Dick, will you?"  But she laughed.  "They're very swell.  The
warships all fire at them or salute them or something.  Mary rides
in the royal bus in London."

"All right," he agreed.  As he heard Nicole at the door asking for
pins, he called, "I wonder if I could have some whiskey; I feel the
mountain air!"

"She'll see to it," presently Nicole called through the bathroom
door.  "It was one of those women who were at the station.  She has
her veil off."

"What did Mary tell you about life?" he asked.

"She didn't say so much--she was interested in high life--she asked
me a lot of questions about my genealogy and all that sort of
thing, as if I knew anything about it.  But it seems the bridegroom
has two very tan children by another marriage--one of them ill with
some Asiatic thing they can't diagnose.  I've got to warn the
children.  Sounds very peculiar to me.  Mary will see how we'd feel
about it."  She stood worrying a minute.

"She'll understand," Dick reassured her.  "Probably the child's in
bed."

At dinner Dick talked to Hosain, who had been at an English public
school.  Hosain wanted to know about stocks and about Hollywood and
Dick, whipping up his imagination with champagne, told him
preposterous tales.

"Billions?" Hosain demanded.

"Trillions," Dick assured him.

"I didn't truly realize--"

"Well, perhaps millions," Dick conceded.  "Every hotel guest is
assigned a harem--or what amounts to a harem."

"Other than the actors and directors?"

"Every hotel guest--even travelling salesmen.  Why, they tried to
send me up a dozen candidates, but Nicole wouldn't stand for it."

Nicole reproved him when they were in their room alone.  "Why so
many highballs?  Why did you use your word spic in front of him?"

"Excuse me, I meant smoke.  The tongue slipped."

"Dick, this isn't faintly like you."

"Excuse me again.  I'm not much like myself any more."

That night Dick opened a bathroom window, giving on a narrow and
tubular court of the château, gray as rats but echoing at the
moment to plaintive and peculiar music, sad as a flute.  Two men
were chanting in an Eastern language or dialect full of k's and
l's--he leaned out but he could not see them; there was obviously a
religious significance in the sounds, and tired and emotionless he
let them pray for him too, but what for, save that he should not
lose himself in his increasing melancholy, he did not know.

Next day, over a thinly wooded hillside they shot scrawny birds,
distant poor relations to the partridge.  It was done in a vague
imitation of the English manner, with a corps of inexperienced
beaters whom Dick managed to miss by firing only directly overhead.

On their return Lanier was waiting in their suite.

"Father, you said tell you immediately if we were near the sick
boy."

Nicole whirled about, immediately on guard.

"--so, Mother," Lanier continued, turning to her, "the boy takes a
bath every evening and to-night he took his bath just before mine
and I had to take mine in his water, and it was dirty."

"What?  Now what?"

"I saw them take Tony out of it, and then they called me into it
and the water was dirty."

"But--did you take it?"

"Yes, Mother."

"Heavens!" she exclaimed to Dick.

He demanded:  "Why didn't Lucienne draw your bath?"

"Lucienne can't.  It's a funny heater--it reached out of itself and
burned her arm last night and she's afraid of it, so one of those
two women--"

"You go in this bathroom and take a bath now."

"Don't say _I_ told you," said Lanier from the doorway.

Dick went in and sprinkled the tub with sulphur; closing the door
he said to Nicole:

"Either we speak to Mary or we'd better get out."

She agreed and he continued:  "People think their children are
constitutionally cleaner than other people's, and their diseases
are less contagious."

Dick came in and helped himself from the decanter, chewing a
biscuit savagely in the rhythm of the pouring water in the
bathroom.

"Tell Lucienne that she's got to learn about the heater--" he
suggested.  At that moment the Asiatic woman came in person to the
door.

"El Contessa--"

Dick beckoned her inside and closed the door.

"Is the little sick boy better?" he inquired pleasantly.

"Better, yes, but he still has the eruptions frequently."

"That's too bad--I'm very sorry.  But you see our children mustn't
be bathed in his water.  That's out of the question--I'm sure your
mistress would be furious if she had known you had done a thing
like that."

"I?"  She seemed thunderstruck.  "Why, I merely saw your maid had
difficulty with the heater--I told her about it and started the
water."

"But with a sick person you must empty the bathwater entirely out,
and clean the tub."

"I?"

Chokingly the woman drew a long breath, uttered a convulsed sob and
rushed from the room.

"She mustn't get up on western civilization at our expense," he
said grimly.

At dinner that night he decided that it must inevitably be a
truncated visit: about his own country Hosain seemed to have
observed only that there were many mountains and some goats and
herders of goats.  He was a reserved young man--to draw him out
would have required the sincere effort that Dick now reserved for
his family.  Soon after dinner Hosain left Mary and the Divers to
themselves, but the old unity was split--between them lay the
restless social fields that Mary was about to conquer.  Dick was
relieved when, at nine-thirty, Mary received and read a note and
got up.

"You'll have to excuse me.  My husband is leaving on a short trip--
and I must be with him."

Next morning, hard on the heels of the servant bringing coffee,
Mary entered their room.  She was dressed and they were not
dressed, and she had the air of having been up for some time.  Her
face was toughened with quiet jerky fury.

"What is this story about Lanier having been bathed in a dirty
bath?"

Dick began to protest, but she cut through:

"What is this story that you commanded my husband's sister to clean
Lanier's tub?"

She remained on her feet staring at them, as they sat impotent as
idols in their beds, weighted by their trays.  Together they
exclaimed:  "His SISTER!"

"That you ordered one of his sisters to clean out a tub!"

"We didn't--" their voices rang together saying the same thing, "--
I spoke to the native servant--"

"You spoke to Hosain's sister."

Dick could only say:  "I supposed they were two maids."

"You were told they were Himadoun."

"What?"  Dick got out of bed and into a robe.

"I explained it to you at the piano night before last.  Don't tell
me you were too merry to understand."

"Was that what you said?  I didn't hear the beginning.  I didn't
connect the--we didn't make any connection, Mary.  Well, all we can
do is see her and apologize."

"See her and apologize!  I explained to you that when the oldest
member of the family--when the oldest one marries, well, the two
oldest sisters consecrate themselves to being Himadoun, to being
his wife's ladies-in-waiting."

"Was that why Hosain left the house last night?"

Mary hesitated; then nodded.

"He had to--they all left.  His honor makes it necessary."

Now both the Divers were up and dressing; Mary went on:

"And what's all that about the bathwater.  As if a thing like that
could happen in this house!  We'll ask Lanier about it."

Dick sat on the bedside indicating in a private gesture to Nicole
that she should take over.  Meanwhile Mary went to the door and
spoke to an attendant in Italian.

"Wait a minute," Nicole said.  "I won't have that."

"You accused us," answered Mary, in a tone she had never used to
Nicole before.  "Now I have a right to see."

"I won't have the child brought in."  Nicole threw on her clothes
as though they were chain mail.

"That's all right," said Dick.  "Bring Lanier in.  We'll settle
this bathtub matter--fact or myth."

Lanier, half clothed mentally and physically, gazed at the angered
faces of the adults.

"Listen, Lanier," Mary demanded, "how did you come to think you
were bathed in water that had been used before?"

"Speak up," Dick added.

"It was just dirty, that was all."

"Couldn't you hear the new water running, from your room, next
door?"

Lanier admitted the possibility but reiterated his point--the water
was dirty.  He was a little awed; he tried to see ahead:

"It couldn't have been running, because--"

They pinned him down.

"Why not?"

He stood in his little kimono arousing the sympathy of his parents
and further arousing Mary's impatience--then he said:

"The water was dirty, it was full of soap-suds."

"When you're not sure what you're saying--" Mary began, but Nicole
interrupted.

"Stop it, Mary.  If there were dirty suds in the water it was
logical to think it was dirty.  His father told him to come--"

"There couldn't have been dirty suds in the water."

Lanier looked reproachfully at his father, who had betrayed him.
Nicole turned him about by the shoulders and sent him out of the
room; Dick broke the tensity with a laugh.

Then, as if the sound recalled the past, the old friendship, Mary
guessed how far away from them she had gone and said in a
mollifying tone:  "It's always like that with children."

Her uneasiness grew as she remembered the past.  "You'd be silly to
go--Hosain wanted to make this trip anyhow.  After all, you're my
guests and you just blundered into the thing."  But Dick, made more
angry by this obliqueness and the use of the word blunder, turned
away and began arranging his effects, saying:

"It's too bad about the young women.  I'd like to apologize to the
one who came in here."

"If you'd only listened on the piano seat!"

"But you've gotten so damned dull, Mary.  I listened as long as I
could."

"Be quiet!" Nicole advised him.

"I return his compliment," said Mary bitterly.  "Good-by, Nicole."
She went out.

After all that there was no question of her coming to see them off;
the major-domo arranged the departure.  Dick left formal notes for
Hosain and the sisters.  There was nothing to do except to go, but
all of them, especially Lanier, felt bad about it.

"I insist," insisted Lanier on the train, "that it was dirty
bathwater."

"That'll do," his father said.  "You better forget it--unless you
want me to divorce you.  Did you know there was a new law in France
that you can divorce a child?"

Lanier roared with delight and the Divers were unified again--Dick
wondered how many more times it could be done.



V


Nicole went to the window and bent over the sill to take a look at
the rising altercation on the terrace; the April sun shone pink on
the saintly face of Augustine, the cook, and blue on the butcher's
knife she waved in her drunken hand.  She had been with them since
their return to Villa Diana in February.

Because of an obstruction of an awning she could see only Dick's
head and his hand holding one of his heavy canes with a bronze knob
on it.  The knife and the cane, menacing each other, were like
tripos and short sword in a gladiatorial combat.  Dick's words
reached her first:

"--care how much kitchen wine you drink but when I find you digging
into a bottle of Chablis Moutonne--"

"You talk about drinking!" Augustine cried, flourishing her sabre.
"You drink--all the time!"

Nicole called over the awning:  "What's the matter, Dick?" and he
answered in English:

"The old girl has been polishing off the vintage wines.  I'm firing
her--at least I'm trying to."

"Heavens!  Well, don't let her reach you with that knife."

Augustine shook her knife up at Nicole.  Her old mouth was made of
two small intersecting cherries.

"I would like to say, Madame, if you knew that your husband drinks
over at his Bastide comparatively as a day-laborer--"

"Shut up and get out!" interrupted Nicole.  "We'll get the
gendarmes."

"YOU'LL get the gendarmes!  With my brother in the corps!  You--a
disgusting American?"

In English Dick called up to Nicole:

"Get the children away from the house till I settle this."

"--disgusting Americans who come here and drink up our finest
wines," screamed Augustine with the voice of the commune.

Dick mastered a firmer tone.

"You must leave now!  I'll pay you what we owe you."

"Very sure you'll pay me!  And let me tell you--" she came close
and waved the knife so furiously that Dick raised his stick,
whereupon she rushed into the kitchen and returned with the carving
knife reinforced by a hatchet.

The situation was not prepossessing--Augustine was a strong woman
and could be disarmed only at the risk of serious results to
herself--and severe legal complications which were the lot of one
who molested a French citizen.  Trying a bluff Dick called up to
Nicole:

"Phone the poste de police."  Then to Augustine, indicating her
armament, "This means arrest for you."

"Ha-HA!" she laughed demoniacally; nevertheless she came no nearer.
Nicole phoned the police but was answered with what was almost an
echo of Augustine's laugh.  She heard mumbles and passings of the
word around--the connection was suddenly broken.

Returning to the window she called down to Dick:  "Give her
something extra!"

"If I could get to that phone!"  As this seemed impracticable, Dick
capitulated.  For fifty francs, increased to a hundred as he
succumbed to the idea of getting her out hastily, Augustine yielded
her fortress, covering the retreat with stormy grenades of
"Salaud!"  She would leave only when her nephew could come for her
baggage.  Waiting cautiously in the neighborhood of the kitchen
Dick heard a cork pop, but he yielded the point.  There was no
further trouble--when the nephew arrived, all apologetic, Augustine
bade Dick a cheerful, convivial good-by and called up "All revoir,
Madame!  Bonne chance!" to Nicole's window.

The Divers went to Nice and dined on a bouillabaisse, which is a
stew of rock fish and small lobsters, highly seasoned with saffron,
and a bottle of cold Chablis.  He expressed pity for Augustine.

"I'm not sorry a bit," said Nicole.

"I'm sorry--and yet I wish I'd shoved her over the cliff."

There was little they dared talk about in these days; seldom did
they find the right word when it counted, it arrived always a
moment too late when one could not reach the other any more.  To-
night Augustine's outburst had shaken them from their separate
reveries; with the burn and chill of the spiced broth and the
parching wine they talked.

"We can't go on like this," Nicole suggested.  "Or can we?--what do
you think?"  Startled that for the moment Dick did not deny it, she
continued, "Some of the time I think it's my fault--I've ruined
you."

"So I'm ruined, am I?" he inquired pleasantly.

"I didn't mean that.  But you used to want to create things--now
you seem to want to smash them up."

She trembled at criticizing him in these broad terms--but his
enlarging silence frightened her even more.  She guessed that
something was developing behind the silence, behind the hard,
blue eyes, the almost unnatural interest in the children.
Uncharacteristic bursts of temper surprised her--he would suddenly
unroll a long scroll of contempt for some person, race, class, way
of life, way of thinking.  It was as though an incalculable story
was telling itself inside him, about which she could only guess at
in the moments when it broke through the surface.

"After all, what do you get out of this?" she demanded.

"Knowing you're stronger every day.  Knowing that your illness
follows the law of diminishing returns."

His voice came to her from far off, as though he were speaking of
something remote and academic; her alarm made her exclaim, "Dick!"
and she thrust her hand forward to his across the table.  A reflex
pulled Dick's hand back and he added:  "There's the whole situation
to think of, isn't there?  There's not just you."  He covered her
hand with his and said in the old pleasant voice of a conspirator
for pleasure, mischief, profit, and delight:

"See that boat out there?"

It was the motor yacht of T. F. Golding lying placid among the
little swells of the Nicean Bay, constantly bound upon a romantic
voyage that was not dependent upon actual motion.  "We'll go out
there now and ask the people on board what's the matter with them.
We'll find out if they're happy."

"We hardly know him," Nicole objected.

"He urged us.  Besides, Baby knows him--she practically married
him, doesn't she--didn't she?"

When they put out from the port in a hired launch it was already
summer dusk and lights were breaking out in spasms along the
rigging of the Margin.  As they drew up alongside, Nicole's doubts
reasserted themselves.

"He's having a party--"

"It's only a radio," he guessed.

They were hailed--a huge white-haired man in a white suit looked
down at them, calling:

"Do I recognize the Divers?"

"Boat ahoy, Margin!"

Their boat moved under the companionway; as they mounted Golding
doubled his huge frame to give Nicole a hand.

"Just in time for dinner."

A small orchestra was playing astern.

"I'm yours for the asking--but till then you can't ask me to
behave--"

And as Golding's cyclonic arms blew them aft without touching them,
Nicole was sorrier they had come, and more impatient at Dick.
Having taken up an attitude of aloofness from the gay people here,
at the time when Dick's work and her health were incompatible with
going about, they had a reputation as refusers.  Riviera
replacements during the ensuing years interpreted this as a vague
unpopularity.  Nevertheless, having taken such a stand, Nicole felt
it should not be cheaply compromised for a momentary self-
indulgence.

As they passed through the principal salon they saw ahead of them
figures that seemed to dance in the half light of the circular
stern.  This was an illusion made by the enchantment of the music,
the unfamiliar lighting, and the surrounding presence of water.
Actually, save for some busy stewards, the guests loafed on a wide
divan that followed the curve of the deck.  There were a white, a
red, a blurred dress, the laundered chests of several men, of whom
one, detaching and identifying himself, brought from Nicole a rare
little cry of delight.

"Tommy!"

Brushing aside the Gallicism of his formal dip at her hand, Nicole
pressed her face against his.  They sat, or rather lay down
together on the Antoninian bench.  His handsome face was so dark as
to have lost the pleasantness of deep tan, without attaining the
blue beauty of Negroes--it was just worn leather.  The foreignness
of his depigmentation by unknown suns, his nourishment by strange
soils, his tongue awkward with the curl of many dialects, his
reactions attuned to odd alarms--these things fascinated and rested
Nicole--in the moment of meeting she lay on his bosom, spiritually,
going out and out. . . .  Then self-preservation reasserted itself
and retiring to her own world she spoke lightly.

"You look just like all the adventurers in the movies--but why do
you have to stay away so long?"

Tommy Barban looked at her, uncomprehending but alert; the pupils
of his eyes flashed.

"Five years," she continued, in throaty mimicry of nothing.  "MUCH
too long.  Couldn't you only slaughter a certain number of
creatures and then come back, and breathe our air for a while?"

In her cherished presence Tommy Europeanized himself quickly.

"Mais pour nous héros," he said, "il nous faut du temps, Nicole.
Nous ne pouvons pas faire de petits exercises d'héroisme--il faut
faire les grandes compositions."

"Talk English to me, Tommy."

"Parlez français avec moi, Nicole."

"But the meanings are different--in French you can be heroic and
gallant with dignity, and you know it.  But in English you can't be
heroic and gallant without being a little absurd, and you know that
too.  That gives me an advantage."

"But after all--"  He chuckled suddenly.  "Even in English I'm
brave, heroic and all that."

She pretended to be groggy with wonderment but he was not abashed.

"I only know what I see in the cinema," he said.

"Is it all like the movies?"

"The movies aren't so bad--now this Ronald Colman--have you seen
his pictures about the Corps d'Afrique du Nord?  They're not bad at
all."

"Very well, whenever I go to the movies I'll know you're going
through just that sort of thing at that moment."

As she spoke, Nicole was aware of a small, pale, pretty young woman
with lovely metallic hair, almost green in the deck lights, who had
been sitting on the other side of Tommy and might have been part
either of their conversation or of the one next to them.  She had
obviously had a monopoly of Tommy, for now she abandoned hope of
his attention with what was once called ill grace, and petulantly
crossed the crescent of the deck.

"After all, I am a hero," Tommy said calmly, only half joking.  "I
have ferocious courage, US-ually, something like a lion, something
like a drunken man."

Nicole waited until the echo of his boast had died away in his
mind--she knew he had probably never made such a statement before.
Then she looked among the strangers, and found as usual, the fierce
neurotics, pretending calm, liking the country only in horror of
the city, of the sound of their own voices which had set the tone
and pitch. . . .  She asked:

"Who is the woman in white?"

"The one who was beside me?  Lady Caroline Sibly-Biers."--They
listened for a moment to her voice across the way:

"The man's a scoundrel, but he's a cat of the stripe.  We sat up
all night playing two-handed chemin-de-fer, and he owes me a mille
Swiss."

Tommy laughed and said:  "She is now the wickedest woman in London--
whenever I come back to Europe there is a new crop of the
wickedest women from London.  She's the very latest--though I
believe there is now one other who's considered almost as wicked."

Nicole glanced again at the woman across the deck--she was fragile,
tubercular--it was incredible that such narrow shoulders, such puny
arms could bear aloft the pennon of decadence, last ensign of the
fading empire.  Her resemblance was rather to one of John Held's
flat-chested flappers than to the hierarchy of tall languid blondes
who had posed for painters and novelists since before the war.

Golding approached, fighting down the resonance of his huge bulk,
which transmitted his will as through a gargantuan amplifier, and
Nicole, still reluctant, yielded to his reiterated points: that the
Margin was starting for Cannes immediately after dinner; that they
could always pack in some caviare and champagne, even though they
had dined; that in any case Dick was now on the phone, telling
their chauffeur in Nice to drive their car back to Cannes and leave
it in front of the Café des Alliées where the Divers could retrieve
it.

They moved into the dining salon and Dick was placed next to Lady
Sibly-Biers.  Nicole saw that his usually ruddy face was drained of
blood; he talked in a dogmatic voice, of which only snatches
reached Nicole:

". . . It's all right for you English, you're doing a dance of
death. . . .  Sepoys in the ruined fort, I mean Sepoys at the gate
and gaiety in the fort and all that.  The green hat, the crushed
hat, no future."

Lady Caroline answered him in short sentences spotted with the
terminal "What?" the double-edged "Quite!" the depressing
"Cheerio!" that always had a connotation of imminent peril, but
Dick appeared oblivious to the warning signals.  Suddenly he made a
particularly vehement pronouncement, the purport of which eluded
Nicole, but she saw the young woman turn dark and sinewy, and heard
her answer sharply:

"After all a chep's a chep and a chum's a chum."

Again he had offended some one--couldn't he hold his tongue a
little longer?  How long?  To death then.

At the piano, a fair-haired young Scotsman from the orchestra
(entitled by its drum "The Ragtime College Jazzes of Edinboro") had
begun singing in a Danny Deever monotone, accompanying himself with
low chords on the piano.  He pronounced his words with great
precision, as though they impressed him almost intolerably.


     "There was a young lady from hell,
      Who jumped at the sound of a bell,
      Because she was bad--bad--bad,
      She jumped at the sound of a bell,
      From hell (BOOMBOOM)
      From hell (TOOTTOOT)
      There was a young lady from hell--"


"What is all this?" whispered Tommy to Nicole.

The girl on the other side of him supplied the answer:

"Caroline Sibly-Biers wrote the words.  He wrote the music."

"Quelle enfanterie!" Tommy murmured as the next verse began,
hinting at the jumpy lady's further predilections.  "On dirait
qu'il récite Racine!"

On the surface at least, Lady Caroline was paying no attention to
the performance of her work.  Glancing at her again Nicole found
herself impressed, neither with the character nor the personality,
but with the sheer strength derived from an attitude; Nicole
thought that she was formidable, and she was confirmed in this
point of view as the party rose from table.  Dick remained in his
seat wearing an odd expression; then he crashed into words with a
harsh ineptness.

"I don't like innuendo in these deafening English whispers."

Already half-way out of the room Lady Caroline turned and walked
back to him; she spoke in a low clipped voice purposely audible to
the whole company.

"You came to me asking for it--disparaging my countrymen,
disparaging my friend, Mary Minghetti.  I simply said you were
observed associating with a questionable crowd in Lausanne.  Is
that a deafening whisper?  Or does it simply deafen YOU?"

"It's still not loud enough," said Dick, a little too late.  "So I
am actually a notorious--"

Golding crushed out the phrase with his voice saying:

"What!  What!" and moved his guests on out, with the threat of his
powerful body.  Turning the corner of the door Nicole saw that Dick
was still sitting at the table.  She was furious at the woman for
her preposterous statement, equally furious at Dick for having
brought them here, for having become fuddled, for having untipped
the capped barbs of his irony, for having come off humiliated--she
was a little more annoyed because she knew that her taking
possession of Tommy Barban on their arrival had first irritated the
Englishwoman.

A moment later she saw Dick standing in the gangway, apparently in
complete control of himself as he talked with Golding; then for
half an hour she did not see him anywhere about the deck and she
broke out of an intricate Malay game, played with string and coffee
beans, and said to Tommy:

"I've got to find Dick."

Since dinner the yacht had been in motion westward.  The fine night
streamed away on either side, the Diesel engines pounded softly,
there was a spring wind that blew Nicole's hair abruptly when she
reached the bow, and she had a sharp lesion of anxiety at seeing
Dick standing in the angle by the flagstaff.  His voice was serene
as he recognized her.

"It's a nice night."

"I was worried."

"Oh, you were worried?"

"Oh, don't talk that way.  It would give me so much pleasure to
think of a little something I could do for you, Dick."

He turned away from her, toward the veil of starlight over Africa.

"I believe that's true, Nicole.  And sometimes I believe that the
littler it was, the more pleasure it would give you."

"Don't talk like that--don't say such things."

His face, wan in the light that the white spray caught and tossed
back to the brilliant sky had none of the lines of annoyance she
had expected.  It was even detached; his eyes focussed upon her
gradually as upon a chessman to be moved; in the same slow manner
he caught her wrist and drew her near.

"You ruined me, did you?" he inquired blandly.  "Then we're both
ruined.  So--"

Cold with terror she put her other wrist into his grip.  All right,
she would go with him--again she felt the beauty of the night
vividly in one moment of complete response and abnegation--all
right, then--

--but now she was unexpectedly free and Dick turned his back
sighing.  "Tch! tch!"

Tears streamed down Nicole's face--in a moment she heard some one
approaching; it was Tommy.

"You found him!  Nicole thought maybe you jumped overboard, Dick,"
he said, "because that little English poule slanged you."

"It'd be a good setting to jump overboard," said Dick mildly.

"Wouldn't it?" agreed Nicole hastily.  "Let's borrow life-
preservers and jump over.  I think we should do something
spectacular.  I feel that all our lives have been too restrained."

Tommy sniffed from one to the other trying to breathe in the
situation with the night.  "We'll go ask the Lady Beer-and-Ale what
to do--she should know the latest things.  And we should memorize
her song 'There was a young lady from l'enfer.'  I shall translate
it, and make a fortune from its success at the Casino."

"Are you rich, Tommy?" Dick asked him, as they retraced the length
of the boat.

"Not as things go now.  I got tired of the brokerage business and
went away.  But I have good stocks in the hands of friends who are
holding it for me.  All goes well."

"Dick's getting rich," Nicole said.  In reaction her voice had
begun to tremble.

On the after deck Golding had fanned three pairs of dancers into
action with his colossal paws.  Nicole and Tommy joined them and
Tommy remarked:  "Dick seems to be drinking."

"Only moderately," she said loyally.

"There are those who can drink and those who can't.  Obviously Dick
can't.  You ought to tell him not to."

"I!" she exclaimed in amazement.  "_I_ tell Dick what he should do
or shouldn't do!"

But in a reticent way Dick was still vague and sleepy when they
reached the pier at Cannes.  Golding buoyed him down into the
launch of the Margin whereupon Lady Caroline shifted her place
conspicuously.  On the dock he bowed good-by with exaggerated
formality, and for a moment he seemed about to speed her with a
salty epigram, but the bone of Tommy's arm went into the soft part
of his and they walked to the attendant car.

"I'll drive you home," Tommy suggested.

"Don't bother--we can get a cab."

"I'd like to, if you can put me up."

On the back seat of the car Dick remained quiescent until the
yellow monolith of Golfe Juan was passed, and then the constant
carnival at Juan les Pins where the night was musical and strident
in many languages.  When the car turned up the hill toward Tarmes,
he sat up suddenly, prompted by the tilt of the vehicle and
delivered a peroration:

"A charming representative of the--" he stumbled momentarily, "--a
firm of--bring me Brains addled a l'Anglaise."  Then he went into
an appeased sleep, belching now and then contentedly into the soft
warm darkness.



VI


Next morning Dick came early into Nicole's room.  "I waited till I
heard you up.  Needless to say I feel badly about the evening--but
how about no postmortems?"

"I'm agreed," she answered coolly, carrying her face to the mirror.

"Tommy drove us home?  Or did I dream it?"

"You know he did."

"Seems probable," he admitted, "since I just heard him coughing.
I think I'll call on him."

She was glad when he left her, for almost the first time in her
life--his awful faculty of being right seemed to have deserted him
at last.

Tommy was stirring in his bed, waking for café au lait.

"Feel all right?" Dick asked.

When Tommy complained of a sore throat he seized at a professional
attitude.

"Better have a gargle or something."

"You have one?"

"Oddly enough I haven't--probably Nicole has."

"Don't disturb her."

"She's up."

"How is she?"

Dick turned around slowly.  "Did you expect her to be dead because
I was tight?"  His tone was pleasant.  "Nicole is now made of--of
Georgia pine, which is the hardest wood known, except lignum vitæ
from New Zealand--"

Nicole, going downstairs, heard the end of the conversation.  She
knew, as she had always known, that Tommy loved her; she knew he
had come to dislike Dick, and that Dick had realized it before he
did, and would react in some positive way to the man's lonely
passion.  This thought was succeeded by a moment of sheerly
feminine satisfaction.  She leaned over her children's breakfast
table and told off instructions to the governess, while upstairs
two men were concerned about her.

Later in the garden she was happy; she did not want anything to
happen, but only for the situation to remain in suspension as the
two men tossed her from one mind to another; she had not existed
for a long time, even as a ball.

"Nice, Rabbits, isn't it--Or is it?  Hey, Rabbit--hey you!  Is it
nice?--hey?  Or does it sound very peculiar to you?"

The rabbit, after an experience of practically nothing else and
cabbage leaves, agreed after a few tentative shiftings of the nose.

Nicole went on through her garden routine.  She left the flowers
she cut in designated spots to be brought to the house later by the
gardener.  Reaching the sea wall she fell into a communicative mood
and no one to communicate with; so she stopped and deliberated.
She was somewhat shocked at the idea of being interested in another
man--but other women have lovers--why not me?  In the fine spring
morning the inhibitions of the male world disappeared and she
reasoned as gaily as a flower, while the wind blew her hair until
her head moved with it.  Other women have had lovers--the same
forces that last night had made her yield to Dick up to the point
of death, now kept her head nodding to the wind, content and happy
with the logic of, Why shouldn't I?

She sat upon the low wall and looked down upon the sea.  But from
another sea, the wide swell of fantasy, she had fished out
something tangible to lay beside the rest of her loot.  If she need
not, in her spirit, be forever one with Dick as he had appeared
last night, she must be something in addition, not just an image on
his mind, condemned to endless parades around the circumference of
a medal.

Nicole had chosen this part of the wall on which to sit, because
the cliff shaded to a slanting meadow with a cultivated vegetable
garden.  Through a cluster of boughs she saw two men carrying rakes
and spades and talking in a counterpoint of Niçoise and Provençal.
Attracted by their words and gestures she caught the sense:

"I laid her down here."

"I took her behind the vines there."

"She doesn't care--neither does he.  It was that sacred dog.  Well,
I laid her down here--"

"You got the rake?"

"You got it yourself, you clown."

"Well, I don't care where you laid her down.  Until that night I
never even felt a woman's breast against my chest since I married--
twelve years ago.  And now you tell me--"

"But listen about the dog--"

Nicole watched them through the boughs; it seemed all right what
they were saying--one thing was good for one person, another for
another.  Yet it was a man's world she had overheard; going back to
the house she became doubtful again.

Dick and Tommy were on the terrace.  She walked through them and
into the house, brought out a sketch pad and began a head of Tommy.

"Hands never idle--distaff flying," Dick said lightly.  How could
he talk so trivially with the blood still drained down from his
cheeks so that the auburn lather of beard showed red as his eyes?
She turned to Tommy saying:

"I can always do something.  I used to have a nice active little
Polynesian ape and juggle him around for hours till people began to
make the most dismal rough jokes--"

She kept her eyes resolutely away from Dick.  Presently he excused
himself and went inside--she saw him pour himself two glasses of
water, and she hardened further.

"Nicole--" Tommy began but interrupted himself to clear the
harshness from his throat.

"I'm going to get you some special camphor rub," she suggested.
"It's American--Dick believes in it.  I'll be just a minute."

"I must go really."

Dick came out and sat down.  "Believes in what?"  When she returned
with the jar neither of the men had moved, though she gathered they
had had some sort of excited conversation about nothing.

The chauffeur was at the door, with a bag containing Tommy's
clothes of the night before.  The sight of Tommy in clothes
borrowed from Dick moved her sadly, falsely, as though Tommy were
not able to afford such clothes.

"When you get to the hotel rub this into your throat and chest and
then inhale it," she said.

"Say, there," Dick murmured as Tommy went down the steps, "don't
give Tommy the whole jar--it has to be ordered from Paris--it's out
of stock down here."

Tommy came back within hearing and the three of them stood in the
sunshine, Tommy squarely before the car so that it seemed by
leaning forward he would tip it upon his back.

Nicole stepped down to the path.

"Now catch it," she advised him.  "It's extremely rare."

She heard Dick grow silent at her side; she took a step off from
him and waved as the car drove off with Tommy and the special
camphor rub.  Then she turned to take her own medicine.

"There was no necessity for that gesture," Dick said.  "There are
four of us here--and for years whenever there's a cough--"

They looked at each other.

"We can always get another jar--" then she lost her nerve and
presently followed him upstairs where he lay down on his own bed
and said nothing.

"Do you want lunch to be brought up to you?" she asked.

He nodded and continued to lie quiescent, staring at the ceiling.
Doubtfully she went to give the order.  Upstairs again she looked
into his room--the blue eyes, like searchlights, played on a dark
sky.  She stood a minute in the doorway, aware of the sin she had
committed against him, half afraid to come in. . . .  She put out
her hand as if to rub his head, but he turned away like a
suspicious animal.  Nicole could stand the situation no longer; in
a kitchen-maid's panic she ran downstairs, afraid of what the
stricken man above would feed on while she must still continue her
dry suckling at his lean chest.



In a week Nicole forgot her flash about Tommy--she had not much
memory for people and forgot them easily.  But in the first hot
blast of June she heard he was in Nice.  He wrote a little note to
them both--and she opened it under the parasol, together with other
mail they had brought from the house.  After reading it she tossed
it over to Dick, and in exchange he threw a telegram into the lap
of her beach pajamas:


Dears will be at Gausses to-morrow unfortunately without mother am
counting on seeing you.


"I'll be glad to see her," said Nicole, grimly.



VII


But she went to the beach with Dick next morning with a renewal of
her apprehension that Dick was contriving at some desperate
solution.  Since the evening on Golding's yacht she had sensed what
was going on.  So delicately balanced was she between an old
foothold that had always guaranteed her security, and the imminence
of a leap from which she must alight changed in the very chemistry
of blood and muscle, that she did not dare bring the matter into
the true forefront of consciousness.  The figures of Dick and
herself, mutating, undefined, appeared as spooks caught up into a
fantastic dance.  For months every word had seemed to have an
overtone of some other meaning, soon to be resolved under
circumstances that Dick would determine.  Though this state of mind
was perhaps more hopeful,--the long years of sheer being had had an
enlivening effect on the parts of her nature that early illness had
killed, that Dick had not reached--through no fault of his but
simply because no one nature can extend entirely inside another--it
was still disquieting.  The most unhappy aspect of their relations
was Dick's growing indifference, at present personified by too much
drink; Nicole did not know whether she was to be crushed or spared--
Dick's voice, throbbing with insincerity, confused the issue; she
couldn't guess how he was going to behave next upon the tortuously
slow unrolling of the carpet, nor what would happen at the end, at
the moment of the leap.

For what might occur thereafter she had no anxiety--she suspected
that that would be the lifting of a burden, an unblinding of eyes.
Nicole had been designed for change, for flight, with money as fins
and wings.  The new state of things would be no more than if a
racing chassis, concealed for years under the body of a family
limousine, should be stripped to its original self.  Nicole could
feel the fresh breeze already--the wrench it was she feared, and
the dark manner of its coming.

The Divers went out on the beach with her white suit and his white
trunks very white against the color of their bodies.  Nicole saw
Dick peer about for the children among the confused shapes and
shadows of many umbrellas, and as his mind temporarily left her,
ceasing to grip her, she looked at him with detachment, and decided
that he was seeking his children, not protectively but for
protection.  Probably it was the beach he feared, like a deposed
ruler secretly visiting an old court.  She had come to hate his
world with its delicate jokes and politenesses, forgetting that for
many years it was the only world open to her.  Let him look at it--
his beach, perverted now to the tastes of the tasteless; he could
search it for a day and find no stone of the Chinese Wall he had
once erected around it, no footprint of an old friend.

For a moment Nicole was sorry it was so; remembering the glass he
had raked out of the old trash heap, remembering the sailor trunks
and sweaters they had bought in a Nice back street--garments that
afterward ran through a vogue in silk among the Paris couturiers,
remembering the simple little French girls climbing on the
breakwaters crying "Dites donc!  Dites donc!" like birds, and the
ritual of the morning time, the quiet restful extraversion toward
sea and sun--many inventions of his, buried deeper than the sand
under the span of so few years. . . .

Now the swimming place was a "club," though, like the international
society it represented, it would be hard to say who was not
admitted.

Nicole hardened again as Dick knelt on the straw mat and looked
about for Rosemary.  Her eyes followed his, searching among the new
paraphernalia, the trapezes over the water, the swinging rings, the
portable bathhouses, the floating towers, the searchlights from
last night's fêtes, the modernistic buffet, white with a hackneyed
motif of endless handlebars.

The water was almost the last place he looked for Rosemary, because
few people swam any more in that blue paradise, children and one
exhibitionistic valet who punctuated the morning with spectacular
dives from a fifty-foot rock--most of Gausse's guests stripped the
concealing pajamas from their flabbiness only for a short hangover
dip at one o'clock.

"There she is," Nicole remarked.

She watched Dick's eyes following Rosemary's track from raft to
raft; but the sigh that rocked out of her bosom was something left
over from five years ago.

"Let's swim out and speak to Rosemary," he suggested.

"You go."

"We'll both go."  She struggled a moment against his pronouncement,
but eventually they swam out together, tracing Rosemary by the
school of little fish who followed her, taking their dazzle from
her, the shining spoon of a trout hook.

Nicole stayed in the water while Dick hoisted himself up beside
Rosemary, and the two sat dripping and talking, exactly as if they
had never loved or touched each other.  Rosemary was beautiful--her
youth was a shock to Nicole, who rejoiced, however, that the young
girl was less slender by a hairline than herself.  Nicole swam
around in little rings, listening to Rosemary who was acting
amusement, joy, and expectation--more confident than she had been
five years ago.

"I miss Mother so, but she's meeting me in Paris, Monday."

"Five years ago you came here," said Dick.  "And what a funny
little thing you were, in one of those hotel peignoirs!"

"How you remember things!  You always did--and always the nice
things."

Nicole saw the old game of flattery beginning again and she dove
under water, coming up again to hear:

"I'm going to pretend it's five years ago and I'm a girl of
eighteen again.  You could always make me feel some you know, kind
of, you know, kind of happy way--you and Nicole.  I feel as if
you're still on the beach there, under one of those umbrellas--the
nicest people I'd ever known, maybe ever will."

Swimming away, Nicole saw that the cloud of Dick's heart-sickness
had lifted a little as he began to play with Rosemary, bringing out
his old expertness with people, a tarnished object of art; she
guessed that with a drink or so he would have done his stunts on
the swinging rings for her, fumbling through stunts he had once
done with ease.  She noticed that this summer, for the first time,
he avoided high diving.

Later, as she dodged her way from raft to raft, Dick overtook her.

"Some of Rosemary's friends have a speed boat, the one out there.
Do you want to aquaplane?  I think it would be amusing."

Remembering that once he could stand on his hands on a chair at the
end of a board, she indulged him as she might have indulged Lanier.
Last summer on the Zugersee they had played at that pleasant water
game, and Dick had lifted a two-hundred-pound man from the board
onto his shoulders and stood up.  But women marry all their
husbands' talents and naturally, afterwards, are not so impressed
with them as they may keep up the pretense of being.  Nicole had
not even pretended to be impressed, though she had said "Yes" to
him, and "Yes, I thought so too."

She knew, though, that he was somewhat tired, that it was only the
closeness of Rosemary's exciting youth that prompted the impending
effort--she had seen him draw the same inspiration from the new
bodies of her children and she wondered coldly if he would make a
spectacle of himself.  The Divers were older than the others in the
boat--the young people were polite, deferential, but Nicole felt an
undercurrent of "Who are these Numbers anyhow?" and she missed
Dick's easy talent of taking control of situations and making them
all right--he had concentrated on what he was going to try to do.

The motor throttled down two hundred yards from shore and one of
the young men dove flat over the edge.  He swam at the aimless
twisting board, steadied it, climbed slowly to his knees on it--
then got on his feet as the boat accelerated.  Leaning back he
swung his light vehicle ponderously from side to side in slow,
breathless arcs that rode the trailing side-swell at the end of
each swing.  In the direct wake of the boat he let go his rope,
balanced for a moment, then back-flipped into the water,
disappearing like a statue of glory, and reappearing as an
insignificant head while the boat made the circle back to him.

Nicole refused her turn; then Rosemary rode the board neatly and
conservatively, with facetious cheers from her admirers.  Three of
them scrambled egotistically for the honor of pulling her into the
boat, managing, among them, to bruise her knee and hip against the
side.

"Now you.  Doctor," said the Mexican at the wheel.

Dick and the last young man dove over the side and swam to the
board.  Dick was going to try his lifting trick and Nicole began to
watch with smiling scorn.  This physical showing-off for Rosemary
irritated her most of all.

When the men had ridden long enough to find their balance, Dick
knelt, and putting the back of his neck in the other man's crotch,
found the rope through his legs, and slowly began to rise.

The people in the boat, watching closely, saw that he was having
difficulties.  He was on one knee; the trick was to straighten all
the way up in the same motion with which he left his kneeling
position.  He rested for a moment, then his face contracted as he
put his heart into the strain, and lifted.

The board was narrow, the man, though weighing less than a hundred
and fifty, was awkward with his weight and grabbed clumsily at
Dick's head.  When, with a last wrenching effort of his back, Dick
stood upright, the board slid sidewise and the pair toppled into
the sea.

In the boat Rosemary exclaimed:  "Wonderful!  They almost had it."

But as they came back to the swimmers Nicole watched for a sight of
Dick's face.  It was full of annoyance as she expected, because he
had done the thing with ease only two years ago.

The second time he was more careful.  He rose a little testing the
balance of his burden, settled down again on his knee; then,
grunting "Alley oop!" began to rise--but before he could really
straighten out, his legs suddenly buckled and he shoved the board
away with his feet to avoid being struck as they fell off.

This time when the Baby Gar came back it was apparent to all the
passengers that he was angry.

"Do you mind if I try that once more?" he called, treading water.
"We almost had it then."

"Sure.  Go ahead."

To Nicole he looked white-around-the-gills, and she cautioned him:

"Don't you think that's enough for now?"

He didn't answer.  The first partner had had plenty and was hauled
over the side, the Mexican driving the motor boat obligingly took
his place.

He was heavier than the first man.  As the boat gathered motion,
Dick rested for a moment, belly-down on the board.  Then he got
beneath the man and took the rope, and his muscles flexed as he
tried to rise.

He could not rise.  Nicole saw him shift his position and strain
upward again but at the instant when the weight of his partner was
full upon his shoulders he became immovable.  He tried again--
lifting an inch, two inches--Nicole felt the sweat glands of her
forehead open as she strained with him--then he was simply holding
his ground, then he collapsed back down on his knees with a smack,
and they went over, Dick's head barely missing a kick of the board.

"Hurry back!" Nicole called to the driver; even as she spoke she
saw him slide under water and she gave a little cry; but he came up
again and turned on his back, and "Château" swam near to help.  It
seemed forever till the boat reached them but when they came
alongside at last and Nicole saw Dick floating exhausted and
expressionless, alone with the water and the sky, her panic changed
suddenly to contempt.

"We'll help you up, Doctor. . . .  Get his foot . . . all right . . .
now altogether. . . ."

Dick sat panting and looking at nothing.

"I knew you shouldn't have tried it," Nicole could not help saying.

"He'd tired himself the first two times," said the Mexican.

"It was a foolish thing," Nicole insisted.  Rosemary tactfully said
nothing.

After a minute Dick got his breath, panting, "I couldn't have
lifted a paper doll that time."

An explosive little laugh relieved the tension caused by his
failure.  They were all attentive to Dick as he disembarked at the
dock.  But Nicole was annoyed--everything he did annoyed her now.

She sat with Rosemary under an umbrella while Dick went to the
buffet for a drink--he returned presently with some sherry for
them.

"The first drink I ever had was with you," Rosemary said, and with
a spurt of enthusiasm she added, "Oh, I'm so glad to see you and
KNOW you're all right.  I was worried--"  Her sentence broke as she
changed direction "that maybe you wouldn't be."

"Did you hear I'd gone into a process of deterioration?"

"Oh, no.  I simply--just heard you'd changed.  And I'm glad to see
with my own eyes it isn't true."

"It is true," Dick answered, sitting down with them.  "The change
came a long way back--but at first it didn't show.  The manner
remains intact for some time after the morale cracks."

"Do you practise on the Riviera?" Rosemary demanded hastily.

"It'd be a good ground to find likely specimens."  He nodded here
and there at the people milling about in the golden sand.  "Great
candidates.  Notice our old friend, Mrs. Abrams, playing duchess to
Mary North's queen?  Don't get jealous about it--think of Mrs.
Abram's long climb up the back stairs of the Ritz on her hands and
knees and all the carpet dust she had to inhale."

Rosemary interrupted him.  "But is that really Mary North?"  She
was regarding a woman sauntering in their direction followed by a
small group who behaved as if they were accustomed to being looked
at.  When they were ten feet away, Mary's glance flickered
fractionally over the Divers, one of those unfortunate glances that
indicate to the glanced-upon that they have been observed but are
to be overlooked, the sort of glance that neither the Divers nor
Rosemary Hoyt had ever permitted themselves to throw at any one in
their lives.  Dick was amused when Mary perceived Rosemary, changed
her plans and came over.  She spoke to Nicole with pleasant
heartiness, nodded unsmilingly to Dick as if he were somewhat
contagious--whereupon he bowed in ironic respect--as she greeted
Rosemary.

"I heard you were here.  For how long?"

"Until to-morrow," Rosemary answered.

She, too, saw how Mary had walked through the Divers to talk to
her, and a sense of obligation kept her unenthusiastic.  No, she
could not dine to-night.

Mary turned to Nicole, her manner indicating affection blended with
pity.

"How are the children?" she asked.

They came up at the moment, and Nicole gave ear to a request that
she overrule the governess on a swimming point.

"No," Dick answered for her.  "What Mademoiselle says must go."

Agreeing that one must support delegated authority, Nicole refused
their request, whereupon Mary--who in the manner of an Anita Loos'
heroine had dealings only with Faits Accomplis, who indeed could
not have house-broken a French poodle puppy--regarded Dick as
though he were guilty of a most flagrant bullying.  Dick, chafed by
the tiresome performance, inquired with mock solicitude:

"How are your children--and their aunts?"

Mary did not answer; she left them, first draping a sympathetic
hand over Lanier's reluctant head.  After she had gone Dick said:
"When I think of the time I spent working over her."

"I like her," said Nicole.

Dick's bitterness had surprised Rosemary, who had thought of him as
all-forgiving, all-comprehending.  Suddenly she recalled what it
was she had heard about him.  In conversation with some State
Department people on the boat,--Europeanized Americans who had
reached a position where they could scarcely have been said to
belong to any nation at all, at least not to any great power though
perhaps to a Balkan-like state composed of similar citizens--the
name of the ubiquitously renowned Baby Warren had occurred and it
was remarked that Baby's younger sister had thrown herself away on
a dissipated doctor.  "He's not received anywhere any more," the
woman said.

The phrase disturbed Rosemary, though she could not place the
Divers as living in any relation to society where such a fact, if
fact it was, could have any meaning, yet the hint of a hostile and
organized public opinion rang in her ears.  "He's not received
anywhere any more."  She pictured Dick climbing the steps of a
mansion, presenting cards and being told by a butler:  "We're not
receiving you any more"; then proceeding down an avenue only to be
told the same thing by the countless other butlers of countless
Ambassadors, Ministers, Chargés d'Affaires. . . .

Nicole wondered how she could get away.  She guessed that Dick,
stung into alertness, would grow charming and would make Rosemary
respond to him.  Sure enough, in a moment his voice managed to
qualify everything unpleasant he had said:

"Mary's all right--she's done very well.  But it's hard to go on
liking people who don't like you."

Rosemary, falling into line, swayed toward Dick and crooned:

"Oh, you're so nice.  I can't imagine anybody not forgiving you
anything, no matter what you did to them."  Then feeling that her
exuberance had transgressed on Nicole's rights, she looked at the
sand exactly between them:  "I wanted to ask you both what you
thought of my latest pictures--if you saw them."

Nicole said nothing, having seen one of them and thought little
about it.

"It'll take a few minutes to tell you," Dick said.  "Let's suppose
that Nicole says to you that Lanier is ill.  What do you do in
life?  What does anyone do?  They ACT--face, voice, words--the face
shows sorrow, the voice shows shock, the words show sympathy."

"Yes--I understand."

"But in the theatre, No.  In the theatre all the best comediennes
have built up their reputations by burlesquing the correct
emotional responses--fear and love and sympathy."

"I see."  Yet she did not quite see.

Losing the thread of it, Nicole's impatience increased as Dick
continued:

"The danger to an actress is in responding.  Again, let's suppose
that somebody told you, 'Your lover is dead.'  In life you'd
probably go to pieces.  But on the stage you're trying to
entertain--the audience can do the 'responding' for themselves.
First the actress has lines to follow, then she has to get the
audience's attention back on herself, away from the murdered
Chinese or whatever the thing is.  So she must do something
unexpected.  If the audience thinks the character is hard she goes
soft on them--if they think she's soft she goes hard.  You go all
OUT of character--you understand?"

"I don't quite," admitted Rosemary.  "How do you mean out of
character?"

"You do the unexpected thing until you've manoeuvred the audience
back from the objective fact to yourself.  THEN you slide into
character again."

Nicole could stand no more.  She stood up sharply, making no
attempt to conceal her impatience.  Rosemary, who had been for a
few minutes half-conscious of this, turned in a conciliatory way to
Topsy.

"Would you like to be an actress when you grow up?  I think you'd
make a fine actress."

Nicole stared at her deliberately and in her grandfather's voice
said, slow and distinct:

"It's absolutely OUT to put such ideas in the heads of other
people's children.  Remember, we may have quite different plans for
them."  She turned sharply to Dick.  "I'm going to take the car
home.  I'll send Michelle for you and the children."

"You haven't driven for months," he protested.

"I haven't forgotten how."

Without a glance at Rosemary whose face was "responding" violently,
Nicole left the umbrella.

In the bathhouse, she changed to pajamas, her expression still hard
as a plaque.  But as she turned into the road of arched pines and
the atmosphere changed,--with a squirrel's flight on a branch, a
wind nudging at the leaves, a cock splitting distant air, with a
creep of sunlight transpiring through the immobility, then the
voices of the beach receded--Nicole relaxed and felt new and happy;
her thoughts were clear as good bells--she had a sense of being
cured and in a new way.  Her ego began blooming like a great rich
rose as she scrambled back along the labyrinths in which she had
wandered for years.  She hated the beach, resented the places where
she had played planet to Dick's sun.

"Why, I'm almost complete," she thought.  "I'm practically standing
alone, without him."  And like a happy child, wanting the
completion as soon as possible, and knowing vaguely that Dick had
planned for her to have it, she lay on her bed as soon as she got
home and wrote Tommy Barban in Nice a short provocative letter.



But that was for the daytime--toward evening with the inevitable
diminution of nervous energy, her spirits flagged, and the arrows
flew a little in the twilight.  She was afraid of what was in
Dick's mind; again she felt that a plan underlay his current
actions and she was afraid of his plans--they worked well and they
had an all-inclusive logic about them which Nicole was not able to
command.  She had somehow given over the thinking to him, and in
his absences her every action seemed automatically governed by what
he would like, so that now she felt inadequate to match her
intentions against his.  Yet think she must; she knew at last the
number on the dreadful door of fantasy, the threshold to the escape
that was no escape; she knew that for her the greatest sin now and
in the future was to delude herself.  It had been a long lesson but
she had learned it.  Either you think--or else others have to think
for you and take power from you, pervert and discipline your
natural tastes, civilize and sterilize you.

They had a tranquil supper with Dick drinking much beer and being
cheerful with the children in the dusky room.  Afterward he played
some Schubert songs and some new jazz from America that Nicole
hummed in her harsh, sweet contralto over his shoulder.


     "Thank y' father-r
      Thank y' mother-r
      Thanks for meetingup with one another--"


"I don't like that one," Dick said, starting to turn the page.

"Oh, play it!" she exclaimed.  "Am I going through the rest of life
flinching at the word 'father'?"


     "--Thank the horse that pulled the buggy that night!
      Thank you both for being justabit tight--"


Later they sat with the children on the Moorish roof and watched
the fireworks of two casinos, far apart, far down on the shore.  It
was lonely and sad to be so empty-hearted toward each other.

Next morning, back from shopping in Cannes, Nicole found a note
saying that Dick had taken the small car and gone up into Provence
for a few days by himself.  Even as she read it the phone rang--it
was Tommy Barban from Monte Carlo, saying that he had received her
letter and was driving over.  She felt her lips' warmth in the
receiver as she welcomed his coming.



VIII


She bathed and anointed herself and covered her body with a layer
of powder, while her toes crunched another pile on a bath towel.
She looked microscopically at the lines of her flanks, wondering
how soon the fine, slim edifice would begin to sink squat and
earthward.  In about six years, but now I'll do--in fact I'll do as
well as any one I know.

She was not exaggerating.  The only physical disparity between
Nicole at present and the Nicole of five years before was simply
that she was no longer a young girl.  But she was enough ridden by
the current youth worship, the moving pictures with their myriad
faces of girl-children, blandly represented as carrying on the work
and wisdom of the world, to feel a jealousy of youth.

She put on the first ankle-length day dress that she had owned for
many years, and crossed herself reverently with Chanel Sixteen.
When Tommy drove up at one o'clock she had made her person into the
trimmest of gardens.

How good to have things like this, to be worshipped again, to
pretend to have a mystery!  She had lost two of the great arrogant
years in the life of a pretty girl--now she felt like making up for
them; she greeted Tommy as if he were one of many men at her feet,
walking ahead of him instead of beside him as they crossed the
garden toward the market umbrella.  Attractive women of nineteen
and of twenty-nine are alike in their breezy confidence; on the
contrary, the exigent womb of the twenties does not pull the
outside world centripetally around itself.  The former are ages of
insolence, comparable the one to a young cadet, the other to a
fighter strutting after combat.

But whereas a girl of nineteen draws her confidence from a surfeit
of attention, a woman of twenty-nine is nourished on subtler stuff.
Desirous, she chooses her apéritifs wisely, or, content, she enjoys
the caviare of potential power.  Happily she does not seem, in
either case, to anticipate the subsequent years when her insight
will often be blurred by panic, by the fear of stopping or the fear
of going on.  But on the landings of nineteen or twenty-nine she is
pretty sure that there are no bears in the hall.

Nicole did not want any vague spiritual romance--she wanted an
"affair"; she wanted a change.  She realized, thinking with Dick's
thoughts, that from a superficial view it was a vulgar business to
enter, without emotion, into an indulgence that menaced all of
them.  On the other hand, she blamed Dick for the immediate
situation, and honestly thought that such an experiment might have
a therapeutic value.  All summer she had been stimulated by
watching people do exactly what they were tempted to do and pay no
penalty for it--moreover, in spite of her intention of no longer
lying to herself, she preferred to consider that she was merely
feeling her way and that at any moment she could withdraw. . . .

In the light shade Tommy caught her up in his white-duck arms and
pulled her around to him, looking at her eyes.

"Don't move," he said.  "I'm going to look at you a great deal from
now on."

There was some scent on his hair, a faint aura of soap from his
white clothes.  Her lips were tight, not smiling and they both
simply looked for a moment.

"Do you like what you see?" she murmured.

"Parle français."

"Very well," and she asked again in French.  "Do you like what you
see?"

He pulled her closer.

"I like whatever I see about you."  He hesitated.  "I thought I
knew your face but it seems there are some things I didn't know
about it.  When did you begin to have white crook's eyes?"

She broke away, shocked and indignant, and cried in English:

"Is that why you wanted to talk French?"  Her voice quieted as the
butler came with sherry.  "So you could be offensive more
accurately?"

She parked her small seat violently on the cloth-of-silver chair
cushion.

"I have no mirror here," she said, again in French, but decisively,
"but if my eyes have changed it's because I'm well again.  And
being well perhaps I've gone back to my true self--I suppose my
grandfather was a crook and I'm a crook by heritage, so there we
are.  Does that satisfy your logical mind?"

He scarcely seemed to know what she was talking about.

"Where's Dick--is he lunching with us?"

Seeing that his remark had meant comparatively little to him she
suddenly laughed away its effect.

"Dick's on a tour," she said.  "Rosemary Hoyt turned up, and either
they're together or she upset him so much that he wants to go away
and dream about her."

"You know, you're a little complicated after all."

"Oh no," she assured him hastily.  "No, I'm not really--I'm just a--
I'm just a whole lot of different simple people."

Marius brought out melon and an ice pail, and Nicole, thinking
irresistibly about her crook's eyes did not answer; he gave one an
entire nut to crack, this man, instead of giving it in fragments to
pick at for meat.

"Why didn't they leave you in your natural state?" Tommy demanded
presently.  "You are the most dramatic person I have known."

She had no answer.

"All this taming of women!" he scoffed.

"In any society there are certain--"  She felt Dick's ghost
prompting at her elbow but she subsided at Tommy's overtone:

"I've brutalized many men into shape but I wouldn't take a chance
on half the number of women.  Especially this 'kind' bullying--what
good does it do anybody?--you or him or anybody?"

Her heart leaped and then sank faintly with a sense of what she
owed Dick.

"I suppose I've got--"

"You've got too much money," he said impatiently.  "That's the crux
of the matter.  Dick can't beat that."

She considered while the melons were removed.

"What do you think I ought to do?"

For the first time in ten years she was under the sway of a
personality other than her husband's.  Everything Tommy said to her
became part of her forever.

They drank the bottle of wine while a faint wind rocked the pine
needles and the sensuous heat of early afternoon made blinding
freckles on the checkered luncheon cloth.  Tommy came over behind
her and laid his arms along hers, clasping her hands.  Their cheeks
touched and then their lips and she gasped half with passion for
him, half with the sudden surprise of its force. . . .

"Can't you send the governess and the children away for the
afternoon?"

"They have a piano lesson.  Anyhow I don't want to stay here."

"Kiss me again."

A little later, riding toward Nice, she thought:  So I have white
crook's eyes, have I?  Very well then, better a sane crook than a
mad puritan.

His assertion seemed to absolve her from all blame or
responsibility and she had a thrill of delight in thinking of
herself in a new way.  New vistas appeared ahead, peopled with the
faces of many men, none of whom she need obey or even love.  She
drew in her breath, hunched her shoulders with a wriggle and turned
to Tommy.

"Have we GOT to go all the way to your hotel at Monte Carlo?"

He brought the car to a stop with a squeak of tires.

"No!" he answered.  "And, my God, I have never been so happy as I
am this minute."

They had passed through Nice following the blue coast and begun to
mount to the middling-high Corniche.  Now Tommy turned sharply down
to the shore, ran out a blunt peninsula, and stopped in the rear of
a small shore hotel.

Its tangibility frightened Nicole for a moment.  At the desk an
American was arguing interminably with the clerk about the rate of
exchange.  She hovered, outwardly tranquil but inwardly miserable,
as Tommy filled out the police blanks--his real, hers false.  Their
room was a Mediterranean room, almost ascetic, almost clean,
darkened to the glare of the sea.  Simplest of pleasures--simplest
of places.  Tommy ordered two cognacs, and when the door closed
behind the waiter, he sat in the only chair, dark, scarred and
handsome, his eyebrows arched and upcurling, a fighting Puck, an
earnest Satan.

Before they had finished the brandy they suddenly moved together
and met standing up; then they were sitting on the bed and he
kissed her hardy knees.  Struggling a little still, like a
decapitated animal she forgot about Dick and her new white eyes,
forgot Tommy himself and sank deeper and deeper into the minutes
and the moment.

. . . When he got up to open a shutter and find out what caused the
increasing clamor below their windows, his figure was darker and
stronger than Dick's, with high lights along the rope-twists of
muscle.  Momentarily he had forgotten her too--almost in the second
of his flesh breaking from hers she had a foretaste that things
were going to be different than she had expected.  She felt the
nameless fear which precedes all emotions, joyous or sorrowful,
inevitable as a hum of thunder precedes a storm.

Tommy peered cautiously from the balcony and reported.

"All I can see is two women on the balcony below this.  They're
talking about weather and tipping back and forth in American
rocking-chairs."

"Making all that noise?"

"The noise is coming from somewhere below them.  Listen."


     "Oh, way down South in the land of cotton
      Hotels bum and business rotten
      Look away--"


"It's Americans."

Nicole flung her arms wide on the bed and stared at the ceiling;
the powder had dampened on her to make a milky surface.  She liked
the bareness of the room, the sound of the single fly navigating
overhead.  Tommy brought the chair over to the bed and swept the
clothes off it to sit down; she liked the economy of the weightless
dress and espadrilles that mingled with his ducks upon the floor.

He inspected the oblong white torso joined abruptly to the brown
limbs and head, and said, laughing gravely:

"You are all new like a baby."

"With white eyes."

"I'll take care of that."

"It's very hard taking care of white eyes--especially the ones made
in Chicago."

"I know all the old Languedoc peasant remedies."

"Kiss me, on the lips, Tommy."

"That's so American," he said, kissing her nevertheless.  "When I
was in America last there were girls who would tear you apart with
their lips, tear themselves too, until their faces were scarlet
with the blood around the lips all brought out in a patch--but
nothing further."

Nicole leaned up on one elbow.

"I like this room," she said.

"I find it somewhat meagre.  Darling, I'm glad you wouldn't wait
until we got to Monte Carlo."

"Why only meagre?  Why, this is a wonderful room, Tommy--like the
bare tables in so many Cézannes and Picassos."

"I don't know."  He did not try to understand her.  "There's that
noise again.  My God, has there been a murder?"

He went to the window and reported once more:

"It seems to be two American sailors fighting and a lot more
cheering them on.  They are from your battleship off shore."  He
wrapped a towel around himself and went farther out on the balcony.
"They have poules with them.  I have heard about this now--the
women follow them from place to place wherever the ship goes.  But
what women!  One would think with their pay they could find better
women!  Why the women who followed Korniloff!  Why we never looked
at anything less than a ballerina!"

Nicole was glad he had known so many women, so that the word itself
meant nothing to him; she would be able to hold him so long as the
person in her transcended the universals of her body.

"Hit him where it hurts!"

"Yah-h-h-h!"

"Hey, what I tell you get inside that right!"

"Come on, Dulschmit, you son!"

"YAA-YAA!"

"YA-YEH-YAH!"

Tommy turned away.

"This place seems to have outlived its usefulness, you agree?"

She agreed, but they clung together for a moment before dressing,
and then for a while longer it seemed as good enough a palace as
any. . . .

Dressing at last Tommy exclaimed:

"MY GOD, those two women in the rocking-chairs on the balcony below
us haven't moved.  They're trying to talk this matter out of
existence.  They're here on an economical holiday, and all the
American navy and all the whores in Europe couldn't spoil it."

He came over gently and surrounded her, pulling the shoulder strap
of her slip into place with his teeth; then a sound split the air
outside:  Cr-ACK--BOOM-M-m-m!  It was the battleship sounding a
recall.

Now, down below their window, it was pandemonium indeed--for the
boat was moving to shores as yet unannounced.  Waiters called
accounts and demanded settlements in impassioned voices, there were
oaths and denials; the tossing of bills too large and change too
small; passouts were assisted to the boats, and the voices of the
naval police chopped with quick commands through all voices.  There
were cries, tears, shrieks, promises as the first launch shoved off
and the women crowded forward on the wharf, screaming and waving.

Tommy saw a girl rush out upon the balcony below waving a napkin,
and before he could see whether or not the rocking Englishwomen
gave in at last and acknowledged her presence, there was a knock at
their own door.  Outside, excited female voices made them agree to
unlock it, disclosing two girls, young, thin and barbaric, unfound
rather than lost, in the hall.  One of them wept chokingly.

"Kwee wave off your porch?" implored the other in passionate
American.  "Kwee please?  Wave at the boy friends?  Kwee, please.
The other rooms is all locked."

"With pleasure," Tommy said.

The girls rushed out on the balcony and presently their voices
struck a loud treble over the din.

"'By, Charlie!  Charlie, look UP!"

"Send a wire gen'al alivery Nice!"

"Charlie!  He don't see me."

One of the girls hoisted her skirt suddenly, pulled and ripped at
her pink step-ins and tore them to a sizable flag; then, screaming
"Ben!  Ben!" she waved it wildly.  As Tommy and Nicole left the
room it still fluttered against the blue sky.  Oh, say can you see
the tender color of remembered flesh?--while at the stern of the
battleship arose in rivalry the Star-Spangled Banner.

They dined at the new Beach Casino at Monte Carlo . . . much later
they swam in Beaulieu in a roofless cavern of white moonlight
formed by a circlet of pale boulders about a cup of phosphorescent
water, facing Monaco and the blur of Mentone.  She liked his
bringing her there to the eastward vision and the novel tricks of
wind and water; it was all as new as they were to each other.
Symbolically she lay across his saddle-bow as surely as if he had
wolfed her away from Damascus and they had come out upon the
Mongolian plain.  Moment by moment all that Dick had taught her
fell away and she was ever nearer to what she had been in the
beginning, prototype of that obscure yielding up of swords that was
going on in the world about her.  Tangled with love in the
moonlight she welcomed the anarchy of her lover.

They awoke together finding the moon gone down and the air cool.
She struggled up demanding the time and Tommy called it roughly at
three.

"I've got to go home then."

"I thought we'd sleep in Monte Carlo."

"No.  There's a governess and the children.  I've got to roll in
before daylight."

"As you like."

They dipped for a second, and when he saw her shivering he rubbed
her briskly with a towel.  As they got into the car with their
heads still damp, their skins fresh and glowing, they were loath to
start back.  It was very bright where they were and as Tommy kissed
her she felt him losing himself in the whiteness of her cheeks and
her white teeth and her cool brow and the hand that touched his
face.  Still attuned to Dick, she waited for interpretation or
qualification; but none was forthcoming.  Reassured sleepily and
happily that none would be, she sank low in the seat and drowsed
until the sound of the motor changed and she felt them climbing
toward Villa Diana.  At the gate she kissed him an almost automatic
good-by.  The sound of her feet on the walk was changed, the night
noises of the garden were suddenly in the past but she was glad,
none the less, to be back.  The day had progressed at a staccato
rate, and in spite of its satisfactions she was not habituated to
such strain.



IX


At four o'clock next afternoon a station taxi stopped at the gate
and Dick got out.  Suddenly off balance, Nicole ran from the
terrace to meet him, breathless with her effort at self-control.

"Where's the car?" she asked.

"I left it in Arles.  I didn't feel like driving any more."

"I thought from your note that you'd be several days."

"I ran into a mistral and some rain."

"Did you have fun?"

"Just as much fun as anybody has running away from things.  I drove
Rosemary as far as Avignon and put her on her train there."  They
walked toward the terrace together, where he deposited his bag.  "I
didn't tell you in the note because I thought you'd imagine a lot
of things."

"That was very considerate of you."  Nicole felt surer of herself
now.

"I wanted to find out if she had anything to offer--the only way
was to see her alone."

"Did she have--anything to offer?"

"Rosemary didn't grow up," he answered.  "It's probably better that
way.  What have you been doing?"

She felt her face quiver like a rabbit's.

"I went dancing last night--with Tommy Barban.  We went--"

He winced, interrupting her.

"Don't tell me about it.  It doesn't matter what you do, only I
don't want to know anything definitely."

"There isn't anything to know."

"All right, all right."  Then as if he had been away a week:  "How
are the children?"

The phone rang in the house.

"If it's for me I'm not home," said Dick turning away quickly.
"I've got some things to do over in the work-room."

Nicole waited till he was out of sight behind the well; then she
went into the house and took up the phone.

"Nicole, comment vas-tu?"

"Dick's home."

He groaned.

"Meet me here in Cannes," he suggested.  "I've got to talk to you."

"I can't."

"Tell me you love me."  Without speaking she nodded at the
receiver; he repeated, "Tell me you love me."

"Oh, I do," she assured him.  "But there's nothing to be done right
now."

"Of course there is," he said impatiently.  "Dick sees it's over
between you two--it's obvious he has quit.  What does he expect you
to do?"

"I don't know.  I'll have to--"  She stopped herself from saying
"--to wait until I can ask Dick," and instead finished with:  "I'll
write and I'll phone you to-morrow."

She wandered about the house rather contentedly, resting on her
achievement.  She was a mischief, and that was a satisfaction; no
longer was she a huntress of corralled game.  Yesterday came back
to her now in innumerable detail--detail that began to overlay her
memory of similar moments when her love for Dick was fresh and
intact.  She began to slight that love, so that it seemed to have
been tinged with sentimental habit from the first.  With the
opportunistic memory of women she scarcely recalled how she had
felt when she and Dick had possessed each other in secret places
around the corners of the world, during the month before they were
married.  Just so had she lied to Tommy last night, swearing to
him that never before had she so entirely, so completely, so
utterly. . . .

. . . then remorse for this moment of betrayal, which so cavalierly
belittled a decade of her life, turned her walk toward Dick's
sanctuary.

Approaching noiselessly she saw him behind his cottage, sitting in
a steamer chair by the cliff wall, and for a moment she regarded
him silently.  He was thinking, he was living a world completely
his own and in the small motions of his face, the brow raised or
lowered, the eyes narrowed or widened, the lips set and reset, the
play of his hands, she saw him progress from phase to phase of his
own story spinning out inside him, his own, not hers.  Once he
clenched his fists and leaned forward, once it brought into his
face an expression of torment and despair--when this passed its
stamp lingered in his eyes.  For almost the first time in her life
she was sorry for him--it is hard for those who have once been
mentally afflicted to be sorry for those who are well, and though
Nicole often paid lip service to the fact that he had led her back
to the world she had forfeited, she had thought of him really as an
inexhaustible energy, incapable of fatigue--she forgot the troubles
she caused him at the moment when she forgot the troubles of her
own that had prompted her.  That he no longer controlled her--did
he know that?  Had he willed it all?--she felt as sorry for him as
she had sometimes felt for Abe North and his ignoble destiny, sorry
as for the helplessness of infants and the old.

She went up putting her arm around his shoulder and touching their
heads together said:

"Don't be sad."

He looked at her coldly.

"Don't touch me!" he said.

Confused she moved a few feet away.

"Excuse me," he continued abstractedly.  "I was just thinking what
I thought of you--"

"Why not add the new classification to your book?"

"I have thought of it--'Furthermore and beyond the psychoses and
the neuroses--'"

"I didn't come over here to be disagreeable."

"Then why DID you come, Nicole?  I can't do anything for you any
more.  I'm trying to save myself."

"From my contamination?"

"Profession throws me in contact with questionable company
sometimes."

She wept with anger at the abuse.

"You're a coward!  You've made a failure of your life, and you want
to blame it on me."

While he did not answer she began to feel the old hypnotism of his
intelligence, sometimes exercised without power but always with
substrata of truth under truth which she could not break or even
crack.  Again she struggled with it, fighting him with her small,
fine eyes, with the plush arrogance of a top dog, with her nascent
transference to another man, with the accumulated resentment of
years; she fought him with her money and her faith that her sister
disliked him and was behind her now; with the thought of the new
enemies he was making with his bitterness, with her quick guile
against his wine-ing and dine-ing slowness, her health and beauty
against his physical deterioration, her unscrupulousness against
his moralities--for this inner battle she used even her weaknesses--
fighting bravely and courageously with the old cans and crockery
and bottles, empty receptacles of her expiated sins, outrages,
mistakes.  And suddenly, in the space of two minutes she achieved
her victory and justified herself to herself without lie or
subterfuge, cut the cord forever.  Then she walked, weak in the
legs, and sobbing coolly, toward the household that was hers at
last.

Dick waited until she was out of sight.  Then he leaned his head
forward on the parapet.  The case was finished.  Doctor Diver was
at liberty.



X


At two o'clock that night the phone woke Nicole and she heard Dick
answer it from what they called the restless bed, in the next room.

"Oui, oui . . . mais à qui est-ce-que je parle? . . . Oui . . ."
His voice woke up with surprise.  "But can I speak to one of the
ladies, Sir the Officer?  They are both ladies of the very highest
prominence, ladies of connections that might cause political
complications of the most serious. . . .  It is a fact, I swear to
you. . . .  Very well, you will see."

He got up and, as he absorbed the situation, his self-knowledge
assured him that he would undertake to deal with it--the old fatal
pleasingness, the old forceful charm, swept back with its cry of
"Use me!"  He would have to go fix this thing that he didn't care a
damn about, because it had early become a habit to be loved,
perhaps from the moment when he had realized that he was the last
hope of a decaying clan.  On an almost parallel occasion, back in
Dohmler's clinic on the Zurichsee, realizing this power, he had
made his choice, chosen Ophelia, chosen the sweet poison and drunk
it.  Wanting above all to be brave and kind, he had wanted, even
more than that, to be loved.  So it had been.  So it would ever be,
he saw, simultaneously with the slow archaic tinkle from the phone
box as he rang off.

There was a long pause.  Nicole called, "What is it?  Who is it?"

Dick had begun to dress even as he hung up the phone.

"It's the poste de police in Antibes--they're holding Mary North
and that Sibley-Biers.  It's something serious--the agent wouldn't
tell me; he kept saying 'pas de mortes--pas d'automobiles' but he
implied it was just about everything else."

"Why on earth did they call on YOU?  It sounds very peculiar to
me."

"They've got to get out on bail to save their faces; and only some
property owner in the Alpes Maritimes can give bail."

"They had their nerve."

"I don't mind.  However I'll pick up Gausse at the hotel--"

Nicole stayed awake after he had departed wondering what offense
they could have committed; then she slept.  A little after three
when Dick came in she sat up stark awake saying, "What?" as if to a
character in her dream.

"It was an extraordinary story--" Dick said.  He sat on the foot of
her bed, telling her how he had roused old Gausse from an Alsatian
coma, told him to clean out his cash drawer, and driven with him to
the police station.

"I don't like to do something for that Anglaise," Gausse grumbled.

Mary North and Lady Caroline, dressed in the costume of French
sailors, lounged on a bench outside the two dingy cells.  The
latter had the outraged air of a Briton who momentarily expected
the Mediterranean fleet to steam up to her assistance.  Mary
Minghetti was in a condition of panic and collapse--she literally
flung herself at Dick's stomach as though that were the point of
greatest association, imploring him to do something.  Meanwhile the
chief of police explained the matter to Gausse who listened to each
word with reluctance, divided between being properly appreciative
of the officer's narrative gift and showing that, as the perfect
servant, the story had no shocking effect on him.  "It was merely a
lark," said Lady Caroline with scorn.  "We were pretending to be
sailors on leave, and we picked up two silly girls.  They got the
wind up and made a rotten scene in a lodging house."

Dick nodded gravely, looking at the stone floor, like a priest in
the confessional--he was torn between a tendency to ironic laughter
and another tendency to order fifty stripes of the cat and a
fortnight of bread and water.  The lack, in Lady Caroline's face,
of any sense of evil, except the evil wrought by cowardly Provençal
girls and stupid police, confounded him; yet he had long concluded
that certain classes of English people lived upon a concentrated
essence of the anti-social that, in comparison, reduced the
gorgings of New York to something like a child contracting
indigestion from ice cream.

"I've got to get out before Hosain hears about this," Mary pleaded.
"Dick, you can always arrange things--you always could.  Tell 'em
we'll go right home, tell 'em we'll pay anything."

"I shall not," said Lady Caroline disdainfully.  "Not a shilling.
But I shall jolly well find out what the Consulate in Cannes has to
say about this."

"No, no!" insisted Mary.  "We've got to get out to-night."

"I'll see what I can do," said Dick, and added, "but money will
certainly have to change hands."  Looking at them as though they
were the innocents that he knew they were not, he shook his head:
"Of all the crazy stunts!"

Lady Caroline smiled complacently.

"You're an insanity doctor, aren't you?  You ought to be able to
help us--and Gausse has GOT to!"

At this point Dick went aside with Gausse and talked over the old
man's findings.  The affair was more serious than had been
indicated--one of the girls whom they had picked up was of a
respectable family.  The family were furious, or pretended to be; a
settlement would have to be made with them.  The other one, a girl
of the port, could be more easily dealt with.  There were French
statutes that would make conviction punishable by imprisonment or,
at the very least, public expulsion from the country.  In addition
to the difficulties, there was a growing difference in tolerance
between such townspeople as benefited by the foreign colony and the
ones who were annoyed by the consequent rise of prices.  Gausse,
having summarized the situation, turned it over to Dick.  Dick
called the chief of police into conference.

"Now you know that the French government wants to encourage
American touring--so much so that in Paris this summer there's an
order that Americans can't be arrested except for the most serious
offenses."

"This is serious enough, my God."

"But look now--you have their Cartes d'Identité?"

"They had none.  They had nothing--two hundred francs and some
rings.  Not even shoe-laces that they could have hung themselves
with!"

Relieved that there had been no Cartes d'Identité Dick continued.

"The Italian Countess is still an American citizen.  She is the
grand-daughter--" he told a string of lies slowly and portentously,
"of John D. Rockefeller Mellon.  You have heard of him?"

"Yes, oh heavens, yes.  You mistake me for a nobody?"

"In addition she is the niece of Lord Henry Ford and so connected
with the Renault and Citroën companies--"  He thought he had better
stop here.  However the sincerity of his voice had begun to affect
the officer, so he continued:  "To arrest her is just as if you
arrested a great royalty of England.  It might mean--War!"

"But how about the Englishwoman?"

"I'm coming to that.  She is affianced to the brother of the Prince
of Wales--the Duke of Buckingham."

"She will be an exquisite bride for him."

"Now we are prepared to give--" Dick calculated quickly, "one
thousand francs to each of the girls--and an additional thousand to
the father of the 'serious' one.  Also two thousand in addition,
for you to distribute as you think best--" he shrugged his
shoulders, "--among the men who made the arrest, the lodging-house
keeper and so forth.  I shall hand you the five thousand and expect
you to do the negotiating immediately.  Then they can be released
on bail on some charge like disturbing the peace, and whatever fine
there is will be paid before the magistrate tomorrow--by
messenger."

Before the officer spoke Dick saw by his expression that it would
be all right.  The man said hesitantly, "I have made no entry
because they have no Cartes d'Identité.  I must see--give me the
money."

An hour later Dick and M. Gausse dropped the women by the Majestic
Hotel, where Lady Caroline's chauffeur slept in her landaulet.

"Remember," said Dick, "you owe Monsieur Gausse a hundred dollars a
piece."

"All right," Mary agreed, "I'll give him a check to-morrow--and
something more."

"Not I!"  Startled, they all turned to Lady Caroline, who, now
entirely recovered, was swollen with righteousness.  "The whole
thing was an outrage.  By no means did I authorize you to give a
hundred dollars to those people."

Little Gausse stood beside the car, his eyes blazing suddenly.

"You won't pay me?"

"Of course she will," said Dick.

Suddenly the abuse that Gausse had once endured as a bus boy in
London flamed up and he walked through the moonlight up to Lady
Caroline.

He whipped a string of condemnatory words about her, and as she
turned away with a frozen laugh, he took a step after her and
swiftly planted his little foot in the most celebrated of targets.
Lady Caroline, taken by surprise, flung up her hands like a person
shot as her sailor-clad form sprawled forward on the sidewalk.

Dick's voice cut across her raging:  "Mary, you quiet her down! or
you'll both be in leg-irons in ten minutes!"

On the way back to the hotel old Gausse said not a word, until they
passed the Juan-les-Pins Casino, still sobbing and coughing with
jazz; then he sighed forth:

"I have never seen women like this sort of women.  I have known
many of the great courtesans of the world, and for them I have much
respect often, but women like these women I have never seen
before."



XI


Dick and Nicole were accustomed to go together to the barber, and
have haircuts and shampoos in adjoining rooms.  From Dick's side
Nicole could hear the snip of shears, the count of changes, the
Voilàs and Pardons.  The day after his return they went down to be
shorn and washed in the perfumed breeze of the fans.

In front of the Carleton Hotel, its windows as stubbornly blank to
the summer as so many cellar doors, a car passed them and Tommy
Barban was in it.  Nicole's momentary glimpse of his expression,
taciturn and thoughtful and, in the second of seeing her, wide-eyed
and alert, disturbed her.  She wanted to be going where he was
going.  The hour with the hair-dresser seemed one of the wasteful
intervals that composed her life, another little prison.  The
coiffeuse in her white uniform, faintly sweating lip-rouge and
cologne reminded her of many nurses.

In the next room Dick dozed under an apron and a lather of soap.
The mirror in front of Nicole reflected the passage between the
men's side and the women's, and Nicole started up at the sight of
Tommy entering and wheeling sharply into the men's shop.  She knew
with a flush of joy that there was going to be some sort of
showdown.

She heard fragments of its beginning.

"Hello, I want to see you."

". . . serious."

". . . serious."

". . . perfectly agreeable."

In a minute Dick came into Nicole's booth, his expression emerging
annoyed from behind the towel of his hastily rinsed face.

"Your friend has worked himself up into a state.  He wants to see
us together, so I agreed to have it over with.  Come along!"

"But my hair--it's half cut."

"Nevermind--come along!"

Resentfully she had the staring coiffeuse remove the towels.

Feeling messy and unadorned she followed Dick from the hotel.
Outside Tommy bent over her hand.

"We'll go to the Café des Alliées," said Dick.

"Wherever we can be alone," Tommy agreed.

Under the arching trees, central in summer, Dick asked:  "Will you
take anything, Nicole?"

"A citron pressé."

"For me a demi," said Tommy.

"The Blackenwite with siphon," said Dick.

"Il n'y a plus de Blackenwite.  Nous n'avons que le Johnny
Walkair."

"Ca va."


     "She's--not--wired for sound
      but on the quiet
      you ought to try it--"


"Your wife does not love you," said Tommy suddenly.  "She loves
me."

The two men regarded each other with a curious impotence of
expression.  There can be little communication between men in that
position, for their relation is indirect, and consists of how much
each of them has possessed or will possess of the woman in
question, so that their emotions pass through her divided self as
through a bad telephone connection.

"Wait a minute," Dick said.  "Donnez moi du gin et du siphon."

"Bien, Monsieur."

"All right, go on, Tommy."

"It's very plain to me that your marriage to Nicole has run its
course.  She is through.  I've waited five years for that to be
so."

"What does Nicole say?"

They both looked at her.

"I've gotten very fond of Tommy, Dick."

He nodded.

"You don't care for me any more," she continued.  "It's all just
habit.  Things were never the same after Rosemary."

Unattracted to this angle, Tommy broke in sharply with:

"You don't understand Nicole.  You treat her always like a patient
because she was once sick."

They were suddenly interrupted by an insistent American, of
sinister aspect, vending copies of The Herald and of The Times
fresh from New York.

"Got everything here, Buddies," he announced.  "Been here long?"

"Cessez cela!  Allez Ouste!" Tommy cried and then to Dick, "Now no
woman would stand such--"

"Buddies," interrupted the American again.  "You think I'm wasting
my time--but lots of others don't."  He brought a gray clipping
from his purse--and Dick recognized it as he saw it.  It cartooned
millions of Americans pouring from liners with bags of gold.  "You
think I'm not going to get part of that?  Well, I am.  I'm just
over from Nice for the Tour de France."

As Tommy got him off with a fierce "allez-vous-en," Dick identified
him as the man who had once hailed him in the Rue de Saints Anges,
five years before.

"When does the Tour de France get here?" he called after him.

"Any minute now, Buddy."

He departed at last with a cheery wave and Tommy returned to Dick.

"Elle doit avoir plus avec moi qu'avec vous."

"Speak English!  What do you mean 'doit avoir'?"

"'Doit avoir?'  Would have more happiness with me."

"You'd be new to each other.  But Nicole and I have had much
happiness together, Tommy."

"L'amour de famille," Tommy said, scoffing.

"If you and Nicole married won't that be 'l'amour de famille'?"
The increasing commotion made him break off; presently it came to a
serpentine head on the promenade and a group, presently a crowd, of
people sprung from hidden siestas, lined the curbstone.

Boys sprinted past on bicycles, automobiles jammed with elaborate
betasselled sportsmen slid up the street, high horns tooted to
announce the approach of the race, and unsuspected cooks in
undershirts appeared at restaurant doors as around a bend a
procession came into sight.  First was a lone cyclist in a red
jersey, toiling intent and confident out of the westering sun,
passing to the melody of a high chattering cheer.  Then three
together in a harlequinade of faded color, legs caked yellow with
dust and sweat, faces expressionless, eyes heavy and endlessly
tired.

Tommy faced Dick, saying:  "I think Nicole wants a divorce--I
suppose you'll make no obstacles?"

A troupe of fifty more swarmed after the first bicycle racers,
strung out over two hundred yards; a few were smiling and self-
conscious, a few obviously exhausted, most of them indifferent and
weary.  A retinue of small boys passed, a few defiant stragglers, a
light truck carried the dupes of accident and defeat.  They were
back at the table.  Nicole wanted Dick to take the initiative, but
he seemed content to sit with his face half-shaved matching her
hair half-washed.

"Isn't it true you're not happy with me any more?" Nicole
continued.  "Without me you could get to your work again--you could
work better if you didn't worry about me."

Tommy moved impatiently.

"That is so useless.  Nicole and I love each other, that's all
there is to it."

"Well, then," said the Doctor, "since it's all settled, suppose we
go back to the barber shop."

Tommy wanted a row:  "There are several points--"

"Nicole and I will talk things over," said Dick equitably.  "Don't
worry--I agree in principal, and Nicole and I understand each
other.  There's less chance of unpleasantness if we avoid a three-
cornered discussion."

Unwillingly acknowledging Dick's logic, Tommy was moved by an
irresistible racial tendency to chisel for an advantage.

"Let it be understood that from this moment," he said, "I stand in
the position of Nicole's protector until details can be arranged.
And I shall hold you strictly accountable for any abuse of the fact
that you continue to inhabit the same house."

"I never did go in for making love to dry loins," said Dick.

He nodded, and walked off toward the hotel with Nicole's whitest
eyes following him.

"He was fair enough," Tommy conceded.  "Darling, will we be
together to-night?"

"I suppose so."

So it had happened--and with a minimum of drama; Nicole felt
outguessed, realizing that from the episode of the camphor-rub,
Dick had anticipated everything.  But also she felt happy and
excited, and the odd little wish that she could tell Dick all about
it faded quickly.  But her eyes followed his figure until it became
a dot and mingled with the other dots in the summer crowd.



XII


The day before Doctor Diver left the Riviera he spent all his time
with his children.  He was not young any more with a lot of nice
thoughts and dreams to have about himself, so he wanted to remember
them well.  The children had been told that this winter they would
be with their aunt in London and that soon they were going to come
and see him in America.  Fräulein was not to be discharged without
his consent.

He was glad he had given so much to the little girl--about the boy
he was more uncertain--always he had been uneasy about what he had
to give to the ever-climbing, ever-clinging, breast-searching
young.  But, when he said good-by to them, he wanted to lift their
beautiful heads off their necks and hold them close for hours.

He embraced the old gardener who had made the first garden at Villa
Diana six years ago; he kissed the Provençal girl who helped with
the children.  She had been with them for almost a decade and she
fell on her knees and cried until Dick jerked her to her feet and
gave her three hundred francs.  Nicole was sleeping late, as had
been agreed upon--he left a note for her, and one for Baby Warren
who was just back from Sardinia and staying at the house.  Dick
took a big drink from a bottle of brandy three feet high, holding
ten quarts, that some one had presented them with.

Then he decided to leave his bags by the station in Cannes and take
a last look at Gausse's Beach.



The beach was peopled with only an advance guard of children when
Nicole and her sister arrived that morning.  A white sun, chivied
of outline by a white sky, boomed over a windless day.  Waiters
were putting extra ice into the bar; an American photographer from
the A. and P. worked with his equipment in a precarious shade and
looked up quickly at every footfall descending the stone steps.  At
the hotel his prospective subjects slept late in darkened rooms
upon their recent opiate of dawn.

When Nicole started out on the beach she saw Dick, not dressed for
swimming, sitting on a rock above.  She shrank back in the shadow
of her dressing-tent.  In a minute Baby joined her, saying:

"Dick's still there."

"I saw him."

"I think he might have the delicacy to go."

"This is his place--in a way, he discovered it.  Old Gausse always
says he owes everything to Dick."

Baby looked calmly at her sister.

"We should have let him confine himself to his bicycle excursions,"
she remarked.  "When people are taken out of their depths they lose
their heads, no matter how charming a bluff they put up."

"Dick was a good husband to me for six years," Nicole said.  "All
that time I never suffered a minute's pain because of him, and he
always did his best never to let anything hurt me."

Baby's lower jaw projected slightly as she said:

"That's what he was educated for."

The sisters sat in silence; Nicole wondering in a tired way about
things; Baby considering whether or not to marry the latest
candidate for her hand and money, an authenticated Hapsburg.  She
was not quite THINKING about it.  Her affairs had long shared such
a sameness, that, as she dried out, they were more important for
their conversational value than for themselves.  Her emotions had
their truest existence in the telling of them.

"Is he gone?" Nicole asked after a while.  "I think his train
leaves at noon."

Baby looked.

"No.  He's moved up higher on the terrace and he's talking to some
women.  Anyhow there are so many people now that he doesn't HAVE to
see us."

He had seen them though, as they left their pavilion, and he
followed them with his eyes until they disappeared again.  He sat
with Mary Minghetti, drinking anisette.

"You were like you used to be the night you helped us," she was
saying, "except at the end, when you were horrid about Caroline.
Why aren't you nice like that always?  You can be."

It seemed fantastic to Dick to be in a position where Mary North
could tell him about things.

"Your friends still like you, Dick.  But you say awful things to
people when you've been drinking.  I've spent most of my time
defending you this summer."

"That remark is one of Doctor Eliot's classics."

"It's true.  Nobody cares whether you drink or not--"  She
hesitated, "even when Abe drank hardest, he never offended people
like you do."

"You're all so dull," he said.

"But we're all there is!" cried Mary.  "If you don't like nice
people, try the ones who aren't nice, and see how you like that!
All people want is to have a good time and if you make them unhappy
you cut yourself off from nourishment."

"Have I been nourished?" he asked.

Mary was having a good time, though she did not know it, as she had
sat down with him only out of fear.  Again she refused a drink and
said:  "Self-indulgence is back of it.  Of course, after Abe you
can imagine how I feel about it--since I watched the progress of a
good man toward alcoholism--"

Down the steps tripped Lady Caroline Sibly-Biers with blithe
theatricality.

Dick felt fine--he was already well in advance of the day; arrived
at where a man should be at the end of a good dinner, yet he showed
only a fine, considered, restrained interest in Mary.  His eyes,
for the moment clear as a child's, asked her sympathy and stealing
over him he felt the old necessity of convincing her that he was
the last man in the world and she was the last woman.

. . . Then he would not have to look at those two other figures, a
man and a woman, black and white and metallic against the sky. . . .

"You once liked me, didn't you?" he asked.

"LIKED you--I LOVED you.  Everybody loved you.  You could've had
anybody you wanted for the asking--"

"There has always been something between you and me."

She bit eagerly.  "Has there, Dick?"

"Always--I knew your troubles and how brave you were about them."
But the old interior laughter had begun inside him and he knew he
couldn't keep it up much longer.

"I always thought you knew a lot," Mary said enthusiastically.
"More about me than any one has ever known.  Perhaps that's why I
was so afraid of you when we didn't get along so well."

His glance fell soft and kind upon hers, suggesting an emotion
underneath; their glances married suddenly, bedded, strained
together.  Then, as the laughter inside of him became so loud that
it seemed as if Mary must hear it, Dick switched off the light and
they were back in the Riviera sun.

"I must go," he said.  As he stood up he swayed a little; he did
not feel well any more--his blood raced slow.  He raised his right
hand and with a papal cross he blessed the beach from the high
terrace.  Faces turned upward from several umbrellas.



"I'm going to him."  Nicole got to her knees.

"No, you're not," said Tommy, pulling her down firmly.  "Let well
enough alone."



XIII


Nicole kept in touch with Dick after her new marriage; there were
letters on business matters, and about the children.  When she
said, as she often did, "I loved Dick and I'll never forget him,"
Tommy answered, "Of course not--why should you?"

Dick opened an office in Buffalo, but evidently without success.
Nicole did not find what the trouble was, but she heard a few
months later that he was in a little town named Batavia, N.Y.,
practising general medicine, and later that he was in Lockport,
doing the same thing.  By accident she heard more about his life
there than anywhere: that he bicycled a lot, was much admired by
the ladies, and always had a big stack of papers on his desk that
were known to be an important treatise on some medical subject,
almost in process of completion.  He was considered to have fine
manners and once made a good speech at a public health meeting on
the subject of drugs; but he became entangled with a girl who
worked in a grocery store, and he was also involved in a lawsuit
about some medical question; so he left Lockport.

After that he didn't ask for the children to be sent to America and
didn't answer when Nicole wrote asking him if he needed money.  In
the last letter she had from him he told her that he was practising
in Geneva, New York, and she got the impression that he had settled
down with some one to keep house for him.  She looked up Geneva in
an atlas and found it was in the heart of the Finger Lakes Section
and considered a pleasant place.  Perhaps, so she liked to think,
his career was biding its time, again like Grant's in Galena; his
latest note was post-marked from Hornell, New York, which is some
distance from Geneva and a very small town; in any case he is
almost certainly in that section of the country, in one town or
another.



THE END

	
I.

At five o'clock the sombre egg-shaped room at the Ritz ripens to subtle melody—the light clat-clat of one lump, two lumps, into the cup, and the ding of the shining teapots and cream-pots as they kiss elegantly in transit upon a silver tray. There are those who cherish that amber hour above all other hours, for now the pale, pleasant toil of the lilies who inhabit the Ritz is over—the singing decorative part of the day remains.

Moving your eyes around the slightly raised horse-shoe balcony you might, one spring afternoon, have seen young Mrs. Alphonse Karr and young Mrs. Charles Hemple at a table for two. The one in the dress was Mrs. Hemple—when I say "the dress" I refer to that black immaculate affair with the big buttons and the red ghost of a cape at the shoulders, a gown suggesting with faint and fashionable irreverence the garb of a French cardinal, as it was meant to do when it was invented in the Rue de la Paix. Mrs. Karr and Mrs. Hemple were twenty-three years old, and their enemies said that they had done very well for themselves. Either might have had her limousine waiting at the hotel door, but both of them much preferred to walk home (up Park Avenue) through the April twilight.

Luella Hemple was tall, with the sort of flaxen hair that English country girls should have, but seldom do. Her skin was radiant, and there was no need of putting anything on it at all, but in deference to an antiquated fashion—this was the year 1920—she had powdered out its high roses and drawn on it a new mouth and new eyebrows—which were no more successful than such meddling deserves. This, of course, is said from the vantage-point of 1925. In those days the effect she gave was exactly right.

"I've been married three years," she was saying as she squashed out a cigarette in an exhausted lemon. "The baby will be two years old to-morrow. I must remember to get—"

She took a gold pencil from her case and wrote "Candles" and "Things you pull, with paper caps," on an ivory date-pad. Then, raising her eyes, she looked at Mrs. Karr and hesitated.

"Shall I tell you something outrageous?"

"Try," said Mrs. Karr cheerfully.

"Even my baby bores me. That sounds unnatural, Ede, but it's true. He doesn't begin to fill my life. I love him with all my heart, but when I have him to take care of for an afternoon, I get so nervous that I want to scream. After two hours I begin praying for the moment the nurse'll walk in the door."

When she had made this confession, Luella breathed quickly and looked closely at her friend. She didn't really feel unnatural at all. This was the truth. There couldn't be anything vicious in the truth.

"It may be because you don't love Charles," ventured Mrs. Karr, unmoved.

"But I do! I hope I haven't given you that impression with all this talk." She decided that Ede Karr was stupid. "It's the very fact that I do love Charles that complicates matters. I cried myself to sleep last night because I know we're drifting slowly but surely toward a divorce. It's the baby that keeps us together."

Ede Karr, who had been married five years, looked at her critically to see if this was a pose, but Luella's lovely eyes were grave and sad.

"And what is the trouble?" Ede inquired.

"It's plural," said Luella, frowning. "First, there's food. I'm a vile housekeeper, and I have no intention of turning into a good one. I hate to order groceries, and I hate to go into the kitchen and poke around to see if the ice-box is clean, and I hate to pretend to the servants that I'm interested in their work, when really I never want to hear about food until it comes on the table. You see, I never learned to cook, and consequently a kitchen is about as interesting to me as a—as a boiler-room. It's simply a machine that I don't understand. It's easy to say, 'Go to cooking school,' the way people do in books—but, Ede, in real life does anybody ever change into a model Hausfrau—unless they have to?"

"Go on," said Ede non-committally. "Tell me more."

"Well, as a result, the house is always in a riot. The servants leave every week. If they're young and incompetent, I can't train them, so we have to let them go. If they're experienced, they hate a house where a woman doesn't take an intense interest in the price of asparagus. So they leave—and half the time we eat at restaurants and hotels."

"I don't suppose Charles likes that."

"Hates it. In fact, he hates about everything that I like. He's lukewarm about the theatre, hates the opera, hates dancing, hates cocktail parties—sometimes I think he hates everything pleasant in the world. I sat home for a year or so. While Chuck was on the way, and while I was nursing him. I didn't mind. But this year I told Charles frankly that I was still young enough to want some fun. And since then we've been going out whether he wants to or not." She paused, brooding. "I'm so sorry for him I don't know what to do, Ede—but if we sat home, I'd just be sorry for myself. And to tell you another true thing, I'd rather that he'd be unhappy than me."

Luella was not so much stating a case as thinking aloud. She considered that she was being very fair. Before her marriage men had always told her that she was "a good sport," and she had tried to carry this fairness into her married life. So she always saw Charley's point of view as clearly as she saw her own.

If she had been a pioneer wife, she would probably have fought the fight side by side with her husband. But here in New York there wasn't any fight. They weren't struggling together to obtain a far-off peace and leisure—she had more of either than she could use. Luella, like several thousand other young wives in New York, honestly wanted something to do. If she had had a little more money and a little less love, she could have gone in for horses or for vagarious amour. Or if they had had a little less money, her surplus energy would have been absorbed by hope and even by effort. But the Charles Hemples were in between. They were of that enormous American class who wander over Europe every summer, sneering rather pathetically and wistfully at the customs and traditions and pastimes of other countries, because they have no customs or tradition or pastimes of their own. It is a class sprung yesterday from fathers and mothers who might just as well have lived two hundred years ago.

The tea-hour had turned abruptly into the before-dinner hour. Most of the tables had emptied until the room was dotted rather than crowded with shrill isolated voices and remote, surprising laughter—in one corner the waiters were already covering the tables with white for dinner.

"Charles and I are on each other's nerves." In the new silence Luella's voice rang out with startling clearness, and she lowered it precipitately. "Little things. He keeps rubbing his face with his hand—all the time, at table, at the theatre—even when he's in bed. It drives me wild, and when things like that begin to irritate you, it's nearly over."

She broke off and, reaching backward, drew up a light fur around her neck. "I hope I haven't bored you, Ede. It's on my mind, because to-night tells the story. I made an engagement for to-night—an interesting engagement, a supper after the theatre to meet some Russians, singers or dancers or something, and Charles says he won't go. If he doesn't—then I'm going alone. And that's the end."

She put her elbows on the table suddenly and, bending her eyes down into her smooth gloves, began to cry, stubbornly and quietly. There was no one near to see, but Ede Karr wished that she had taken her gloves off. She would have reached out consolingly and touched her bare hand. But the gloves were a symbol of the difficulty of sympathizing with a woman to whom life had given so much. Ede wanted to say that it would "come out all right," that it wasn't "so bad as it seemed," but she said nothing. Her only reaction was impatience and distaste.

A waiter stepped near and laid a folded paper on the table, and Mrs. Karr reached for it.

"No, you mustn't," murmured Luella brokenly. "No, I invited you! I've got the money right here."

II.

The Hemples' apartment—they owned it—was in one of those impersonal white palaces that are known by number instead of name. They had furnished it on their honeymoon, gone to England for the big pieces, to Florence for the bric-a-brac, and to Venice for the lace and sheer linen of the curtains and for the glass of many colors which littered the table when they entertained. Luella enjoyed choosing things on her honeymoon. It gave a purposeful air to the trip, and saved it from ever turning into the rather dismal wandering among big hotels and desolate ruins which European honeymoons are apt to be.

They returned, and life began. On the grand scale. Luella found herself a lady of substance. It amazed her sometimes that the specially created apartment and the specially created limousine were hers, just as indisputably as the mortgaged suburban bungalow out of The Ladies' Home Journal and the last year's car that fate might have given her instead. She was even more amazed when it all began to bore her. But it did. The evening was at seven when she turned out of the April dusk, let herself into the hall, and saw her husband waiting in the living-room before an open fire. She came in without a sound, closed the door noiselessly behind her, and stood watching him for a moment through the pleasant effective vista of the small salon which intervened. Charles Hemple was in the middle thirties, with a young serious face and distinguished iron-gray hair which would be white in ten years more. That and his deep-set, dark-gray eyes were his most noticeable features—women always thought his hair was romantic; most of the time Luella thought so too.

At this moment she found herself hating him a little, for she saw that he had raised his hand to his face and was rubbing it nervously over his chin and mouth. It gave him an air of unflattering abstraction, and sometimes even obscured his words, so that she was continually saying "What?" She had spoken about it several times, and he had apologized in a surprised way. But obviously he didn't realize how noticeable and how irritating it was, for he continued to do it. Things had now reached such a precarious state that Luella dreaded speaking of such matters any more—a certain sort of word might precipitate the imminent scene.

Luella tossed her gloves and purse abruptly on the table. Hearing the faint sound, her husband looked out toward the hall.

"Is that you, dear?"

"Yes, dear."

She went into the living-room, and walked into his arms and kissed him tensely. Charles Hemple responded with unusual formality, and then turned her slowly around so that she faced across the room.

"I've brought some one home to dinner."

She saw then that they were not alone, and her first feeling was of strong relief; the rigid expression on her face softened into a shy, charming smile as she held out her hand.

"This is Doctor Moon—this is my wife." A man a little older than her husband, with a round, pale, slightly lined face, came forward to meet her.

"Good evening, Mrs. Hemple," he said. "I hope I'm not interfering with any arrangements of yours."

"Oh, no," Luella cried quickly. "I'm delighted that you're coming to dinner. We're quite alone."

Simultaneously she thought of her engagement to-night, and wondered if this could be a clumsy trap of Charles' to keep her at home. If it were, he had chosen his bait badly. This man—a tired placidity radiated from him, from his face, from his heavy, leisurely voice, even from the three year old shine of his clothes.

Nevertheless, she excused herself and went into the kitchen to see what was planned for dinner. As usual they were trying a new pair of servants, the luncheon had been ill-cooked and ill-served she would let them go to-morrow. She hoped Charles would talk to them—she hated to get rid of servants. Sometimes they wept, and sometimes they were insolent, but Charles had a way with him. And they were always afraid of a man.

The cooking on the stove, however, had a soothing savor. Luella gave instructions about "which china," and unlocked a bottle of precious chianti from the buffet. Then she went in to kiss young Chuck good night.

"Has he been good?" she demanded as he crawled enthusiastically into her arms.

"Very good," said the governess. "We went for a long walk over by Central Park."

"Well, aren't you a smart boy!" She kissed him ecstatically.

"And he put his foot into the fountain, so we had to come home in a taxi right away and change his little shoe and stocking."

"That's right. Here, wait a minute, Chuck!" Luella unclasped the great yellow beads from around her neck and handed them to him. "You mustn't break mama's beads." She turned to the nurse. "Put them on my dresser, will you, after he's asleep?"

She felt a certain compassion for her son as she went away—the small enclosed life he led, that all children led, except in big families. He was a dear little rose, except on the days when she took care of him. His face was the same shape as hers; she was thrilled sometimes, and formed new resolves about life when his heart beat against her own.

In her own pink and lovely bedroom, she confined her attentions to her face, which she washed and restored. Doctor Moon didn't deserve a change of dress, and Luella found herself oddly tired, though she had done very little all day. She returned to the living-room, and they went in to dinner.

"Such a nice house, Mrs. Hemple," said Doctor Moon impersonally; "and let me congratulate you on your fine little boy."

"Thanks. Coming from a doctor, that's a nice compliment." She hesitated. "Do you specialize in children?"

"I'm not a specialist at all," he said. "I'm about the last of my kind—a general practitioner."

"The last in New York, anyhow," remarked Charles. He had begun rubbing his face nervously, and Luella fixed her eyes on Doctor Moon so that she wouldn't see. But at Charles's next words she looked back at him sharply.

"In fact," he said unexpectedly, "I've invited Doctor Moon here because I wanted you to have a talk with him to-night."

Luella sat up straight in her chair.

"A talk with me?"

"Doctor Moon's an old friend of mine, and I think he can tell you a few things, Luella, that you ought to know."

"Why—" She tried to laugh, but she was surprised and annoyed. "I don't see, exactly, what you mean. There's nothing the matter with me. I don't believe I've ever felt better in my life."

Doctor Moon looked at Charles, asking permission to speak. Charles nodded, and his hand went up automatically to his face.

"Your husband has told me a great deal about your unsatisfactory life together," said Doctor Moon, still impersonally. "He wonders if I can be of any help in smoothing things out."

Luella's face was burning.

"I have no particular faith in psychoanalysis," she said coldly, "and I scarcely consider myself a subject for it."

"Neither have I," answered Doctor Moon, apparently unconscious of the snub; "I have no particular faith in anything but myself. I told you I am not a specialist, nor, I may add, a faddist of any sort. I promise nothing."

For a moment Luella considered leaving the room. But the effrontery of the suggestion aroused her curiosity too.

"I can't imagine what Charles has told you," she said, controlling herself with difficulty, "much less why. But I assure you that our affairs are a matter entirely between my husband and me. If you have no objections, Doctor Moon, I'd much prefer to discuss something—less personal."

Doctor Moon nodded heavily and politely. He made no further attempt to open the subject, and dinner proceeded in what was little more than a defeated silence. Luella determined that, whatever happened, she would adhere to her plans for to-night. An hour ago her independence had demanded it, but now some gesture of defiance—had become necessary to her self-respect. She would stay in the living-room for a short moment after dinner; then, when the coffee came, she would excuse herself and dress to go out. But when they did leave the dining-room, it was Charles who, in a quick, unarguable way, vanished.

"I have a letter to write," he said; "I'll be back in a moment." Before Luella could make a diplomatic objection, he went quickly down the corridor to his room, and she heard him shut his door.

Angry and confused, Luella poured the coffee and sank into a corner of the couch, looking intently at the fire.

"Don't be afraid, Mrs. Hemple," said Doctor Moon suddenly. "This was forced upon me. I do not act as a free agent—"

"I'm not afraid of you," she interrupted. But she knew that she was lying. She was a little afraid of him, if only for his dull insensitiveness to her distaste.

"Tell me about your trouble," he said very naturally, as though she were not a free agent either. He wasn't even looking at her, and except that they were alone in the room, he scarcely seemed to be addressing her at all.

The words that were in Luella's mind, her will, on her lips, were: "I'll do no such thing." What she actually said amazed her. It came out of her spontaneously, with apparently no co-operation of her own.

"Didn't you see him rubbing his face at dinner?" she said despairingly. "Are you blind? He's become so irritating to me that I think I'll go mad."

"I see." Doctor Moon's round face nodded.

"Don't you see I've had enough of home?" Her breasts seemed to struggle for air under her dress. "Don't you see how bored I am with keeping house, with the baby—everything seems as if it's going on forever and ever? I want excitement; and I don't care what form it takes or what I pay for it, so long as it makes my heart beat."

"I see."

It infuriated Luella that he claimed to understand. Her feeling of defiance had reached such a pitch that she preferred that no one should understand. She was content to be justified by the impassioned sincerity of her desires.

"I've tried to be good, and I'm not going to try any more. If I'm one of those women who wreck their lives for nothing, then I'll do it now. You can call me selfish, or silly, and be quite right; but in five minutes I'm going out of this house and begin to be alive."

This time Doctor Moon didn't answer, but he raised his head as if he were listening to something that was taking place a little distance away.

"You're not going out," he said after a moment; "I'm quite sure you're not going out."

Luella laughed.

"I am going out."

He disregarded this.

"You see, Mrs. Hemple, your husband isn't well. He's been trying to live your kind of life, and the strain of it has been too much for him. When he rubs his mouth—"

Light steps came down the corridor, and the maid, with a frightened expression on her face, tiptoed into the room.

"Mrs. Hemple—"

Startled at the interruption, Luella turned quickly.

"Yes?"

"Can I speak to—?" Her fear broke precipitately through her slight training. "Mr. Hemple, he's sick! He came into the kitchen a while ago and began throwing all the food out of the ice-box, and now he's in his room, crying and singing—" Suddenly Luella heard his voice.

III.

Charles Hemple had had a nervous collapse. There were twenty years of almost uninterrupted toil upon his shoulders, and the recent pressure at home had been too much for him to bear. His attitude toward his wife was the weak point in what had otherwise been a strong-minded and well-organized career—he was aware of her intense selfishness, but it is one of the many flaws in the scheme of human relationships that selfishness in women has an irresistible appeal to many men. Luella's selfishness existed side by side with a childish beauty, and, in consequence, Charles Hemple had begun to take the blame upon himself for situations which she had obviously brought about. It was an unhealthy attitude, and his mind had sickened, at length, with his attempts to put himself in the wrong. After the first shock and the momentary flush of pity that followed it, Luella looked at the situation with impatience. She was "a good sport"—she couldn't take advantage of Charles when he was sick.

The question of her liberties had to be postponed until he was on his feet. Just when she had determined to be a wife no longer, Luella was compelled to be a nurse as well. She sat beside his bed while he talked about her in his delirium—about the days of their engagement, and how some friend had told him then that he was making a mistake, and about his happiness in the early months of their marriage, and his growing disquiet as the gap appeared. Evidently he had been more aware of it than she had thought—more than he ever said.

"Luella!" He would lurch up in bed. "Luella! Where are you?"

"I'm right here, Charles, beside you." She tried to make her voice cheerful and warm.

"If you want to go, Luella, you'd better go. I don't seem to be enough for you any more."

She denied this soothingly.

"I've thought it over, Luella, and I can't ruin my health on account of you—" Then quickly, and passionately: "Don't go, Luella, for God's sake, don't go away and leave me! Promise me you won't!—I'll do anything you say if you won't go."

His humility annoyed her most; he was a reserved man, and she had never guessed at the extent of his devotion before.

"I'm only going for a minute. It's Doctor Moon, your friend, Charles. He came to-day to see how you were, don't you remember? And he wants to talk to me before he goes."

"You'll come back?" he persisted.

"In just a little while. There—lie quiet."

She raised his head and plumped his pillow into freshness. A new trained nurse would arrive to-morrow.

In the living-room Doctor Moon was waiting—his suit more worn and shabby in the afternoon light. She disliked him inordinately, with an illogical conviction that he was in some way to blame for her misfortune, but he was so deeply interested that she couldn't refuse to see him. She hadn't asked him to consult with the specialists, though—a doctor who was so down at the heel.

"Mrs. Hemple." He came forward, holding out his hand, and Luella touched it, lightly and uneasily.

"You seem well," he said.

"I am well, thank you."

"I congratulate you on the way you've taken hold of things."

"But I haven't taken hold of things at all," she said coldly. "I do what I have to—"

"That's just it." Her impatience mounted rapidly. "I do what I have to, and nothing more," she continued: "and with no particular good-will."

Suddenly she opened up to him again, as she had the night of the Catastrophe—realizing that she was putting herself on a footing of intimacy with him, yet unable to restrain her words.

"The house isn't going," she broke out bitterly. "I had to discharge the servants, and now I've got a woman in by the day. And the baby has a cold, and I've found out that his nurse doesn't know her business, and everything's just as messy and terrible as it can be!"

"Would you mind telling me how you found out the nurse didn't know her business?"

"You find out various unpleasant things when you're forced to stay around the house."

He nodded, his weary face turning here and there about the room.

"I feel somewhat encouraged," he said slowly. "As I told you, I promise nothing; I only do the best I can."

Luella looked up at him, startled.

"What do you mean?" she protested. "You've done nothing for me—nothing at all!"

"Nothing much—yet," he said heavily. "It takes time, Mrs. Hemple."

The words were said in a dry monotone that was somehow without offense, but Luella felt that he had gone too far. She got to her feet.

"I've met your type before," she said coldly. "For some reason you seem to think that you have a standing here as the old friend of the family. But I don't make friends quickly, and I haven't given you the privilege of being so"—she wanted to say "insolent," but the word eluded her—"so personal with me."

When the front door had closed behind him, Luella went into the kitchen to see if the woman understood about the three different dinners—one for Charles, one for the baby, and one for herself. It was hard to do with only a single servant when things were so complicated. She must try another employment agency—this one had begun to sound bored.

To her surprise, she found the cook with hat and coat on, reading a newspaper at the kitchen table.

"Why"—Luella tried to think of the name—"why, what's the matter, Mrs.—"

"Mrs. Danski is my name."

"What's the matter?"

"I'm afraid I won't be able to accommodate you," said Mrs. Danski. "You see, I'm only a plain cook, and I'm not used to preparing invalid's food."

"But I've counted on you."

"I'm very sorry." She shook her head stubbornly. "I've got my own health to think of. I'm sure they didn't tell me what kind of a job it was when I came. And when you asked me to clean out your husband's room, I knew it was way beyond my powers."

"I won't ask you to clean anything," said Luella desperately. "If you'll just stay until to-morrow. I can't possibly get anybody else to-night."

Mrs. Danski smiled politely.

"I got my own children to think of, just like you."

It was on Luella's tongue to offer her more money, but suddenly her temper gave way.

"I've never heard of anything so selfish in my life!" she broke out. "To leave me at a time like this! You're an old fool!"

"If you'd pay me for my time, I'd go," said Mrs. Danski calmly.

"I won't pay you a cent unless you'll stay!"

She was immediately sorry she had said this, but she was too proud to withdraw the threat.

"You will so pay me!"

"You go out that door!"

"I'll go when I get my money," asserted Mrs. Danski indignantly. "I got my children to think of."

Luella drew in her breath sharply, and took a step forward. Intimidated by her intensity, Mrs. Danski turned and flounced, muttering, out of the door.

Luella went to the phone and, calling up the agency, explained that the woman had left.

"Can you send me some one right away? My husband is sick and the baby's sick—"

"I'm sorry, Mrs. Hemple; there's no one in the office now. It's after four o'clock."

Luella argued for a while. Finally she obtained a promise that they would telephone to an emergency: woman they knew. That was the best they could do until to-morrow.

She called several other agencies, but the servant industry had apparently ceased to function for the day. After giving Charles his medicine, she tiptoed softly into the nursery.

"How's baby?" she asked abstractedly.

"Ninety-nine one," whispered the nurse, holding the thermometer to the light. "I just took it."

"Is that much?" asked Luella, frowning.

"It's just three-fifths of a degree. That isn't so much for the afternoon. They often run up a little with a cold."

Luella went over to the cot and laid her hand on her son's flushed cheek, thinking, in the midst of her anxiety, how much he resembled the incredible cherub of the "Lux" advertisement in the bus.

She turned to the nurse.

"Do you know how to cook?"

"Why—I'm not a good cook."

"Well, can you do the baby's food to-night? That old fool has left, and I can't get anyone, and I don't know what to do."

"Oh, yes, I can do the baby's food."

"That's all right, then. I'll try to fix something for Mr. Hemple. Please have your door open so you can hear the bell when the doctor comes. And let me know."

So many doctors! There had scarcely been an hour all day when there wasn't a doctor in the house. The specialist and their family physician every morning, then the baby doctor—and this afternoon there had been Doctor Moon, placid, persistent, unwelcome, in the parlor. Luella went into the kitchen. She could cook bacon and eggs for herself—she had often done that after the theatre. But the vegetables for Charles were a different matter—they must be left to boil or stew or something, and the stove had so many doors and ovens that she couldn't decide which to use. She chose a blue pan that looked new, sliced carrots into it, and covered them with a little water. As she put it on the stove and tried to remember what to do next, the phone rang. It was the agency.

"Yes, this is Mrs. Hemple speaking."

"Why, the woman we sent to you has returned here with the claim that you refused to pay her for her time."

"I explained to you that she refused to stay," said Luella hotly. "She didn't keep her agreement, and I didn't feel I was under any obligation—"

"We have to see that our people are paid," the agency informed her; "otherwise we wouldn't be helping them at all, would we? I'm sorry, Mrs. Hemple, but we won't be able to furnish you with any one else until this little matter is arranged."

"Oh, I'll pay, I'll pay!" she cried.

"Of course we like to keep on good terms with our clients—"

"Yes—yes!"

"So if you'll send her money around to-morrow? It's seventy-five cents an hour."

"But how about to-night?" she exclaimed. "I've got to have some one to-night."

"Why—it's pretty late now. I was just going home myself."

"But I'm Mrs. Charles Hemple! Don't you understand? I'm perfectly good for what I say I'll do. I'm the wife of Charles Hemple, of 14 Broadway—"

Simultaneously she realized that Charles Hemple of 14 Broadway was a helpless invalid—he was neither a reference nor a refuge any more. In despair at the sudden callousness of the world, she hung up the receiver.

After another ten minutes of frantic muddling in the kitchen, she went to the baby's nurse, whom she disliked, and confessed that she was unable to cook her husband's dinner. The nurse announced that she had a splitting headache, and that with a sick child her hands were full already, but she consented, without enthusiasm, to show Luella what to do.

Swallowing her humiliation, Luella obeyed orders while the nurse experimented, grumbling, with the unfamiliar stove. Dinner was started after a fashion. Then it was time for the nurse to bathe Chuck, and Luella sat down alone at the kitchen table, and listened to the bubbling perfume that escaped from the pans.

"And women do this every day," she thought. "Thousands of women. Cook and take care of sick people—and go out to work too."

But she didn't think of those women as being like her, except in the superficial aspect of having two feet and two hands. She said it as she might have said "South Sea Islanders wear nose-rings." She was merely slumming to-day in her own home, and she wasn't enjoying it. For her, it was merely a ridiculous exception.

Suddenly she became aware of slow approaching steps in the dining-room and then in the butler's pantry. Half afraid that it was doctor Moon coming to pay another call, she looked up—and saw the nurse coming through the pantry door. It flashed through Luella's mind that the nurse was going to be sick too. And she was right—the nurse had hardly reached the kitchen door when she lurched and clutched at the handle as a winged bird clings to a branch. Then she receded wordlessly to the floor. Simultaneously the door-bell rang; and Luella, getting to her feet, gasped with relief that the baby doctor had come.

"Fainted, that's all," he said, taking the girl's head into his lap. The eyes fluttered. "Yep, she fainted, that's all."

"Everybody's sick!" cried Luella with a sort of despairing humor. "Everybody's sick but me, doctor."

"This one's not sick," he said after a moment. "Her heart is normal already. She just fainted."

When she had helped the doctor raise the quickening body to a chair, Luella hurried into the nursery and bent over the baby's bed. She let down one of the iron sides quietly. The fever seemed to be gone now—the flush had faded away. She bent over to touch the small cheek.

Suddenly Luella began to scream.

IV.

Even after her baby's funeral, Luella still couldn't believe that she had lost him. She came back to the apartment and walked around the nursery in a circle, saying his name. Then, frightened by grief, she sat down and stared at his white rocker with the red chicken painted on the side.

"What will become of me now?" she whispered to herself. "Something awful is going to happen to me when I realize that I'll never see Chuck any more!"

She wasn't sure yet. If she waited here till twilight, the nurse might still bring him in from his walk. She remembered a tragic confusion in the midst of which some one had told her that Chuck was dead, but if that was so, then why was his room waiting, with his small brush and comb still on the bureau, and why was she here at all?

"Mrs. Hemple."

She looked up. The weary, shabby figure of Doctor Moon stood in the door.

"You go away," Luella said dully. "Your husband needs you."

"I don't care." Doctor Moon came a little way into the room. "I don't think you understand, Mrs. Hemple. He's been calling for you. You haven't any one now except him."

"I hate you," she said suddenly.

"If you like. I promised nothing, you know. I do the best I can. You'll be better when you realize that your baby is gone, that you're not going to see him any more."

Luella sprang to her feet.

"My baby isn't dead!" she cried. "You lie! You always lie!" Her flashing eyes looked into his and caught something there, at once brutal and kind, that awed her and made her impotent and acquiescent. She lowered her own eyes in tired despair.

"All right," she said wearily. "My baby is gone. What shall I do now?"

"Your husband is much better. All he needs is rest and kindness. But you must go to him and tell him what's happened."

"I suppose you think you made him better," said Luella bitterly.

"Perhaps. He's nearly well."

Nearly well—then the last link that held her to her home was broken. This part of her life was over—she could cut it off here, with its grief and oppression, and be off now, free as the wind.

"I'll go to him in a minute," Luella said in a far-away voice. "Please leave me alone."

Doctor Moon's unwelcome shadow melted into the darkness of the hall.

"I can go away," Luella whispered to herself. "Life has given me back freedom, in place of what it took away from me."

But she mustn't linger even a minute, or Life would bind her again and make her suffer once more. She called the apartment porter and asked that her trunk be brought up from the storeroom. Then she began taking things from the bureau and wardrobe, trying to approximate as nearly as possible the possessions that she had brought to her married life. She even found two old dresses that had formed part of her trousseau—out of style now, and a little tight in the hip—which she threw in with the rest. A new life. Charles was well again; and her baby, whom she had worshipped, and who had bored her a little, was dead.

When she had packed her trunk, she went into the kitchen automatically, to see about the preparations for dinner. She spoke to the cook about the special things for Charles and said that she herself was dining out. The sight of one of the small pans that had been used to cook Chuck's food caught her attention for a moment—but she stared at it unmoved. She looked into the ice-box and saw it was clean and fresh inside. Then she went into Charles's room. He was sitting up in bed, and the nurse was reading to him. His hair was almost white now, silvery white, and underneath it his eyes were huge and dark in his thin young face.

"The baby is sick?" he asked in his own natural voice.

She nodded.

He hesitated, closing his eyes for a moment. Then he asked:

"The baby is dead?"

"Yes."

For a long time he didn't speak. The nurse came over and put her hand on his forehead. Two large, strange tears welled from his eyes.

"I knew the baby was dead."

After another long wait, the nurse spoke:

"The doctor said he could be taken out for a drive to-day while there was still sunshine. He needs a little change."

"Yes."

"I thought"—the nurse hesitated—"I thought perhaps it would do you both good, Mrs. Hemple, if you took him instead of me."

Luella shook her head hastily.

"Oh, no," she said. "I don't feel able to, to-day."

The nurse looked at her oddly. With a sudden feeling of pity for Charles, Luella bent down gently and kissed his cheek. Then, without a word, she went to her own room, put on her hat and coat, and with her suitcase started for the front door.

Immediately she saw that there was a shadow in the hall. If she could get past that shadow, she was free. If she could go to the right or left of it, or order it out of her way! But, stubbornly, it refused to move, and with a little cry she sank down into a hall chair.

"I thought you'd gone," she wailed. "I told you to go away."

"I'm going soon," said Doctor Moon, "but I don't want you to make an old mistake."

"I'm not making a mistake—I'm leaving my mistakes behind."

"You're trying to leave yourself behind, but you can't. The more you try to run away from yourself, the more you'll have yourself with you."

"But I've got to go away," she insisted wildly. "Out of this house of death and failure!"

"You haven't failed yet. You've only begun."

She stood up.

"Let me pass."

"No."

Abruptly she gave way, as she always did when he talked to her. She covered her face with her hands and burst into tears.

"Go back into that room and tell the nurse you'll take your husband for a drive," he suggested.

"I can't."

"Oh, yes."

Once more Luella looked at him, and knew that she would obey. With the conviction that her spirit was broken at last, she took up her suitcase and walked back through the hall.

V.

The nature of the curious influence that Doctor Moon exerted upon her, Louella could not guess. But as the days passed, she found herself doing many things that had been repugnant to her before. She stayed at home with Charles; and when he grew better, she went out with him sometimes to dinner, or the theatre, but only when he expressed a wish. She visited the kitchen every day, and kept an unwilling eye on the house, at first with a horror that it would go wrong again, then from habit. And she felt that it was all somehow mixed up with Doctor Moon—it was something he kept telling her about life, or almost telling her, and yet concealing from her, as though he were afraid to have her know.

With the resumption of their normal life, she found that Charles was less nervous. His habit of rubbing his face had left him, and if the world seemed less gay and happy to her than it had before, she experienced a certain peace, sometimes, that she had never known.

Then, one afternoon, Doctor Moon told her suddenly that he was going away.

"Do you mean for good?" she demanded with a touch of panic.

"For good."

For a strange moment she wasn't sure whether she was sorry.

"You don't need me any more," he said quietly. "You don't realize it, but you've grown up."

He came over and, sitting on the couch beside her, took her hand. Luella sat silent and tense—listening.

"We make an agreement with children that they can sit in the audience without helping to make the play," he said, "but if they still sit in the audience after they're grown, somebody's got to work double time for them, so that they can enjoy the light and glitter of the world."

"But I want the light and glitter," she protested. "That's all there is in life. There can't be anything wrong in wanting to have things warm."

"Things will still be warm."

"How?"

"Things will warm themselves from you."

Luella looked at him, startled.

"It's your turn to be the centre, to give others what was given to you for so long. You've got to give security to young people and peace to your husband, and a sort of charity to the old. You've got to let the people who work for you depend on you. You've got to cover up a few more troubles than you show, and be a little more patient than the average person, and do a little more instead of a little less than your share. The light and glitter of the world is in your hands."

He broke off suddenly.

"Get up," he said, "and go to that mirror and tell me what you see."

Obediently Luella got up and went close to a purchase of her honeymoon, a Venetian pier-glass on the wall.

"I see new lines in my face here," she said, raising her finger and placing it between her eyes, "and a few shadows at the sides that might be—that are little wrinkles."

"Do you care?"

She turned quickly. "No," she said.

"Do you realize that Chuck is gone? That you'll never see him any more?"

"Yes." She passed her hands slowly over her eyes. "But that all seems so vague and far away."

"Vague and far away," he repeated; and then: "And are you afraid of me now?"

"Not any longer," she said, and she added frankly, "now that you're going away."

He moved toward the door. He seemed particularly weary to-night, as though he could hardly move about at all.

"The household here is in your keeping," he said in a tired whisper. "If there is any light and warmth in it, it will be your light and warmth; if it is happy, it will be because you've made it so. Happy things may come to you in life, but you must never go seeking them any more. It is your turn to make the fire."

"Won't you sit down a moment longer?" Luella ventured.

"There isn't time." His voice was so low now that she could scarcely hear the words. "But remember that whatever suffering comes to you, I can always help you—if it is something that can be helped. I promise nothing."

He opened the door. She must find out now what she most wanted to know, before it was too late.

"What have you done to me?" she cried. "Why have I no sorrow left for Chuck—for anything at all? Tell me, I almost see, yet I can't see. Before you go—tell me who you are!"

"Who am I?—"

His worn suit paused in the doorway. His round, pale face seemed to dissolve into two faces, a dozen faces, a score, each one different yet the same—sad, happy, tragic, indifferent, resigned—until threescore Doctor Moons were ranged like an infinite series of reflections, like months stretching into the vista of the past.

"Who am I?" he repeated; "I am five years."

The door closed.

At six o'clock Charles Hemple came home, and as usual Luella met him in the hall. Except that now his hair was dead white, his long illness of two years had left no mark upon him. Luella herself was more noticeably changed—she was a little stouter, and there were those lines around her eyes that had come when Chuck died one evening back in 1921. But she was still lovely, and there was a mature kindness about her face at twenty-eight, as if suffering had touched her only reluctantly and then hurried away.

"Ede and her husband are coming to dinner," she said. "I've got theatre tickets, but if you're tired, I don't care whether we go or not."

"I'd like to go."

She looked at him. "You wouldn't."

"I really would."

"We'll see how you feel after dinner."

He put his arm around her waist. Together they walked into the nursery where the two children were waiting up to say good night.

THE END







CONTENTS


Pat Hobby's Christmas Wish
Esquire (January 1940)

A Man in the Way Esquire
(February 1940)

"Boil Some Water--Lots of It"
Esquire (March 1940)

Teamed with Genius
Esquire (April 1940)

Pat Hobby and Orson Welles
Esquire (May 1940)

Pat Hobby's Secret
Esquire (June 1940)

Pat Hobby, Putative Father
Esquire (July 1940)

The Homes of the Stars
Esquire (August 1940)

Pat Hobby Does His Bit
Esquire (September 1940)

Pat Hobby's Preview
Esquire (October 1940)

No Harm Trying
Esquire (November 1940)

A Patriotic Short
Esquire (December 1940)

On the Trail of Pat Hobby
Esquire (January 1941)

Fun in an Artist's Studio
Esquire (February 1941)

Two Old-Timers
Esquire (March 1941)

Mightier than the Sword
Esquire (April 1941)

Pat Hobby's College Days
Esquire (May 1941)




PAT HOBBY'S CHRISTMAS WISH

Esquire (January 1940)


I


It was Christmas Eve in the studio.  By eleven o'clock in the
morning, Santa Claus had called on most of the huge population
according to each one's deserts.

Sumptuous gifts from producers to stars, and from agents to
producers arrived at offices and studio bungalows: on every stage
one heard of the roguish gifts of casts to directors or directors
to casts; champagne had gone out from publicity office to the
press.  And tips of fifties, tens and fives from producers,
directors and writers fell like manna upon the white collar class.

In this sort of transaction there were exceptions.  Pat Hobby, for
example, who knew the game from twenty years' experience, had had
the idea of getting rid of his secretary the day before.  They were
sending over a new one any minute--but she would scarcely expect a
present the first day.

Waiting for her, he walked the corridor, glancing into open offices
for signs of life.  He stopped to chat with Joe Hopper from the
scenario department.

'Not like the old days,' he mourned, 'Then there was a bottle on
every desk.'

'There're a few around.'

'Not many.'  Pat sighed.  'And afterwards we'd run a picture--made
up out of cutting-room scraps.'

'I've heard.  All the suppressed stuff,' said Hopper.

Pat nodded, his eyes glistening.

'Oh, it was juicy.  You darned near ripped your guts laughing--'

He broke off as the sight of a woman, pad in hand, entering his
office down the hall recalled him to the sorry present.

'Gooddorf has me working over the holiday,' he complained bitterly.

'I wouldn't do it.'

'I wouldn't either except my four weeks are up next Friday, and if
I bucked him he wouldn't extend me.'

As he turned away Hopper knew that Pat was not being extended
anyhow.  He had been hired to script an old-fashioned horse-opera
and the boys who were 'writing behind him'--that is working over
his stuff--said that all of it was old and some didn't make sense.

'I'm Miss Kagle,' said Pat's new secretary.

She was about thirty-six, handsome, faded, tired, efficient.  She
went to the typewriter, examined it, sat down and burst into sobs.

Pat started.  Self-control, from below anyhow, was the rule around
here.  Wasn't it bad enough to be working on Christmas Eve?  Well--
less bad than not working at all.  He walked over and shut the door--
someone might suspect him of insulting the girl.

'Cheer up,' he advised her.  'This is Christmas.'

Her burst of emotion had died away.  She sat upright now, choking
and wiping her eyes.

'Nothing's as bad as it seems,' he assured her unconvincingly.
'What's it, anyhow?  They going to lay you off?'

She shook her head, did a sniffle to end sniffles, and opened her
note book.

'Who you been working for?'

She answered between suddenly gritted teeth.

'Mr Harry Gooddorf.'

Pat widened his permanently bloodshot eyes.  Now he remembered he
had seen her in Harry's outer office,

'Since 1921.  Eighteen years.  And yesterday he sent me back to the
department.  He said I depressed him--I reminded him he was getting
on.'  Her face was grim.  'That isn't the way he talked after hours
eighteen years ago.'

'Yeah, he was a skirt chaser then,' said Pat.

'I should have done something then when I had the chance.'

Pat felt righteous stirrings.

'Breach of promise?  That's no angle!'

'But I had something to clinch it.  Something bigger than breach of
promise.  I still have too.  But then, you see, I thought I was in
love with him.'  She brooded for a moment.  'Do you want to dictate
something now?'

Pat remembered his job and opened a script.

'It's an insert,' he began, 'Scene 114A.'

Pat paced the office.

'Ext.  Long Shot of the Plains,' he decreed.  'Buck and Mexicans
approaching the hyacenda.'

'The what?'

'The hyacenda--the ranch house.'  He looked at her reproachfully,
'114 B.  Two Shot:  Buck and Pedro.  Buck:  "The dirty son-of-a-
bitch.  I'll tear his guts out!"'

Miss Kagle looked up, startled.

'You want me to write that down?'

'Sure.'

'It won't get by.'

'I'm writing this.  Of course, it won't get by.  But if I put "you
rat" the scene won't have any force.'

'But won't somebody have to change it to "you rat"?'

He glared at her--he didn't want to change secretaries every day.

'Harry Gooddorf can worry about that.'

'Are you working for Mr Gooddorf?' Miss Kagle asked in alarm.

'Until he throws me out.'

'I shouldn't have said--'

'Don't worry,' he assured her.  'He's no pal of mine anymore.  Not
at three-fifty a week, when I used to get two thousand . . .  Where
was I?'

He paced the floor again, repeating his last line aloud with
relish.  But now it seemed to apply not to a personage of the story
but to Harry Gooddorf.  Suddenly he stood still, lost in thought.
'Say, what is it you got on him?  You know where the body is
buried?'

'That's too true to be funny.'

'He knock somebody off?'

'Mr Hobby, I'm sorry I ever opened my mouth.'

'Just call me Pat.  What's your first name?'

'Helen.'

'Married?'

'Not now.'

'Well, listen Helen:  What do you say we have dinner?'


II


On the afternoon of Christmas Day he was still trying to get the
secret out of her.  They had the studio almost to themselves--only
a skeleton staff of technical men dotted the walks and the
commissary.  They had exchanged Christmas presents.  Pat gave her a
five dollar bill, Helen bought him a white linen handkerchief.
Very well he could remember the day when many dozen such
handkerchiefs had been his Christmas harvest.

The script was progressing at a snail's pace but their friendship
had considerably ripened.  Her secret, he considered, was a very
valuable asset, and he wondered how many careers had turned on just
such an asset.  Some, he felt sure, had been thus raised to
affluence.  Why, it was almost as good as being in the family, and
he pictured an imaginary conversation with Harry Gooddorf.

'Harry, it's this way.  I don't think my experience is being made
use of.  It's the young squirts who ought to do the writing--I
ought to do more supervising.'

'Or--?'

'Or else,' said Pat firmly.

He was in the midst of his day dream when Harry Gooddorf
unexpectedly walked in.

'Merry Christmas, Pat,' he said jovially.  His smile was less
robust when he saw Helen, 'Oh, hello Helen--didn't know you and Pat
had got together.  I sent you a remembrance over to the script
department.'

'You shouldn't have done that.'

Harry turned swiftly to Pat.

'The boss is on my neck,' he said.  'I've got to have a finished
script Thursday.'

'Well, here I am,' said Pat.  'You'll have it.  Did I ever fail
you?'

'Usually,' said Harry.  'Usually.'

He seemed about to add more when a call boy entered with an
envelope and handed it to Helen Kagle--whereupon Harry turned and
hurried out.

'He'd better get out!' burst forth Miss Kagle, after opening the
envelope.  'Ten bucks--just TEN BUCKS--from an executive--after
eighteen years.'

It was Pat's chance.  Sitting on her desk he told her his plan.

'It's soft jobs for you and me,' he said.  'You the head of a
script department, me an associate producer.  We're on the gravy
train for life--no more writing--no more pounding the keys.  We
might even--we might even--if things go good we could get married.'

She hesitated a long time.  When she put a fresh sheet in the
typewriter Pat feared he had lost.

'I can write it from memory,' she said.  'This was a letter he
typed HIMSELF on February 3rd, 1921.  He sealed it and gave it to
me to mail--but there was a blonde he was interested in, and I
wondered why he should be so secret about a letter.'

Helen had been typing as she talked, and now she handed Pat a note.


To Will Bronson
First National Studios
Personal

Dear Bill:

We killed Taylor.  We should have cracked down on him sooner.  So
why not shut up.

Yours, Harry


'Get it?' Helen said.  'On February 1st, 1921, somebody knocked off
William Desmond Taylor, the director.  And they've never found out
who.'


III


For eighteen years she had kept the original note, envelope and
all.  She had sent only a copy to Bronson, tracing Harry Gooddorf's
signature.

'Baby, we're set!' said Pat.  'I always thought it was a GIRL got
Taylor.'

He was so elated that he opened a drawer and brought forth a half-
pint of whiskey.  Then, with an afterthought, he demanded:

'Is it in a safe place?'

'You bet it is.  He'd never guess where.'

'Baby, we've got him!'

Cash, cars, girls, swimming pools swam in a glittering montage
before Pat's eye.

He folded the note, put it in his pocket, took another drink and
reached for his hat.

'You going to see him now?' Helen demanded in some alarm.  'Hey,
wait till I get off the lot.  _I_ don't want to get murdered.'

'Don't worry!  Listen I'll meet you in "the Muncherie" at Fifth and
La Brea--in one hour.'

As he walked to Gooddorf's office he decided to mention no facts or
names within the walls of the studio.  Back in the brief period
when he had headed a scenario department Pat had conceived a plan
to put a dictaphone in every writer's office.  Thus their loyalty
to the studio executives could be checked several times a day.

The idea had been laughed at.  But later, when he had been 'reduced
back to a writer', he often wondered if his plan was secretly
followed.  Perhaps some indiscreet remark of his own was
responsible for the doghouse where he had been interred for the
past decade.  So it was with the idea of concealed dictaphones in
mind, dictaphones which could be turned on by the pressure of a
toe, that he entered Harry Gooddorf's office.

'Harry--' he chose his words carefully, 'do you remember the night
of February 1st, 1921?'

Somewhat flabbergasted, Gooddorf leaned back in his swivel chair.

'WHAT?'

'Try and think.  It's something very important to you.'

Pat's expression as he watched his friend was that of an anxious
undertaker.

'February 1st, 1921.'  Gooddorf mused.  'No.  How could I remember?
You think I keep a diary?  I don't even know where I was then.'

'You were right here in Hollywood.'

'Probably.  If you know, tell me.'

'You'll remember.'

'Let's see.  I came out to the coast in sixteen.  I was with
Biograph till 1920.  Was I making some comedies?  That's it.  I was
making a piece called Knuckleduster--on location.'

'You weren't always on location.  You were in town February 1st.'

'What is this?' Gooddorf demanded.  'The third degree?'

'No--but I've got some information about your doings on that date.'

Gooddorf's face reddened; for a moment it looked as if he were
going to throw Pat out of the room--then suddenly he gasped, licked
his lips and stared at his desk.

'Oh,' he said, and after a minute:  'But I don't see what business
it is of yours.'

'It's the business of every decent man.'

'Since when have you been decent?'

'All my life,' said Pat.  'And, even if I haven't, I never did
anything like that.'

'My foot!' said Harry contemptuously.  'YOU showing up here with a
halo!  Anyhow, what's the evidence?  You'd think you had a written
confession.  It's all forgotten long ago.'

'Not in the memory of decent men,' said Pat.  'And as for a written
confession--I've got it.'

'I doubt you.  And I doubt if it would stand in any court.  You've
been taken in.'

'I've seen it,' said Pat with growing confidence.  'And it's enough
to hang you.'

'Well, by God, if there's any publicity I'll run you out of town.'

'You'll run ME out of town.'

'I don't want any publicity.'

'Then I think you'd better come along with me.  Without talking to
anybody.'

'Where are we going?'

'I know a bar where we can be alone.'

The Muncherie was in fact deserted, save for the bartender and
Helen Kagle who sat at a table, jumpy with alarm.  Seeing her,
Gooddorf's expression changed to one of infinite reproach.

'This is a hell of a Christmas,' he said, 'with my family expecting
me home an hour ago.  I want to know the idea.  You say you've got
something in my writing.'

Pat took the paper from his pocket and read the date aloud.  Then
he looked up hastily:

'This is just a copy, so don't try and snatch it.'

He knew the technique of such scenes as this.  When the vogue for
Westerns had temporarily subsided he had sweated over many an orgy
of crime.

'To William Bronson, Dear Bill:  We killed Taylor.  We should have
cracked down on him sooner.  So why not shut up.  Yours, Harry.'

Pat paused.  'You wrote this on February 3rd, 1921.'

Silence.  Gooddorf turned to Helen Kagle.

'Did YOU do this?  Did I dictate that to you?'

'No,' she admitted in an awed voice.  'You wrote it yourself.  I
opened the letter.'

'I see.  Well, what do you want?'

'Plenty,' said Pat, and found himself pleased with the sound of the
word.

'What exactly?'

Pat launched into the description of a career suitable to a man of
forty-nine.  A glowing career.  It expanded rapidly in beauty and
power during the time it took him to drink three large whiskeys.
But one demand he returned to again and again.

He wanted to be made a producer tomorrow.

'Why tomorrow?' demanded Gooddorf.  'Can't it wait?'

There were sudden tears in Pat's eyes--real tears.

'This is Christmas,' he said.  'It's my Christmas wish.  I've had a
hell of a time.  I've waited so long.'

Gooddorf got to his feet suddenly.

'Nope,' he said.  'I won't make you a producer.  I couldn't do it
in fairness to the company.  I'd rather stand trial.'

Pat's mouth fell open.

'What?  You won't?'

'Not a chance.  I'd rather swing.'

He turned away, his face set, and started toward the door.

'All right!' Pat called after him.  'It's your last chance.'

Suddenly he was amazed to see Helen Kagle spring up and run after
Gooddorf--try to throw her arms around him.

'Don't worry!' she cried.  'I'll tear it up, Harry!  It was a joke
Harry--'

Her voice trailed off rather abruptly.  She had discovered that
Gooddorf was shaking with laughter.

'What's the joke?' she demanded, growing angry again.  'Do you
think I haven't got it?'

'Oh, you've got it all right,' Gooddorf howled.  'You've got it--
but it isn't what you think it is.'

He came back to the table, sat down and addressed Pat.

'Do you know what I thought that date meant?  I thought maybe it
was the date Helen and I first fell for each other.  That's what I
thought.  And I thought she was going to raise Cain about it.  I
thought she was nuts.  She's been married twice since then, and so
have I.'

'That doesn't explain the note,' said Pat sternly but with a sinky
feeling.  'You admit you killed Taylor.'

Gooddorf nodded.

'I still think a lot of us did,' he said.  'We were a wild crowd--
Taylor and Bronson and me and half the boys in the big money.  So a
bunch of us got together in an agreement to go slow.  The country
was waiting for somebody to hang.  We tried to get Taylor to watch
his step but he wouldn't.  So instead of cracking down on him, we
let him "go the pace".  And some rat shot him--who did it I don't
know.'

He stood up.

'Like somebody should have cracked down on YOU, Pat.  But you were
an amusing guy in those days, and besides we were all too busy.'

Pat sniffled suddenly.

'I've BEEN cracked down on,' he said.  'Plenty.'

'But too late,' said Gooddorf, and added, 'you've probably got a
new Christmas wish by now, and I'll grant it to you.  I won't say
anything about this afternoon.'

When he had gone, Pat and Helen sat in silence.  Presently Pat took
out the note again and looked it over.

'"So why not shut up?"' he read aloud.  'He didn't explain that.'

'Why NOT shut up?' Helen said.




A MAN IN THE WAY

Esquire (February 1940)


I


Pat Hobby could always get on the lot.  He had worked there fifteen
years on and off--chiefly off during the past five--and most of the
studio police knew him.  If tough customers on watch asked to see
his studio card he could get in by phoning Lou, the bookie.  For
Lou also, the studio had been home for many years.

Pat was forty-nine.  He was a writer but he had never written much,
nor even read all the 'originals' he worked from, because it made
his head bang to read much.  But the good old silent days you got
somebody's plot and a smart secretary and gulped benzedrine
'structure' at her six or eight hours every week.  The director
took care of the gags.  After talkies came he always teamed up with
some man who wrote dialogue.  Some young man who liked to work.

'I've got a list of credits second to none,' he told Jack Berners.
'All I need is an idea and to work with somebody who isn't all
wet.'

He had buttonholed Jack outside the production office as Jack was
going to lunch and they walked together in the direction of the
commissary.

'You bring me an idea,' said Jack Berners.  'Things are tight.  We
can't put a man on salary unless he's got an idea.'

'How can you get ideas off salary?' Pat demanded--then he added
hastily:  'Anyhow I got the germ of an idea that I could be telling
you all about at lunch.'

Something might come to him at lunch.  There was Baer's notion
about the boy scout.  But Jack said cheerfully:

'I've got a date for lunch, Pat.  Write it out and send it around,
eh?'

He felt cruel because he knew Pat couldn't write anything out but
he was having story trouble himself.  The war had just broken out
and every producer on the lot wanted to end their current stories
with the hero going to war.  And Jack Berners felt he had thought
of that first for his production.

'So write it out, eh?'

When Pat didn't answer Jack looked at him--he saw a sort of whipped
misery in Pat's eye that reminded him of his own father.  Pat had
been in the money before Jack was out of college--with three cars
and a chicken over every garage.  Now his clothes looked as if he'd
been standing at Hollywood and Vine for three years.

'Scout around and talk to some of the writers on the lot,' he said.
'If you can get one of them interested in your idea, bring him up
to see me.'

'I hate to give an idea without money on the line,' Pat brooded
pessimistically, 'These young squirts'll lift the shirt off your
back.'

They had reached the commissary door.

'Good luck, Pat.  Anyhow we're not in Poland.'

--Good YOU'RE not, said Pat under his breath.  They'd slit your
gizzard.

Now what to do?  He went up and wandered along the cell block of
writers.  Almost everyone had gone to lunch and those who were in
he didn't know.  Always there were more and more unfamiliar faces.
And he had thirty credits; he had been in the business, publicity
and script-writing, for twenty years.

The last door in the line belonged to a man he didn't like.  But he
wanted a place to sit a minute so with a knock he pushed it open.
The man wasn't there--only a very pretty, frail-looking girl sat
reading a book.

'I think he's left Hollywood,' she said in answer to his question.
'They gave me his office but they forgot to put up my name.'

'You a writer?' Pat asked in surprise.

'I work at it.'

'You ought to get 'em to give you a test.'

'No--I like writing.'

'What's that you're reading.'

She showed him.

'Let me give you a tip,' he said.  'That's not the way to get the
guts out of a book.'

'Oh.'

'I've been here for years--I'm Pat Hobby--and I KNOW.  Give the
book to four of your friends to read it.  Get them to tell you what
stuck in their minds.  Write it down and you've got a picture--
see?'

The girl smiled.

'Well, that's very--very original advice, Mr Hobby.'

'Pat Hobby,' he said.  'Can I wait here a minute?  Man I came to
see is at lunch.'

He sat down across from her and picked up a copy of a photo
magazine.

'Oh, just let me mark that,' she said quickly.

He looked at the page which she checked.  It showed paintings being
boxed and carted away to safety from an art gallery in Europe.

'How'll you use it?' he said.

'Well, I thought it would be dramatic if there was an old man
around while they were packing the pictures.  A poor old man,
trying to get a job helping them.  But they can't use him--he's in
the way--not even good cannon fodder.  They want strong young
people in the world.  And it turns out he's the man who painted the
pictures many years ago.'

Pat considered.

'It's good but I don't get it,' he said.

'Oh, it's nothing, a short short maybe.'

'Got any good picture ideas?  I'm in with all the markets here.'

'I'm under contract.'

'Use another name.'

Her phone rang.

'Yes, this is Pricilla Smith,' the girl said.

After a minute she turned to Pat.

'Will you excuse me?  This is a private call.'

He got it and walked out, and along the corridor.  Finding an
office with no name on it he went in and fell asleep on the couch.


II


Late that afternoon he returned to Jack Berners' waiting rooms.  He
had an idea about a man who meets a girl in an office and he thinks
she's a stenographer but she turns out to be a writer.  He engages
her as a stenographer, though, and they start for the South Seas.
It was a beginning, it was something to tell Jack, he thought--and,
picturing Pricilla Smith, he refurbished some old business he
hadn't seen used for years.

He became quite excited about it--felt quite young for a moment and
walked up and down the waiting room mentally rehearsing the first
sequence.  'So here we have a situation like It Happened One Night--
only NEW.  I see Hedy Lamarr--'

Oh, he knew how to talk to these boys if he could get to them, with
something to say.

'Mr Berners still busy?' he asked for the fifth time.

'Oh, yes, Mr Hobby.  Mr Bill Costello and Mr Bach are in there.'

He thought quickly.  It was half-past five.  In the old days he had
just busted in sometimes and sold an idea, an idea good for a
couple of grand because it was just the moment when they were very
tired of what they were doing at present.

He walked innocently out and to another door in the hall.  He knew
it led through a bathroom right in to Jack Berners' office.
Drawing a quick breath he plunged . . .

'. . . So that's the notion,' he concluded after five minutes.
'It's just a flash--nothing really worked out, but you could give
me an office and a girl and I could have something on paper for you
in three days.'

Berners, Costello and Bach did not even have to look at each other.
Berners spoke for them all as he said firmly and gently:

'That's no idea, Pat.  I can't put you on salary for that.'

'Why don't you work it out further by yourself,' suggested Bill
Costello.  'And then let's see it.  We're looking for ideas--
especially about the war.'

'A man can think better on salary,' said Pat.

There was silence.  Costello and Bach had drunk with him, played
poker with him, gone to the races with him.  They'd honestly be
glad to see him placed.

'The war, eh,' he said gloomily.  'Everything is war now, no matter
how many credits a man has.  Do you know what it makes me think of?
It makes me think of a well-known painter in the discard.  It's war
time and he's useless--just a man in the way.'  He warmed to his
conception of himself, '--but all the time they're carting away his
OWN PAINTINGS as the most valuable thing worth saving.  And they
won't even let me help.  That's what it reminds me of.'

There was again silence for a moment.

'That isn't a bad idea,' said Bach thoughtfully.  He turned to the
others.  'You know?  In itself?'

Bill Costello nodded

'Not bad at all.  And I know where we could spot it.  Right at the
end of the fourth sequence.  We just change old Ames to a painter.'

Presently they talked money.

'I'll give you two weeks on it,' said Berners to Pat.  'At two-
fifty.'

'Two-fifty!' objected Pat.  'Say there was one time you paid me ten
times that!'

'That was ten years ago,' Jack reminded him.  'Sorry.  Best we can
do now.'

'You make me feel like that old painter--'

'Don't oversell it,' said Jack, rising and smiling.  'You're on the
payroll.'

Pat went out with a quick step and confidence in his eyes.  Half a
grand--that would take the pressure off for a month and you could
often stretch two weeks into three--sometimes four.  He left the
studio proudly through the front entrance, stopping at the liquor
store for a half-pint to take back to his room.

By seven o'clock things were even better.  Santa Anita tomorrow, if
he could get an advance.  And tonight--something festive ought to
be done tonight.  With a sudden rush of pleasure he went down to
the phone in the lower hall, called the studio and asked for Miss
Pricilla Smith's number.  He hadn't met anyone so pretty for
years . . .

In her apartment Pricilla Smith spoke rather firmly into the phone.

'I'm awfully sorry,' she said, 'but I couldn't possibly . . .  No--
and I'm tied up all the rest of the week.'

As she hung up, Jack Berners spoke from the couch.

'Who was it?'

'Oh, some man who came in the office,' she laughed, 'and told me
never to read the story I was working on.'

'Shall I believe you?'

'You certainly shall.  I'll even think of his name in a minute.
But first I want to tell you about an idea I had this morning.  I
was looking at a photo in a magazine where they were packing up
some works of art in the Tate Gallery in London.  And I thought--'





"BOIL SOME WATER--LOTS OF IT"


Esquire (March 1940)



Pat Hobby sat in his office in the writers' building and looked at
his morning's work, just come back from the script department.  He
was on a "polish job," about the only kind he ever got nowadays.
He was to repair a messy sequence in a hurry, but the word "hurry"
neither frightened nor inspired him for Pat had been in Hollywood
since he was thirty--now he was forty-nine.  All the work he had
done this morning (except a little changing around of lines so he
could claim them as his own)--all he had actually invented was a
single imperative sentence, spoken by a doctor.

"Boil some water--lots of it."

It was a good line.  It had sprung into his mind full grown as soon
as he had read the script.  In the old silent days Pat would have
used it as a spoken title and ended his dialogue worries for a
space, but he needed some spoken words for other people in the
scene.  Nothing came.

"Boil some water," he repeated to himself.  "Lots of it."

The word boil brought a quick glad thought of the commissary.  A
reverent thought too--for an old-timer like Pat, what people you
sat with at lunch was more important in getting along than what you
dictated in your office.  This was no art, as he often said--this
was an industry.

"This is no art," he remarked to Max Learn who was leisurely
drinking at a corridor water cooler.  "This is an industry."

Max had flung him this timely bone of three weeks at three-fifty.

"Say look, Pat!  Have you got anything down on paper yet?"

"Say I've got some stuff already that'll make 'em--"  He named a
familiar biological function with the somewhat startling assurance
that it would take place in the theater.

Max tried to gauge his sincerity.

"Want to read it to me now?" he asked.

"Not yet.  But it's got the old guts if you know what I mean."

Max was full of doubts.

"Well, go to it.  And if you run into any medical snags check with
the doctor over at the First Aid Station.  It's got to be right."

The spirit of Pasteur shone firmly in Pat's eyes.

"It will be."

He felt good walking across the lot with Max--so good that he
decided to glue himself to the producer and sit down with him at
the Big Table.  But Max foiled his intention by cooing "See you
later" and slipping into the barber shop.

Once Pat had been a familiar figure at the Big Table; often in his
golden prime he had dined in the private canteens of executives.
Being of the older Hollywood he understood their jokes, their
vanities, their social system with its swift fluctuations.  But
there were too many new faces at the Big Table now--faces that
looked at him with the universal Hollywood suspicion.  And at the
little tables where the young writers sat they seemed to take work
so seriously.  As for just sitting down anywhere, even with
secretaries or extras--Pat would rather catch a sandwich at the
corner.

Detouring to the Red Cross Station he asked for the doctor.  A
girl, a nurse, answered from a wall mirror where she was hastily
drawing her lips, "He's out.  What is it?"

"Oh.  Then I'll come back."

She had finished, and now she turned--vivid and young and with a
bright consoling smile.

"Miss Stacey will help you.  I'm about to go to lunch."

He was aware of an old, old feeling--left over from the time when
he had had wives--a feeling that to invite this little beauty to
lunch might cause trouble.  But he remembered quickly that he
didn't have any wives now--they had both given up asking for
alimony.

"I'm working on a medical," he said.  "I need some help."

"A medical?"

"Writing it--idea about a doc.  Listen--let me buy you lunch.  I
want to ask you some medical questions."

The nurse hesitated.

"I don't know.  It's my first day out here."

"It's all right," he assured her, "studios are democratic;
everybody is just 'Joe' or 'Mary'--from the big shots right down to
the prop boys."

He proved it magnificently on their way to lunch by greeting a male
star and getting his own name back in return.  And in the
commissary, where they were placed hard by the Big Table, his
producer, Max Leam, looked up, did a little "takem" and winked.

The nurse--her name was Helen Earle--peered about eagerly.

"I don't see anybody," she said.  "Except oh, there's Ronald
Colman.  I didn't know Ronald Colman looked like that."

Pat pointed suddenly to the floor.

"And there's Mickey Mouse!"

She jumped and Pat laughed at his joke--but Helen Earle was already
staring starry-eyed at the costume extras who filled the hall with
the colors of the First Empire.  Pat was piqued to see her interest
go out to these nonentities.

"The big shots are at this next table," he said solemnly,
wistfully, "directors and all except the biggest executives.  They
could have Ronald Colman pressing pants.  I usually sit over there
but they don't want ladies.  At lunch, that is, they don't want
ladies."

"Oh," said Helen Earle, polite but unimpressed.  "It must be
wonderful to be a writer too.  It's so very interesting."

"It has its points," he said . . . he had thought for years it was
a dog's life.

"What is it you want to ask me about a doctor?"

Here was toil again.  Something in Pat's mind snapped off when he
thought of the story.

"Well, Max Leam--that man facing us--Max Leam and I have a script
about a Doc.  You know?  Like a hospital picture?"

"I know."  And she added after a moment, "That's the reason that I
went in training."

"And we've got to have it RIGHT because a hundred million people
would check on it.  So this doctor in the script he tells them to
boil some water.  He says, 'Boil some water--lots of it.'  And we
were wondering what the people would do then."

"Why--they'd probably boil it," Helen said, and then, somewhat
confused by the question, "What people?"

"Well, somebody's daughter and the man that lived there and an
attorney and the man that was hurt."

Helen tried to digest this before answering.

"--and some other guy I'm going to cut out," he finished.

There was a pause.  The waitress set down tuna fish sandwiches.

"Well, when a doctor gives orders they're orders," Helen decided.

"Hm."  Pat's interest had wandered to an odd little scene at the
Big Table while he inquired absently, "You married?"

"No."

"Neither am I."

Beside the Big Table stood an extra.  A Russian Cossack with a
fierce moustache.  He stood resting his hand on the back of an
empty chair between Director Paterson and Producer Leam.

"Is this taken?" he asked, with a thick Central European accent.

All along the Big Table faces stared suddenly at him.  Until after
the first look the supposition was that he must be some well-known
actor.  But he was not--he was dressed in one of the many-colored
uniforms that dotted the room.

Someone at the table said:  "That's taken."  But the man drew out
the chair and sat down.

"Got to eat somewhere," he remarked with a grin.

A shiver went over the near-by tables.  Pat Hobby stared with his
mouth ajar.  It was as if someone had crayoned Donald Duck into the
Last Supper.

"Look at that," he advised Helen.  "What they'll do to him!  Boy!"

The flabbergasted silence at the Big Table was broken by Ned
Harman, the Production Manager.

"This table is reserved," he said.

The extra looked up from a menu.

"They told me sit anywhere."

He beckoned a waitress--who hesitated, looking for an answer in the
faces of her superiors.

"Extras don't eat here," said Max Leam, still politely.  "This is
a--"

"I got to eat," said the Cossack doggedly.  "I been standing around
six hours while they shoot this stinking mess and now I got to
eat."

The silence had extended--from Pat's angle all within range seemed
to be poised in mid-air.

The extra shook his head wearily.

"I dunno who cooked it up--" he said--and Max Leam sat forward in
his chair--"but it's the lousiest tripe I ever seen shot in
Hollywood."

--At his table Pat was thinking why didn't they do something?
Knock him down, drag him away.  If they were yellow themselves they
could call the studio police.

"Who is that?"  Helen Earle was following his eyes innocently,
"Somebody I ought to know?"

He was listening attentively to Max Leam's voice, raised in anger.

"Get up and get out of here, buddy, and get out quick!"

The extra frowned.

"Who's telling me?" he demanded.

"You'll see."  Max appealed to the table at large, "Where's Cushman--
where's the Personnel man?"

"You try to move me," said the extra, lifting the hilt of his
scabbard above the level of the table, "and I'll hang this on your
ear.  I know my rights."

The dozen men at the table, representing a thousand dollars an hour
in salaries, sat stunned.  Far down by the door one of the studio
police caught wind of what was happening and started to elbow
through the crowded room.  And Big Jack Wilson, another director,
was on his feet in an instant coming around the table.

But they were too late--Pat Hobby could stand no more.  He had
jumped up, seizing a big heavy tray from the serving stand nearby.
In two springs he reached the scene of action--lifting the tray he
brought it down upon the extra's head with all the strength of his
forty-nine years.  The extra, who had been in the act of rising to
meet Wilson's threatened assault, got the blow full on his face and
temple and as he collapsed a dozen red streaks sprang into sight
through the heavy grease paint.  He crashed sideways between the
chairs.

Pat stood over him panting--the tray in his hand.

"The dirty rat!" he cried.  "Where does he think--"

The studio policeman pushed past; Wilson pushed past--two aghast
men from another table rushed up to survey the situation.

"It was a gag!" one of them shouted.  "That's Walter Herrick, the
writer.  It's his picture."

"My God!"

"He was kidding Max Leam.  It was a gag I tell you!"

"Pull him out . . .  Get a doctor . . .  Look out, there!"

Now Helen Earle hurried over; Walter Herrick was dragged out into a
cleared space on the floor and there were yells of "Who did it?--
Who beaned him?"

Pat let the tray lapse to a chair, its sound unnoticed in the
confusion.

He saw Helen Earle working swiftly at the man's head with a pile of
clean napkins.

"Why did they have to do this to him?" someone shouted.

Pat caught Max Leam's eye but Max happened to look away at the
moment and a sense of injustice came over Pat.  He alone in this
crisis, real or imaginary, had ACTED.  He alone had played the man,
while those stuffed shirts let themselves be insulted and abused.
And now he would have to take the rap--because Walter Herrick was
powerful and popular, a three thousand a week man who wrote hit
shows in New York.  How could anyone have guessed that it was a
gag?

There was a doctor now.  Pat saw him say something to the
manageress and her shrill voice sent the waitresses scattering like
leaves toward the kitchen.

"Boil some water!  Lots of it!"

The words fell wild and unreal on Pat's burdened soul.  But even
though he now knew at first hand what came next, he did not think
that he could go on from there.




TEAMED WITH GENIUS


Esquire (April 1940)



"I took a chance in sending for you," said Jack Berners.  "But
there's a job that you just MAY be able to help out with."

Though Pat Hobby was not offended, either as man or writer, a
formal protest was called for.

"I been in the industry fifteen years, Jack.  I've got more screen
credits than a dog has got fleas."

"Maybe I chose the wrong word," said Jack.  "What I mean is, that
was a long time ago.  About money we'll pay you just what Republic
paid you last month--three-fifty a week.  Now--did you ever hear of
a writer named René Wilcox?"

The name was unfamiliar.  Pat had scarcely opened a book in a
decade.

"She's pretty good," he ventured.

"It's a man, an English playwright.  He's only here in L. A. for
his health.  Well--we've had a Russian Ballet picture kicking
around for a year--three bad scripts on it.  So last week we signed
up René Wilcox--he seemed just the person."

Pat considered.

"You mean he's--"

"I don't know and I don't care," interrupted Berners sharply.  "We
think we can borrow Zorina, so we want to hurry things up--do a
shooting script instead of just a treatment.  Wilcox is
inexperienced and that's where you come in.  You used to be a good
man for structure."

"USED to be!"

"All right, maybe you still are."  Jack beamed with momentary
encouragement.  "Find yourself an office and get together with René
Wilcox."  As Pat started out he called him back and put a bill in
his hand.  "First of all, get a new hat.  You used to be quite a
boy around the secretaries in the old days.  Don't give up at forty-
nine!"

Over in the Writers' Building Pat glanced at the directory in the
hall and knocked at the door of 216.  No answer, but he went in to
discover a blond, willowy youth of twenty-five staring moodily out
the window.

"Hello, René!" Pat said.  "I'm your partner."

Wilcox's regard questioned even his existence, but Pat continued
heartily, "I hear we're going to lick some stuff into shape.  Ever
collaborate before?"

"I have never written for the cinema before."

While this increased Pat's chance for a screen credit he badly
needed, it meant that he might have to do some work.  The very
thought made him thirsty.

"This is different from playwriting," he suggested, with suitable
gravity.

"Yes--I read a book about it."

Pat wanted to laugh.  In 1928 he and another man had concocted such
a sucker-trap, Secrets of Film Writing.  It would have made money
if pictures hadn't started to talk.

"It all seems simple enough," said Wilcox.  Suddenly he took his
hat from the rack.  "I'll be running along now."

"Don't you want to talk about the script?" demanded Pat.  "What
have you done so far?"

"I've not done anything," said Wilcox deliberately.  "That idiot,
Berners, gave me some trash and told me to go on from there.  But
it's too dismal."  His blue eyes narrowed.  "I say, what's a boom
shot?"

"A boom shot?  Why, that's when the camera's on a crane."

Pat leaned over the desk and picked up a blue-jacketed "Treatment."
On the cover he read:


                        BALLET SHOES

                         A Treatment
                             by
                       Consuela Martin
         An Original from an idea by Consuela Martin


Pat glanced at the beginning and then at the end.

"I'd like it better if we could get the war in somewhere," he said
frowning.  "Have the dancer go as a Red Cross nurse and then she
could get regenerated.  See what I mean?"

There was no answer.  Pat turned and saw the door softly closing.

What is this? he exclaimed.  What kind of collaborating can a man
do if he walks out?  Wilcox had not even given the legitimate
excuse--the races at Santa Anita!

The door opened again, a pretty girl's face, rather frightened,
showed itself momentarily, said "Oh," and disappeared.  Then it
returned.

"Why it's Mr. Hobby!" she exclaimed.  "I was looking for Mr.
Wilcox."

He fumbled for her name but she supplied it.

"Katherine Hodge.  I was your secretary when I worked here three
years ago."

Pat knew she had once worked with him, but for the moment could not
remember whether there had been a deeper relation.  It did not seem
to him that it had been love--but looking at her now, that appeared
rather too bad.

"Sit down," said Pat.  "You assigned to Wilcox?"

"I thought so--but he hasn't given me any work yet."

"I think he's nuts," Pat said gloomily.  "He asked me what a boom
shot was.  Maybe he's sick--that's why he's out here.  He'll
probably start throwing up all over the office."

"He's well now," Katherine ventured.

"He doesn't look like it to me.  Come on in my office.  You can
work for ME this afternoon."

Pat lay on his couch while Miss Katherine Hodge read the script of
Ballet Shoes aloud to him.  About midway in the second sequence he
fell asleep with his new hat on his chest.



Except for the hat, that was the identical position in which he
found René next day at eleven.  And it was that way for three
straight days--one was asleep or else the other--and sometimes
both.  On the fourth day they had several conferences in which Pat
again put forward his idea about the war as a regenerating force
for ballet dancers.

"Couldn't we NOT talk about the war?" suggested René.  "I have two
brothers in the Guards."

"You're lucky to be here in Hollywood."

"That's as it may be."

"Well, what's your idea of the start of the picture?"

"I do not like the present beginning.  It gives me an almost
physical nausea."

"So then, we got to have something in its place.  That's why I want
to plant the war--"

"I'm late to luncheon," said René Wilcox.  "Good-bye, Mike."

Pat grumbled to Katherine Hodge:

"He can call me anything he likes, but somebody's got to write this
picture.  I'd go to Jack Berners and tell him--but I think we'd
both be out on our ears."

For two days more he camped in René's office, trying to rouse him
to action, but with no avail.  Desperate on the following day--when
the playwright did not even come to the studio--Pat took a
benzedrine tablet and attacked the story alone.  Pacing his office
with the treatment in his hand he dictated to Katherine--
interspersing the dictation with a short, biased history of his
life in Hollywood.  At the day's end he had two pages of script.

The ensuing week was the toughest in his life--not even a moment to
make a pass at Katherine Hodge.  Gradually with many creaks, his
battered hulk got in motion.  Benzedrine and great drafts of coffee
woke him in the morning, whiskey anesthetized him at night.  Into
his feet crept an old neuritis and as his nerves began to crackle
he developed a hatred against René Wilcox, which served him as a
sort of ersatz fuel.  He was going to finish the script by himself
and hand it to Berners with the statement that Wilcox had not
contributed a single line.

But it was too much--Pat was too far gone.  He blew up when he was
half through and went on a twenty-four-hour bat--and next morning
arrived back at the studio to find a message that Mr. Berners
wanted to see the script at four.  Pat was in a sick and confused
state when his door opened and René Wilcox came in with a
typescript in one hand, and a copy of Berners' note in the other.

"It's all right," said Wilcox.  "I've finished it."

"WHAT?  Have you been WORKING?"

"I always work at night."

"What've you done?  A treatment?"

"No, a shooting script.  At first I was held back by personal
worries, but once I got started it was very simple.  You just get
behind the camera and dream."

Pat stood up aghast.

"But we were supposed to collaborate.  Jack'll be wild."

"I've always worked alone," said Wilcox gently.  "I'll explain to
Berners this afternoon."

Pat sat in a daze.  If Wilcox's script was good--but how could a
first script be good?  Wilcox should have fed it to him as he
wrote; then they might have HAD something.

Fear started his mind working--he was struck by his first original
idea since he had been on the job.  He phoned to the script
department for Katherine Hodge and when she came over told her what
he wanted.  Katherine hesitated.

"I just want to READ it," Pat said hastily.  "If Wilcox is there
you can't take it, of course.  But he just might be out."

He waited nervously.  In five minutes she was back with the script.

"It isn't mimeographed or even bound," she said.

He was at the typewriter, trembling as he picked out a letter with
two fingers.

"Can I help?" she asked.

"Find me a plain envelope and a used stamp and some paste."

Pat sealed the letter himself and then gave directions:

"Listen outside Wilcox's office.  If he's in, push it under his
door.  If he's out get a call boy to deliver it to him, wherever he
is.  Say it's from the mail room.  Then you better go off the lot
for the afternoon.  So he won't catch on, see?"

As she went out Pat wished he had kept a copy of the note.  He was
proud of it--there was a ring of factual sincerity in it too often
missing from his work.


"Dear Mr. Wilcox:

I am sorry to tell you your two brothers were killed in action
today by a long range Tommy-gun.  You are wanted at home in England
right away.

John Smythe
The British Consulate, New York"


But Pat realized that this was no time for self-applause.  He
opened Wilcox's script.

To his vast surprise it was technically proficient--the dissolves,
fades, cuts, pans and trucking shots were correctly detailed.  This
simplified everything.  Turning back to the first page he wrote at
the top:


BALLET SHOES

First Revise

From Pat Hobby and René Wilcox--presently changing this to read:
From René Wilcox and Pat Hobby.


Then, working frantically, he made several dozen small changes.  He
substituted the word "Scram!" for "Get out of my sight!", he put
"Behind the eight-ball" instead of "in trouble," and replaced
"you'll be sorry" with the apt coinage "Or else!"  Then he phoned
the script department.

"This is Pat Hobby.  I've been working on a script with René
Wilcox, and Mr. Berners would like to have it mimeographed by half-
past three."

This would give him an hour's start on his unconscious
collaborator.

"Is it an emergency?"

"I'll say."

"We'll have to split it up between several girls."

Pat continued to improve the script till the call boy arrived.  He
wanted to put in his war idea but time was short--still, he finally
told the call boy to sit down, while he wrote laboriously in pencil
on the last page.


CLOSE SHOT: Boris and Rita

Rita: What does anything matter now!  I have enlisted as a trained
nurse in the war.

Boris: (moved) War purifies and regenerates!

(He puts his arms around her in a wild embrace as the music soars
way up and we FADE OUT)


Limp and exhausted by his effort he needed a drink, so he left the
lot and slipped cautiously into the bar across from the studio
where he ordered gin and water.

With the glow, he thought warm thoughts.  He had done ALMOST what
he had been hired to do--though his hand had accidentally fallen
upon the dialogue rather than the structure.  But how could Berners
tell that the structure wasn't Pat's?  Katherine Hodge would say
nothing, for fear of implicating herself.  They were all guilty but
guiltiest of all was René Wilcox for refusing to play the game.
Always, according to his lights, Pat had played the game.

He had another drink, bought breath tablets and for awhile amused
himself at the nickel machine in the drugstore.  Louie, the studio
bookie, asked if he was interested in wagers on a bigger scale.

"Not today, Louie."

"What are they paying you, Pat?"

"Thousand a week."

"Not so bad."

"Oh, a lot of us old-timers are coming back," Pat prophesied.  "In
silent days was where you got real training--with directors
shooting off the cuff and needing a gag in a split second.  Now
it's a sis job.  They got English teachers working in pictures!
What do they know?"

"How about a little something on 'Quaker Girl'?"

"No," said Pat.  "This afternoon I got an important angle to work
on.  I don't want to worry about horses."

At three-fifteen he returned to his office to find two copies of
his script in bright new covers.


                        BALLET SHOES

                            from
                  René Wilcox and Pat Hobby
                        First Revise


It reassured him to see his name in type.  As he waited in Jack
Berners' anteroom he almost wished he had reversed the names.  With
the right director this might be another It Happened One Night, and
if he got his name on something like that it meant a three or four
year gravy ride.  But this time he'd save his money--go to Santa
Anita only once a week--get himself a girl along the type of
Katherine Hodge, who wouldn't expect a mansion in Beverly Hills.

Berners' secretary interrupted his reverie, telling him to go in.
As he entered he saw with gratification that a copy of the new
script lay on Berners' desk.

"Did you ever--" asked Berners suddenly "--go to a psychoanalyst?"

"No," admitted Pat.  "But I suppose I could get up on it.  Is it a
new assignment?"

"Not exactly.  It's just that I think you've lost your grip.  Even
larceny requires a certain cunning.  I've just talked to Wilcox on
the phone."

"Wilcox must be nuts," said Pat, aggressively.  "I didn't steal
anything from him.  His name's on it, isn't it?  Two weeks ago I
laid out all his structure--every scene.  I even wrote one whole
scene--at the end about the war."

"Oh yes, the war," said Berners as if he was thinking of something
else.

"But if you like Wilcox's ending better--"

"Yes, I like his ending better.  I never saw a man pick up this
work so fast."  He paused.  "Pat, you've told the truth just once
since you came in this room--that you didn't steal anything from
Wilcox."

"I certainly did not.  I GAVE him stuff."

But a certain dreariness, a grey malaise, crept over him as Berners
continued:

"I told you we had three scripts.  You used an old one we discarded
a year ago.  Wilcox was in when your secretary arrived, and he sent
one of them to you.  Clever, eh?"

Pat was speechless.

"You see, he and that girl like each other.  Seems she typed a play
for him this summer."

"They like each other," said Pat incredulously.  "Why, he--"

"Hold it, Pat.  You've had trouble enough today."

"He's responsible," Pat cried.  "He wouldn't collaborate--and all
the time--"

"--he was writing a swell script.  And he can write his own ticket
if we can persuade him to stay here and do another."

Pat could stand no more.  He stood up.

"Anyhow thank you, Jack," he faltered.  "Call my agent if anything
turns up."  Then he bolted suddenly and surprisingly for the door.

Jack Berners signaled on the Dictograph for the President's office.

"Get a chance to read it?" he asked in a tone of eagerness.

"It's swell.  Better than you said.  Wilcox is with me now."

"Have you signed him up?"

"I'm going to.  Seems he wants to work with Hobby.  Here, you talk
to him."

Wilcox's rather high voice came over the wire.

"Must have Mike Hobby," he said.  "Grateful to him.  Had a quarrel
with a certain young lady just before he came, but today Hobby
brought us together.  Besides I want to write a play about him.  So
give him to me--you fellows don't want him any more."

Berners picked up his secretary's phone.

"Go after Pat Hobby.  He's probably in the bar across the street.
We're putting him on salary again but we'll be sorry."  He switched
off, switched on again.  "Oh!  Take him his hat.  He forgot his
hat."




PAT HOBBY AND ORSON WELLES

Esquire (May 1940)


I


'Who's this Welles?' Pat asked of Louie, the studio bookie.  'Every
time I pick up a paper they got about this Welles.'

'You know, he's that beard,' explained Louie.

'Sure, I know he's that beard, you couldn't miss that.  But what
credits's he got?  What's he done to draw one hundred and fifty
grand a picture?'

What indeed?  Had he, like Pat, been in Hollywood over twenty
years?  Did he have credits that would knock your eye out,
extending up to--well, up to five years ago when Pat's credits had
begun to be few and far between?

'Listen--they don't last long,' said Louie consolingly, 'We've seen
'em come and we've seen 'em go.  Hey, Pat?'

Yes--but meanwhile those who had toiled in the vineyard through the
heat of the day were lucky to get a few weeks at three-fifty.  Men
who had once had wives and Filipinos and swimming pools.

'Maybe it's the beard,' said Louie.  'Maybe you and I should grow a
beard.  My father had a beard but it never got him off Grand
Street.'

The gift of hope had remained with Pat through his misfortunes--and
the valuable alloy of his hope was proximity.  Above all things one
must stick around, one must be there when the glazed, tired mind of
the producer grappled with the question 'Who?'  So presently Pat
wandered out of the drug-store, and crossed the street to the lot
that was home.

As he passed through the side entrance an unfamiliar studio
policeman stood in his way.

'Everybody in the front entrance now.'

'I'm Hobby, the writer,' Pat said.

The Cossack was unimpressed.

'Got your card?'

'I'm between pictures.  But I've got an engagement with Jack
Berners.'

'Front gate.'

As he turned away Pat thought savagely:  'Lousy Keystone Cop!'  In
his mind he shot it out with him.  Plunk! the stomach.  Plunk!
plunk! plunk!

At the main entrance, too, there was a new face.

'Where's Ike?' Pat demanded.

'Ike's gone.'

'Well, it's all right, I'm Pat Hobby.  Ike always passes me.'

'That's why he's gone,' said the guardian blandly.  'Who's your
business with?'

Pat hesitated.  He hated to disturb a producer.

'Call Jack Berners' office,' he said.  'Just speak to his
secretary.'

After a minute the man turned from the phone.

'What about?' he said.

'About a picture.'

He waited for an answer.

'She wants to know what picture?'

'To hell with it,' said Pat disgustedly.  'Look--call Louie
Griebel.  What's all this about?'

'Orders from Mr Kasper,' said the clerk.  'Last week a visitor from
Chicago fell in the wind machine--Hello.  Mr Louie Griebel?'

'I'll talk to him,' said Pat, taking the phone.

'I can't do nothing, Pat,' mourned Louie.  'I had trouble getting
my boy in this morning.  Some twirp from Chicago fell in the wind
machine.'

'What's that got to do with me?' demanded Pat vehemently.

He walked, a little faster than his wont, along the studio wall to
the point where it joined the back lot.  There was a guard there
but there were always people passing to and fro and he joined one
of the groups.  Once inside he would see Jack and have himself
excepted from this absurd ban.  Why, he had known this lot when the
first shacks were rising on it, when this was considered the edge
of the desert.

'Sorry mister, you with this party?'

'I'm in a hurry,' said Pat.  'I've lost my card.'

'Yeah?  Well, for all I know you may be a plain clothes man.'  He
held open a copy of a photo magazine under Pat's nose.  'I wouldn't
let you in even if you told me you was this here Orson Welles.'


II


There is an old Chaplin picture about a crowded street car where
the entrance of one man at the rear forces another out in front.  A
similar image came into Pat's mind in the ensuing days whenever he
thought of Orson Welles.  Welles was in; Hobby was out.  Never
before had the studio been barred to Pat and though Welles was on
another lot it seemed as if his large body, pushing in brashly from
nowhere, had edged Pat out the gate.

'Now where do you go?' Pat thought.  He had worked in the other
studios but they were not his.  At this studio he never felt
unemployed--in recent times of stress he had eaten property food on
its stages--half a cold lobster during a scene from The Divine Miss
Carstairs; he had often slept on the sets and last winter made use
of a Chesterfield overcoat from the costume department.  Orson
Welles had no business edging him out of this.  Orson Welles
belonged with the rest of the snobs back in New York.

On the third day he was frantic with gloom.  He had sent note after
note to Jack Berners and even asked Louie to intercede--now word
came that Jack had left town.  There were so few friends left.
Desolate, he stood in front of the automobile gate with a crowd of
staring children, feeling that he had reached the end at last.

A great limousine rolled out, in the back of which Pat recognized
the great overstuffed Roman face of Harold Marcus.  The car rolled
toward the children and, as one of them ran in front of it, slowed
down.  The old man spoke into the tube and the car halted.  He
leaned out blinking.

'Is there no policeman here?' he asked of Pat.

'No, Mr Marcus,' said Pat quickly.  'There should be.  I'm Pat
Hobby, the writer--could you give me a lift down the street?'

It was unprecedented--it was an act of desperation but Pat's need
was great.

Mr Marcus looked at him closely.

'Oh yes, I remember you,' he said.  'Get in.'

He might possibly have meant get up in front with the chauffeur.
Pat compromised by opening one of the little seats.  Mr Marcus was
one of the most powerful men in the whole picture world.  He did
not occupy himself with production any longer.  He spent most of
his time rocking from coast to coast on fast trains, merging and
launching, launching and merging, like a much divorced woman.

'Some day those children'll get hurt.'

'Yes, Mr Marcus,' agreed Pat heartily, 'Mr Marcus--'

'They ought to have a policeman there.'

'Yes.  Mr Marcus.  Mr Marcus--'

'Hm-m-m!' said Mr Marcus.  'Where do you want to be dropped?'

Pat geared himself to work fast.

'Mr Marcus, when I was your press agent--'

'I know,' said Mr Marcus.  'You wanted a ten dollar a week raise.'

'What a memory!' cried Pat in gladness.  'What a memory!  But Mr
Marcus, now I don't want anything at all.'

'This is a miracle.'

'I've got modest wants, see, and I've saved enough to retire.'

He thrust his shoes slightly forward under a hanging blanket, The
Chesterfield coat effectively concealed the rest.

'That's what I'd like,' said Mr Marcus gloomily.  'A farm--with
chickens.  Maybe a little nine-hole course.  Not even a stock
ticker.'

'I want to retire, but different,' said Pat earnestly.  'Pictures
have been my life.  I want to watch them grow and grow--'

Mr Marcus groaned.

'Till they explode,' he said.  'Look at Fox!  I cried for him.'  He
pointed to his eyes, 'Tears!'

Pat nodded very sympathetically.

'I want only one thing.'  From the long familiarity he went into
the foreign locution.  'I should go on the lot anytime.  From
nothing.  Only to be there.  Should bother nobody.  Only help a
little from nothing if any young person wants advice.'

'See Berners,' said Marcus.

'He said see you.'

'Then you did want something,' Marcus smiled.  'All right, all
right by me.  Where do you get off now?'

'Could you write me a pass?' Pat pleaded.  'Just a word on your
card?'

'I'll look into it,' said Mr Marcus.  'Just now I've got things on
my mind.  I'm going to a luncheon.'  He sighed profoundly.  'They
want I should meet this new Orson Welles that's in Hollywood.'

Pat's heart winced.  There it was again--that name, sinister and
remorseless, spreading like a dark cloud over all his skies.

'Mr Marcus,' he said so sincerely that his voice trembled, 'I
wouldn't be surprised if Orson Welles is the biggest menace that's
come to Hollywood for years.  He gets a hundred and fifty grand a
picture and I wouldn't be surprised if he was so radical that you
had to have all new equipment and start all over again like you did
with sound in 1928.'

'Oh my God!' groaned Mr Marcus.

'And me,' said Pat, 'all I want is a pass and no money--to leave
things as they are.'

Mr Marcus reached for his card case.


III


To those grouped together under the name 'talent', the atmosphere
of a studio is not unfailingly bright--one fluctuates too quickly
between high hope and grave apprehension.  Those few who decide
things are happy in their work and sure that they are worthy of
their hire--the rest live in a mist of doubt as to when their vast
inadequacy will be disclosed.

Pat's psychology was, oddly, that of the masters and for the most
part he was unworried even though he was off salary.  But there was
one large fly in the ointment--for the first time in his life he
began to feel a loss of identity.  Due to reasons that he did not
quite understand, though it might have been traced to his
conversation, a number of people began to address him as 'Orson'.

Now to lose one's identity is a careless thing in any case.  But to
lose it to an enemy, or at least to one who has become scapegoat
for our misfortunes--that is a hardship.  Pat was NOT Orson.  Any
resemblance must be faint and far-fetched and he was aware of the
fact.  The final effect was to make him, in that regard, something
of an eccentric.

'Pat,' said Joe the barber, 'Orson was in here today and asked me
to trim his beard.'

'I hope you set fire to it,' said Pat.

'I did,' Joe winked at waiting customers over a hot towel.  'He
asked for a singe so I took it all off.  Now his face is as bald as
yours.  In fact you look a bit alike.'

This was the morning the kidding was so ubiquitous that, to avoid
it, Pat lingered in Mario's bar across the street.  He was not
drinking--at the bar, that is, for he was down to his last thirty
cents, but he refreshed himself frequently from a half-pint in his
back pocket.  He needed the stimulus for he had to make a touch
presently and he knew that money was easier to borrow when one
didn't have an air of urgent need.

His quarry, Jeff Boldini, was in an unsympathetic state of mind.
He too was an artist, albeit a successful one, and a certain great
lady of the screen had just burned him up by criticizing a wig he
had made for her.  He told the story to Pat at length and the
latter waited until it was all out before broaching his request.

'No soap,' said Jeff.  'Hell, you never paid me back what you
borrowed last month.'

'But I got a job now,' lied Pat.  'This is just to tide me over.  I
start tomorrow.'

'If they don't give the job to Orson Welles,' said Jeff humorously.

Pat's eyes narrowed but he managed to utter a polite, borrower's
laugh.

'Hold it,' said Jeff.  'You know I think you look like him?'

'Yeah.'

'Honest.  Anyhow I could make you look like him.  I could make you
a beard that would be his double.'

'I wouldn't be his double for fifty grand.'

With his head on one side Jeff regarded Pat.

'I could,' he said.  'Come on in to my chair and let me see.'

'Like hell.'

'Come on.  I'd like to try it.  You haven't got anything to do.
You don't work till tomorrow.'

'I don't want a beard.'

'It'll come off.'

'I don't want it.'

'It won't cost you anything.  In fact I'll be paying YOU--I'll loan
you the ten smackers if you'll let me make you a beard.'

Half an hour later Jeff looked at his completed work.

'It's perfect,' he said.  'Not only the beard but the eyes and
everything.'

'All right.  Now take it off,' said Pat moodily.

'What's the hurry?  That's a fine muff.  That's a work of art.  We
ought to put a camera on it.  Too bad you're working tomorrow--
they're using a dozen beards out on Sam Jones' set and one of them
went to jail in a homo raid.  I bet with that muff you could get
the job.'

It was weeks since Pat had heard the word job and he could not
himself say how he managed to exist and eat.  Jeff saw the light in
his eye.

'What say?  Let me drive you out there just for fun,' pleaded Jeff.
'I'd like to see if Sam could tell it was a phony muff.'

'I'm a writer, not a ham.'

'Come on!  Nobody would never know you back of that.  And you'd
draw another ten bucks.'

As they left the make-up department Jeff lingered behind a minute.
On a strip of cardboard he crayoned the name Orson Welles in large
block letters.  And outside, without Pat's notice, he stuck it in
the windshield of his car.

He did not go directly to the back lot.  Instead he drove not too
swiftly up the main studio street.  In front of the administration
building he stopped on the pretext that the engine was missing, and
almost in no time a small but definitely interested crowd began to
gather.  But Jeff's plans did not include stopping anywhere long,
so he hopped in and they started on a tour around the commissary.

'Where are we going?' demanded Pat.

He had already made one nervous attempt to tear the beard from him,
but to his surprise it did not come away.

He complained of this to Jeff.

'Sure,' Jeff explained.  'That's made to last.  You'll have to soak
it off.'

The car paused momentarily at the door of the commissary.  Pat saw
blank eyes staring at him and he stared back at them blankly from
the rear seat.

'You'd think I was the only beard on the lot,' he said gloomily.

'You can sympathize with Orson Welles.'

'To hell with him.'

This colloquy would have puzzled those without, to whom he was
nothing less than the real McCoy.

Jeff drove on slowly up the street.  Ahead of them a little group
of men were walking--one of them, turning, saw the car and drew the
attention of the others to it.  Whereupon the most elderly member
of the party threw up his arms in what appeared to be a defensive
gesture, and plunged to the sidewalk as the car went past.

'My God, did you see that?' exclaimed Jeff.  'That was Mr Marcus.'

He came to a stop.  An excited man ran up and put his head in the
car window.

'Mr Welles, our Mr Marcus has had a heart attack.  Can we use your
car to get him to the infirmary?'

Pat stared.  Then very quickly he opened the door on the other side
and dashed from the car.  Not even the beard could impede his
streamlined flight.  The policeman at the gate, not recognizing the
incarnation, tried to have words with him but Pat shook him off
with the ease of a triple-threat back and never paused till he
reached Mario's bar.

Three extras with beards stood at the rail, and with relief Pat
merged himself into their corporate whiskers.  With a trembling
hand he took the hard-earned ten dollar bill from his pocket.

'Set 'em up,' he cried hoarsely.  'Every muff has a drink on me.'




PAT HOBBY'S SECRET

Esquire (June 1940)


I


Distress in Hollywood is endemic and always acute.  Scarcely an
executive but is being gnawed at by some insoluble problem and in a
democratic way he will let you in on it, with no charge.  The
problem, be it one of health or of production, is faced
courageously and with groans at from one to five thousand a week.
That's how pictures are made.

'But this one has got me down,' said Mr Banizon, '--because how did
the artillery shell get in the trunk of Claudette Colbert or Betty
Field or whoever we decide to use?  We got to explain it so the
audience will believe it.'

He was in the office of Louie the studio bookie and his present
audience also included Pat Hobby, venerable script-stooge of forty-
nine.  Mr Banizon did not expect a suggestion from either of them
but he had been talking aloud to himself about the problem for a
week now and was unable to stop.

'Who's your writer on it?' asked Louie.

'R. Parke Woll,' said Banizon indignantly.  'First I buy this
opening from another writer, see.  A grand notion but only a
notion.  Then I call in R. Parke Woll, the playwright, and we meet
a couple of times and develop it.  Then when we get the end in
sight, his agent horns in and says he won't let Woll talk any more
unless I give him a contract--eight weeks at $3,000!  And all I
need him for is one more day!'

The sum brought a glitter into Pat's old eyes.  Ten years ago he
had camped beatifically in range of such a salary--now he was lucky
to get a few weeks at $250.  His inflamed and burnt over talent had
failed to produce a second growth.

'The worse part of it is that Woll told me the ending,' continued
the producer.

'Then what are you waiting for?' demanded Pat.  'You don't need to
pay him a cent.'

'I forgot it!' groaned Mr Banizon.  'Two phones were ringing at
once in my office--one from a working director.  And while I was
talking Woll had to run along.  Now I can't remember it and I can't
get him back.'

Perversely Pat Hobby's sense of justice was with the producer, not
the writer.  Banizon had almost outsmarted Woll and then been
cheated by a tough break.  And now the playwright, with the
insolence of an Eastern snob, was holding him up for twenty-four
grand.  What with the European market gone.  What with the war.

'Now he's on a big bat,' said Banizon.  'I know because I got a man
tailing him.  It's enough to drive you nuts--here I got the whole
story except the pay-off.  What good is it to me like that?'

'If he's drunk maybe he'd spill it,' suggested Louie practically.

'Not to me,' said Mr Banizon.  'I thought of it but he would
recognize my face.'

Having reached the end of his current blind alley, Mr Banizon
picked a horse in the third and one in the seventh and prepared to
depart.

'I got an idea,' said Pat.

Mr Banizon looked suspiciously at the red old eyes.

'I got no time to hear it now,' he said.

'I'm not selling anything,' Pat reassured him.  'I got a deal
almost ready over at Paramount.  But once I worked with this R.
Parke Woll and maybe I could find what you want to know.'

He and Mr Banizon went out of the office together and walked slowly
across the lot.  An hour later, for an advance consideration of
fifty dollars, Pat was employed to discover how a live artillery
shell got into Claudette Colbert's trunk or Betty Field's trunk or
whosoever's trunk it should be.


II


The swath which R. Parke Woll was now cutting through the City of
the Angels would have attracted no special notice in the twenties;
in the fearful forties it rang out like laughter in church.  He was
easy to follow: his absence had been requested from two hotels but
he had settled down into a routine where he carried his sleeping
quarters in his elbow.  A small but alert band of rats and weasels
were furnishing him moral support in his journey--a journey which
Pat caught up with at two a.m. in Conk's Old Fashioned Bar.

Conk's Bar was haughtier than its name, boasting cigarette girls
and a doorman-bouncer named Smith who had once stayed a full hour
with Tarzan White.  Mr Smith was an embittered man who expressed
himself by goosing the patrons on their way in and out and this was
Pat's introduction.  When he recovered himself he discovered R.
Parke Woll in a mixed company around a table, and sauntered up with
an air of surprise.

'Hello, good looking,' he said to Woll.  'Remember me--Pat Hobby?'

R. Parke Woll brought him with difficulty into focus, turning his
head first on one side then on the other, letting it sink, snap up
and then lash forward like a cobra taking a candid snapshot.
Evidently it recorded for he said:

'Pat Hobby!  Sit down and wha'll you have.  Genlemen, this is Pat
Hobby--best left-handed writer in Hollywood.  Pat h'are you?'

Pat sat down, amid suspicious looks from a dozen predatory eyes.
Was Pat an old friend sent to get the playwright home?

Pat saw this and waited until a half-hour later when he found
himself alone with Woll in the washroom.

'Listen Parke, Banizon is having you followed,' he said.  'I don't
know why he's doing it.  Louie at the studio tipped me off.'

'You don't know why?' cried Parke.  'Well, I know why.  I got
something he wants--that's why!'

'You owe him money?'

'Owe him money.  Why that--he owes ME money!  He owes me for three
long, hard conferences--I outlined a whole damn picture for him.'
His vague finger tapped his forehead in several places.  'What he
wants is in here.'

An hour passed at the turbulent orgiastic table.  Pat waited--and
then inevitably in the slow, limited cycle of the lush, Woll's mind
returned to the subject.

'The funny thing is I told him who put the shell in the trunk and
why.  And then the Master Mind forgot.'

Pat had an inspiration.

'But his secretary remembered.'

'She did?'  Woll was flabbergasted.  'Secretary--don't remember
secretary.'

'She came in,' ventured Pat uneasily.

'Well then by God he's got to pay me or I'll sue him.'

'Banizon says he's got a better idea.'

'The hell he has.  My idea was a pip.  Listen--'

He spoke for two minutes.

'You like it?' he demanded.  He looked at Pat for applause--then he
must have seen something in Pat's eye that he was not intended to
see.  'Why you little skunk,' he cried.  'You've talked to Banizon--
he sent you here.'

Pat rose and tore like a rabbit for the door.  He would have been
out into the street before Woll could overtake him had it not been
for the intervention of Mr Smith, the doorman.

'Where you going?' he demanded, catching Pat by his lapels.

'Hold him!' cried Woll, coming up.  He aimed a blow at Pat which
missed and landed full in Mr Smith's mouth.

It has been mentioned that Mr Smith was an embittered as well as a
powerful man.  He dropped Pat, picked up R. Parke Woll by crotch
and shoulder, held him high and then in one gigantic pound brought
his body down against the floor.  Three minutes later Woll was
dead.


III


Except in great scandals like the Arbuckle case the industry
protects its own--and the industry included Pat, however
intermittently.  He was let out of prison next morning without
bail, wanted only as a material witness.  If anything, the
publicity was advantageous--for the first time in a year his name
appeared in the trade journals.  Moreover he was now the only
living man who knew how the shell got into Claudette Colbert's (or
Betty Field's) trunk.

'When can you come up and see me?' said Mr Banizon.

'After the inquest tomorrow,' said Pat enjoying himself.  'I feel
kind of shaken--it gave me an earache.'

That too indicated power.  Only those who were 'in' could speak of
their health and be listened to.

'Woll really did tell you?' questioned Banizon.

'He told me,' said Pat.  'And it's worth more than fifty smackers.
I'm going to get me a new agent and bring him to your office.'

'I tell you a better plan.' said Banizon hastily, 'I'll get you on
the payroll.  Four weeks at your regular price.'

'What's my price?' demanded Pat gloomily.  'I've drawn everything
from four thousand to zero.'  And he added ambiguously, 'As
Shakespeare says, "Every man has his price."'

The attendant rodents of R. Parke Woll had vanished with their
small plunder into convenient rat holes, leaving as the defendant
Mr Smith, and, as witnesses, Pat and two frightened cigarette
girls.  Mr Smith's defence was that he had been attacked.  At the
inquest one cigarette girl agreed with him--one condemned him for
unnecessary roughness.  Pat Hobby's turn was next, but before his
name was called he started as a voice spoke to him from behind.

'You talk against my husband and I'll twist your tongue out by the
roots.'

A huge dinosaur of a woman, fully six feet tall and broad in
proportion, was leaning forward against his chair.

'Pat Hobby, step forward please . . . now Mr Hobby tell us exactly
what happened.'

The eyes of Mr Smith were fixed balefully on his and he felt the
eyes of the bouncer's mate reaching in for his tongue through the
back of his head.  He was full of natural hesitation.

'I don't know exactly,' he said, and then with quick inspiration,
'All I know is everything went white!'

'WHAT?'

'That's the way it was.  I saw white.  Just like some guys see red
or black I saw white.'

There was some consultation among the authorities.

'Well, what happened from when you came into the restaurant--up to
the time you saw white?'

'Well--' said Pat fighting for time.  'It was all kind of that way.
I came and sat down and then it began to go black.'

'You mean white.'

'Black AND white.'

There was a general titter.

'Witness dismissed.  Defendant remanded for trial.'

What was a little joking to endure when the stakes were so high--
all that night a mountainous Amazon pursued him through his dreams
and he needed a strong drink before appearing at Mr Banizon's
office next morning.  He was accompanied by one of the few
Hollywood agents who had not yet taken him on and shaken him off.

'A flat sum of five hundred,' offered Banizon.  'Or four weeks at
two-fifty to work on another picture.'

'How bad do you want this?' asked the agent.  'My client seems to
think it's worth three thousand.'

'Of my own money?' cried Banizon.  'And it isn't even HIS idea.
Now that Woll is dead it's in the Public Remains.'

'Not quite,' said the agent.  'I think like you do that ideas are
sort of in the air.  They belong to whoever's got them at the time--
like balloons.'

'Well, how much?' asked Mr Banizon fearfully.  'How do I know he's
got the idea?'

The agent turned to Pat.

'Shall we let him find out--for a thousand dollars?'

After a moment Pat nodded.  Something was bothering him.

'All right,' said Banizon.  'This strain is driving me nuts.  One
thousand.'

There was silence.

'Spill it Pat,' said the agent.

Still no word from Pat.  They waited.  When Pat spoke at last his
voice seemed to come from afar.

'Everything's white,' he gasped.

'WHAT?'

'I can't help it--everything has gone white.  I can see it--white.
I remember going into the joint but after that it all goes white.'

For a moment they thought he was holding out.  Then the agent
realized that Pat actually had drawn a psychological blank.  The
secret of R. Parke Woll was safe forever.  Too late Pat realized
that a thousand dollars was slipping away and tried desperately to
recover.

'I remember, I remember!  It was put in by some Nazi dictator.'

'Maybe the girl put it in the trunk herself,' said Banizon
ironically.  'For her bracelet.'

For many years Mr Banizon would be somewhat gnawed by this
insoluble problem.  And as he glowered at Pat he wished that
writers could be dispensed with altogether.  If only ideas could be
plucked from the inexpensive air!




PAT HOBBY, PUTATIVE FATHER

Esquire (July 1940)


I


Most writers look like writers whether they want to or not.  It is
hard to say why--for they model their exteriors whimsically on Wall
Street brokers, cattle kings or English explorers--but they all
turn out looking like writers, as definitely typed as 'The Public'
or 'The Profiteers' in the cartoons.

Pat Hobby was the exception.  He did not look like a writer.  And
only in one corner of the Republic could he have been identified as
a member of the entertainment world.  Even there the first guess
would have been that he was an extra down on his luck, or a bit
player who specialized in the sort of father who should NEVER come
home.  But a writer he was: he had collaborated in over two dozen
moving picture scripts, most of them, it must be admitted, prior to
1929.

A writer?  He had a desk in the Writers' Building at the studio; he
had pencils, paper, a secretary, paper clips, a pad for office
memoranda.  And he sat in an overstuffed chair, his eyes not so
very bloodshot taking in the morning's Reporter.

'I got to get to work,' he told Miss Raudenbush at eleven.  And
again at twelve:

'I got to get to work.'

At quarter to one, he began to feel hungry--up to this point every
move, or rather every moment, was in the writer's tradition.  Even
to the faint irritation that no one had annoyed him, no one had
bothered him, no one had interfered with the long empty dream which
constituted his average day.

He was about to accuse his secretary of staring at him when the
welcome interruption came.  A studio guide tapped at his door and
brought him a note from his boss, Jack Berners:


Dear Pat:

Please take some time off and show these people around the lot.

                                                       Jack


'My God!' Pat exclaimed.  'How can I be expected to get anything
done and show people around the lot at the same time.  Who are
they?' he demanded of the guide.

'I don't know.  One of them seems to be kind of coloured.  He looks
like the extras they had at Paramount for Bengal Lancer.  He can't
speak English.  The other--'

Pat was putting on his coat to see for himself.

'Will you be wanting me this afternoon?' asked Miss Raudenbush.

He looked at her with infinite reproach and went out in front of
the Writers' Building.

The visitors were there.  The sultry person was tall and of a fine
carriage, dressed in excellent English clothes except for a turban.
The other was a youth of fifteen, quite light of hue.  He also wore
a turban with beautifully cut jodhpurs and riding coat.

They bowed formally.

'Hear you want to go on some sets,' said Pat, 'You friends of Jack
Berners?'

'Acquaintances,' said the youth.  'May I present you to my uncle:
Sir Singrim Dak Raj.'

Probably, thought Pat, the company was cooking up a Bengal Lancers,
and this man would play the heavy who owned the Khyber Pass.  Maybe
they'd put Pat on it--at three-fifty a week.  Why not?  He knew how
to write that stuff:

Beautiful Long Shot.  The Gorge.  Show Tribesman firing from behind
rocks.

Medium Shot.  Tribesman hit by bullet making nose dive over high
rock.  (use stunt man)

Medium Long Shot.  The Valley.  British troops wheeling out cannon.

'You going to be long in Hollywood?' he asked shrewdly.

'My uncle doesn't speak English,' said the youth in a measured
voice.  'We are here only a few days.  You see--I am your putative
son.'


II


'--And I would very much like to see Bonita Granville,' continued
the youth.  'I find she has been borrowed by your studio.'

They had been walking toward the production office and it took Pat
a minute to grasp what the young man had said.

'You're my what?' he asked.

'Your putative son,' said the young man, in a sort of sing-song.
'Legally I am the son and heir of the Rajah Dak Raj Indore.  But I
was born John Brown Hobby.'

'Yes?' said Pat.  'Go on!  What's this?'

'My mother was Delia Brown.  You married her in 1926.  And she
divorced you in 1927 when I was a few months old.  Later she took
me to India, where she married my present legal father.'

'Oh,' said Pat.  They had reached the production office.  'You want
to see Bonita Granville.'

'Yes,' said John Hobby Indore.  'If it is convenient.'

Pat looked at the shooting schedule on the wall.

'It may be,' he said heavily.  'We can go and see.'

As they started toward Stage 4, he exploded.

'What do you mean, "my potato son"?  I'm glad to see you and all
that, but say, are you really the kid Delia had in 1926?'

'Putatively,' John Indore said.  'At that time you and she were
legally married.'

He turned to his uncle and spoke rapidly in Hindustani, whereupon
the latter bent forward, looked with cold examination upon Pat and
threw up his shoulders without comment.  The whole business was
making Pat vaguely uncomfortable.

When he pointed out the commissary, John wanted to stop there 'to
buy his uncle a hot dog'.  It seemed that Sir Singrim had conceived
a passion for them at the World's Fair in New York, whence they had
just come.  They were taking ship for Madras tomorrow.

'--whether or not,' said John, sombrely.  'I get to see Bonita
Granville.  I do not care if I MEET her.  I am too young for her.
She is already an old woman by our standards.  But I'd like to SEE
her.'

It was one of those bad days for showing people around.  Only one
of the directors shooting today was an old timer, on whom Pat could
count for a welcome--and at the door of that stage he received word
that the star kept blowing up in his lines and had demanded that
the set be cleared.

In desperation he took his charges out to the back lot and walked
them past the false fronts of ships and cities and village streets,
and medieval gates--a sight in which the boy showed a certain
interest but which Sir Singrim found disappointing.  Each time that
Pat led them around behind to demonstrate that it was all phony Sir
Singrim's expression would change to disappointment and faint
contempt.

'What's he say?' Pat asked his offspring, after Sir Singrim had
walked eagerly into a Fifth Avenue jewellery store, to find nothing
but carpenter's rubble inside.

'He is the third richest man in India,' said John.  'He is
disgusted.  He says he will never enjoy an American picture again.
He says he will buy one of our picture companies in India and make
every set as solid as the Taj Mahal.  He thinks perhaps the
actresses just have a false front too, and that's why you won't let
us see them.'

The first sentence had rung a sort of carillon in Pat's head.  If
there was anything he liked it was a good piece of money--not this
miserable, uncertain two-fifty a week which purchased his freedom.

'I'll tell you,' he said with sudden decision.  'We'll try Stage 4,
and peek at Bonita Granville.'

Stage 4 was double locked and barred, for the day--the director
hated visitors, and it was a process stage besides.  'Process' was
a generic name for trick photography in which every studio competed
with other studios, and lived in terror of spies.  More
specifically it meant that a projecting machine threw a moving
background upon a transparent screen.  On the other side of the
screen, a scene was played and recorded against this moving
background.  The projector on one side of the screen and the camera
on the other were so synchronized that the result could show a star
standing on his head before an indifferent crowd on 42nd Street--a
REAL crowd and a REAL star--and the poor eye could only conclude
that it was being deluded and never quite guess how.

Pat tried to explain this to John, but John was peering for Bonita
Granville from behind the great mass of coiled ropes and pails
where they hid.  They had not got there by the front entrance, but
by a little side door for technicians that Pat knew.

Wearied by the long jaunt over the back lot, Pat took a pint flask
from his hip and offered it to Sir Singrim who declined.  He did
not offer it to John.

'Stunt your growth,' he said solemnly, taking a long pull.

'I do not want any,' said John with dignity.

He was suddenly alert.  He had spotted an idol more glamorous than
Siva not twenty feet away--her back, her profile, her voice.  Then
she moved off.

Watching his face, Pat was rather touched.

'We can go nearer,' he said.  'We might get to that ballroom set.
They're not using it--they got covers on the furniture.'

On tip toe they started, Pat in the lead, then Sir Singrim, then
John.  As they moved softly forward Pat heard the word 'Lights' and
stopped in his tracks.  Then, as a blinding white glow struck at
their eyes and the voice shouted 'Quiet!  We're rolling!' Pat began
to run, followed quickly through the white silence by the others.

The silence did not endure.

'CUT!' screamed a voice, 'What the living, blazing hell!'

From the director's angle something had happened on the screen
which, for the moment, was inexplicable.  Three gigantic
silhouettes, two with huge Indian turbans, had danced across what
was intended to be a New England harbour--they had blundered into
the line of the process shot.  Prince John Indore had not only seen
Bonita Granville--he had acted in the same picture.  His
silhouetted foot seemed to pass miraculously through her blonde
young head.


III


They sat for some time in the guard-room before word could be
gotten to Jack Berners, who was off the lot.  So there was leisure
for talk.  This consisted of a longish harangue from Sir Singrim to
John, which the latter--modifying its tone if not its words--
translated to Pat.

'My uncle says his brother wanted to do something for you.  He
thought perhaps if you were a great writer he might invite you to
come to his kingdom and write his life.'

'I never claimed to be--'

'My uncle says you are an ignominious writer--in your own land you
permitted him to be touched by those dogs of the policemen.'

'Aw--bananas,' muttered Pat uncomfortably.

'He says my mother always wished you well.  But now she is a high
and sacred lady and should never see you again.  He says we will go
to our chambers in the Ambassador Hotel and meditate and pray and
let you know what we decide.'

When they were released, and the two moguls were escorted
apologetically to their car by a studio yes-man, it seemed to Pat
that it had been pretty well decided already.  He was angry.  For
the sake of getting his son a peek at Miss Granville, he had quite
possibly lost his job--though he didn't really think so.  Or rather
he was pretty sure that when his week was up he would have lost it
anyhow.  But though it was a pretty bad break he remembered most
clearly from the afternoon that Sir Singrim was 'the third richest
man in India', and after dinner at a bar on La Cienega he decided
to go down to the Ambassador Hotel and find out the result of the
prayer and meditation.

It was early dark of a September evening.  The Ambassador was full
of memories to Pat--the Coconut Grove in the great days, when
directors found pretty girls in the afternoon and made stars of
them by night.  There was some activity in front of the door and
Pat watched it idly.  Such a quantity of baggage he had seldom
seen, even in the train of Gloria Swanson or Joan Crawford.  Then
he started as he saw two or three men in turbans moving around
among the baggage.  So--they were running out on him.

Sir Singrim Dak Raj and his nephew Prince John, both pulling on
gloves as if at a command, appeared at the door, as Pat stepped
forward out of the darkness.

'Taking a powder, eh?' he said.  'Say, when you get back there,
tell them that one American could lick--'

'I have left a note for you,' said Prince John, turning from his
Uncle's side.  'I say, you WERE nice this afternoon and it really
was too bad.'

'Yes, it was,' agreed Pat.

'But we are providing for you,' John said.  'After our prayers we
decided that you will receive fifty sovereigns a month--two hundred
and fifty dollars--for the rest of your natural life.'

'What will I have to do for it?' questioned Pat suspiciously.

'It will only be withdrawn in case--'

John leaned and whispered in Pat's ear, and relief crept into Pat's
eyes.  The condition had nothing to do with drink and blondes,
really nothing to do with him at all.

John began to get in the limousine.

'Goodbye, putative father,' he said, almost with affection.

Pat stood looking after him.

'Goodbye son,' he said.  He stood watching the limousine go out of
sight.  Then he turned away--feeling like--like Stella Dallas.
There were tears in his eyes.

Potato Father--whatever that meant.  After some consideration he
added to himself: it's better than not being a father at all.


IV


He awoke late next afternoon with a happy hangover--the cause of
which he could not determine until young John's voice seemed to
spring into his ears, repeating:  'Fifty sovereigns a month, with
just one condition--that it be withdrawn in case of war, when all
revenues of our state will revert to the British Empire.'

With a cry Pat sprang to the door.  No Los Angeles Times lay
against it, no Examiner--only Toddy's Daily Form Sheet.  He
searched the orange pages frantically.  Below the form sheets, the
past performances, the endless oracles for endless racetracks, his
eye was caught by a one-inch item:


LONDON.  SEPTEMBER 3RD.  ON THIS MORNING'S DECLARATION BY
CHAMBERLAIN, DOUGIE CABLES 'ENGLAND TO WIN.  FRANCE TO PLACE.
RUSSIA TO SHOW'.





THE HOMES OF THE STARS

Esquire (August 1940)


Beneath a great striped umbrella at the side of a boulevard in a
Hollywood heat wave, sat a man.  His name was Gus Venske (no
relation to the runner) and he wore magenta pants, cerise shoes and
a sport article from Vine Street which resembled nothing so much as
a cerulean blue pajama top.

Gus Venske was not a freak nor were his clothes at all extraordinary
for his time and place.  He had a profession--on a pole beside the
umbrella was a placard:


                VISIT THE HOMES OF THE STARS


Business was bad or Gus would not have hailed the unprosperous man
who stood in the street beside a panting, steaming car, anxiously
watching its efforts to cool.

'Hey fella,' said Gus, without much hope.  'Wanna visit the homes
of the stars?'

The red-rimmed eyes of the watcher turned from the automobile and
looked superciliously upon Gus.

'I'm IN pictures,' said the man, 'I'm in 'em myself.'

'Actor?'

'No.  Writer.'

Pat Hobby turned back to his car, which was whistling like a peanut
wagon.  He had told the truth--or what was once the truth.  Often
in the old days his name had flashed on the screen for the few
seconds allotted to authorship, but for the past five years his
services had been less and less in demand.

Presently Gus Venske shut up shop for lunch by putting his folders
and maps into a briefcase and walking off with it under his arm.
As the sun grew hotter moment by moment, Pat Hobby took refuge
under the faint protection of the umbrella and inspected a soiled
folder which had been dropped by Mr Venske.  If Pat had not been
down to his last fourteen cents he would have telephoned a garage
for aid--as it was, he could only wait.

After a while a limousine with a Missouri licence drew to rest
beside him.  Behind the chauffeur sat a little white moustached man
and a large woman with a small dog.  They conversed for a moment--
then, in a rather shamefaced way, the woman leaned out and
addressed Pat.

'What stars' homes can you visit?' she asked.

It took a moment for this to sink in.

'I mean can we go to Robert Taylor's home and Clark Gable's and
Shirley Temple's--'

'I guess you can if you can get in,' said Pat.

'Because--' continued the woman, '--if we could go to the very best
homes, the most exclusive--we would be prepared to pay more than
your regular price.'

Light dawned upon Pat.  Here together were suckers and smackers.
Here was that dearest of Hollywood dreams--the angle.  If one got
the right angle it meant meals at the Brown Derby, long nights with
bottles and girls, a new tyre for his old car.  And here was an
angle fairly thrusting itself at him.

He rose and went to the side of the limousine.

'Sure.  Maybe I could fix it.'  As he spoke he felt a pang of
doubt.  'Would you be able to pay in advance?'

The couple exchanged a look.

'Suppose we gave you five dollars now,' the woman said, 'and five
dollars if we can visit Clark Gable's home or somebody like that.'

Once upon a time such a thing would have been so easy.  In his
salad days when Pat had twelve or fifteen writing credits a year,
he could have called up many people who would have said, 'Sure,
Pat, if it means anything to you.'  But now he could only think of
a handful who really recognized him and spoke to him around the
lots--Melvyn Douglas and Robert Young and Ronald Colman and Young
Doug.  Those he had known best had retired or passed away.

And he did not know except vaguely where the new stars lived, but
he had noticed that on the folder were typewritten several dozen
names and addresses with pencilled checks after each.

'Of course you can't be sure anybody's at home,' he said, 'they
might be working in the studios.'

'We understand that.'  The lady glanced at Pat's car, glanced away.
'We'd better go in our motor.'

'Sure.'

Pat got up in front with the chauffeur--trying to think fast.  The
actor who spoke to him most pleasantly was Ronald Colman--they had
never exchanged more than conventional salutations but he might
pretend that he was calling to interest Colman in a story.

Better still, Colman was probably not at home and Pat might wangle
his clients an inside glimpse of the house.  Then the process might
be repeated at Robert Young's house and Young Doug's and Melvyn
Douglas'.  By that time the lady would have forgotten Gable and the
afternoon would be over.

He looked at Ronald Colman's address on the folder and gave the
direction to the chauffeur.

'We know a woman who had her picture taken with George Brent,' said
the lady as they started off, 'Mrs Horace J. Ives, Jr.'

'She's our neighbour,' said her husband.  'She lives at 372 Rose
Drive in Kansas City.  And we live at 327.'

'She had her picture taken with George Brent.  We always wondered
if she had to pay for it.  Of course I don't know that I'd want to
go so far as THAT.  I don't know what they'd say back home.'

'I don't think we want to go as far as all that,' agreed her
husband.

'Where are we going first?' asked the lady, cosily.

'Well, I had a couple calls to pay anyhow,' said Pat.  'I got to
see Ronald Colman about something.'

'Oh, he's one of my favourites.  Do you know him well?'

'Oh yes,' said Pat, 'I'm not in this business regularly.  I'm just
doing it today for a friend.  I'm a writer.'

Sure in the knowledge that not so much as a trio of picture writers
were known to the public he named himself as the author of several
recent successes.

'That's very interesting,' said the man, 'I knew a writer once--
this Upton Sinclair or Sinclair Lewis.  Not a bad fellow even if he
was a socialist.'

'Why aren't you writing a picture now?' asked the lady.

'Well, you see we're on strike,' Pat invented.  'We got a thing
called the Screen Playwriters' Guild and we're on strike.'

'Oh.'  His clients stared with suspicion at this emissary of Stalin
in the front seat of their car.

'What are you striking for?' asked the man uneasily.

Pat's political development was rudimentary.  He hesitated.

'Oh, better living conditions,' he said finally, 'free pencils and
paper, I don't know--it's all in the Wagner Act.'  After a moment
he added vaguely, 'Recognize Finland.'

'I didn't know writers had unions,' said the man.  'Well, if you're
on strike who writes the movies?'

'The producers,' said Pat bitterly.  'That's why they're so lousy.'

'Well, that's what I would call an odd state of things.'

They came in sight of Ronald Colman's house and Pat swallowed
uneasily.  A shining new roadster sat out in front.

'I better go in first,' he said.  'I mean we wouldn't want to come
in on any--on any family scene or anything.'

'Does he have family scenes?' asked the lady eagerly.

'Oh, well, you know how people are,' said Pat with charity.  'I
think I ought to see how things are first.'

The car stopped.  Drawing a long breath Pat got out.  At the same
moment the door of the house opened and Ronald Colman hurried down
the walk.  Pat's heart missed a beat as the actor glanced in his
direction.

'Hello Pat,' he said.  Evidently he had no notion that Pat was a
caller for he jumped into his car and the sound of his motor
drowned out Pat's responses as he drove away.

'Well, he called you "Pat",' said the woman impressed.

'I guess he was in a hurry,' said Pat.  'But maybe we could see his
house.'

He rehearsed a speech going up the walk.  He had just spoken to his
friend Mr Colman, and received permission to look around.

But the house was shut and locked and there was no answer to the
bell.  He would have to try Melvyn Douglas whose salutations, on
second thought, were a little warmer than Ronald Colman's.  At any
rate his clients' faith in him was now firmly founded.  The 'Hello,
Pat,' rang confidently in their ears; by proxy they were already
inside the charmed circle.

'Now let's try Clark Gable's,' said the lady.  'I'd like to tell
Carole Lombard about her hair.'

The lese majesty made Pat's stomach wince.  Once in a crowd he had
met Clark Gable but he had no reason to believe that Mr Gable
remembered.

'Well, we could try Melvyn Douglas' first and then Bob Young or
else Young Doug.  They're all on the way.  You see Gable and
Lombard live away out in the St Joaquin valley.'

'Oh,' said the lady, disappointed, 'I did want to run up and see
their bedroom.  Well then, our next choice would be Shirley
Temple.'  She looked at her little dog.  'I know that would be
Boojie's choice too.'

'They're kind of afraid of kidnappers,' said Pat.

Ruffled, the man produced his business card and handed it to Pat.


                     DEERING R. ROBINSON

                 Vice President and Chairman
                        of the Board
                    Robdeer Food Products


'Does THAT sound as if I want to kidnap Shirley Temple?'

'They just have to be sure,' said Pat apologetically.  'After we go
to Melvyn--'

'No--let's see Shirley Temple's now,' insisted the woman.  'Really!
I told you in the first place what I wanted.'

Pat hesitated.

'First I'll have to stop in some drugstore and phone about it.'

In a drugstore he exchanged some of the five dollars for a half
pint of gin and took two long swallows behind a high counter, after
which he considered the situation.  He could, of course, duck Mr
and Mrs Robinson immediately--after all he had produced Ronald
Colman, with sound, for their five smackers.  On the other hand
they just MIGHT catch Miss Temple on her way in or out--and for a
pleasant day at Santa Anita tomorrow Pat needed five smackers more.
In the glow of the gin his courage mounted, and returning to the
limousine he gave the chauffeur the address.

But approaching the Temple house his spirit quailed as he saw that
there was a tall iron fence and an electric gate.  And didn't
guides have to have a licence?

'Not here,' he said quickly to the chauffeur.  'I made a mistake.
I think it's the next one, or two or three doors further on.'

He decided on a large mansion set in an open lawn and stopping the
chauffeur got out and walked up to the door.  He was temporarily
licked but at least he might bring back some story to soften them--
say, that Miss Temple had mumps.  He could point out her sick-room
from the walk.

There was no answer to his ring but he saw that the door was partly
ajar.  Cautiously he pushed it open.  He was staring into a
deserted living room on the baronial scale.  He listened.  There
was no one about, no footsteps on the upper floor, no murmur from
the kitchen.  Pat took another pull at the gin.  Then swiftly he
hurried back to the limousine.

'She's at the studio,' he said quickly.  'But if we're quiet we can
look at their living-room.'

Eagerly the Robinsons and Boojie disembarked and followed him.  The
living-room might have been Shirley Temple's, might have been one
of many in Hollywood.  Pat saw a doll in a corner and pointed at
it, whereupon Mrs Robinson picked it up, looked at it reverently
and showed it to Boojie who sniffed indifferently.

'Could I meet Mrs Temple?' she asked.

'Oh, she's out--nobody's home,' Pat said--unwisely.

'Nobody.  Oh--then Boojie would so like a wee little peep at her
bedroom.'

Before he could answer she had run up the stairs.  Mr Robinson
followed and Pat waited uneasily in the hall, ready to depart at
the sound either of an arrival outside or a commotion above.

He finished the bottle, disposed of it politely under a sofa
cushion and then deciding that the visit upstairs was tempting fate
too far, he went after his clients.  On the stairs he heard Mrs
Robinson.

'But there's only ONE child's bedroom.  I thought Shirley had
brothers.'

A window on the winding staircase looked upon the street, and
glancing out Pat saw a large car drive up to the curb.  From it
stepped a Hollywood celebrity who, though not one of those pursued
by Mrs Robinson, was second to none in prestige and power.  It was
old Mr Marcus, the producer, for whom Pat Hobby had been press
agent twenty years ago.

At this point Pat lost his head.  In a flash he pictured an
elaborate explanation as to what he was doing here.  He would not
be forgiven.  His occasional weeks in the studio at two-fifty would
now disappear altogether and another finis would be written to his
almost entirely finished career.  He left, impetuously and swiftly--
down the stairs, through the kitchen and out the back gate,
leaving the Robinsons to their destiny.

Vaguely he was sorry for them as he walked quickly along the next
boulevard.  He could see Mr Robinson producing his card as the head
of Robdeer Food Products.  He could see Mr Marcus' scepticism, the
arrival of the police, the frisking of Mr and Mrs Robinson.

Probably it would stop there--except that the Robinsons would be
furious at him for his imposition.  They would tell the police
where they had picked him up.

Suddenly he went ricketing down the street, beads of gin breaking
out profusely on his forehead.  He had left his car beside Gus
Venske's umbrella.  And now he remembered another recognizing clue
and hoped that Ronald Colman didn't know his last name.




PAT HOBBY DOES HIS BIT

Esquire (September 1940)


I


In order to borrow money gracefully one must choose the time and
place.  It is a difficult business, for example, when the borrower
is cockeyed, or has measles, or a conspicuous shiner.  One could
continue indefinitely but the inauspicious occasions can be
catalogued as one--it is exceedingly difficult to borrow money when
one needs it.

Pat Hobby found it difficult in the case of an actor on a set
during the shooting of a moving picture.  It was about the stiffest
chore he had ever undertaken but he was doing it to save his car.
To a sordidly commercial glance the jalopy would not have seemed
worth saving but, because of Hollywood's great distances, it was an
indispensable tool of the writer's trade.

'The finance company--' explained Pat, but Gyp McCarthy
interrupted.

'I got some business in this next take.  You want me to blow up on
it?'

'I only need twenty,' persisted Pat.  'I can't get jobs if I have
to hang around my bedroom.'

'You'd save money that way--you don't get jobs anymore.'

This was cruelly correct.  But working or not Pat liked to pass his
days in or near a studio.  He had reached a dolorous and precarious
forty-nine with nothing else to do.

'I got a rewrite job promised for next week,' he lied.

'Oh, nuts to you,' said Gyp.  'You better get off the set before
Hilliard sees you.'

Pat glanced nervously toward the group by the camera--then he
played his trump card.

'Once--' he said,'--once I paid for you to have a baby.'

'Sure you did!' said Gyp wrathfully.  'That was sixteen years ago.
And where is it now--it's in jail for running over an old lady
without a licence.'

'Well I paid for it,' said Pat.  'Two hundred smackers.'

'That's nothing to what it cost me.  Would I be stunting at my age
if I had dough to lend?  Would I be working at all?'

From somewhere in the darkness an assistant director issued an
order:

'Ready to go!'

Pat spoke quickly.

'All right,' he said.  'Five bucks.'

'No.'

'All right then,' Pat's red-rimmed eyes tightened.  'I'm going to
stand over there and put the hex on you while you say your line.'

'Oh, for God's sake!' said Gyp uneasily.  'Listen, I'll give you
five.  It's in my coat over there.  Here, I'll get it.'

He dashed from the set and Pat heaved a sigh of relief.  Maybe
Louie, the studio bookie, would let him have ten more.

Again the assistant director's voice:

'Quiet! . . .  We'll take it now! . . .  Lights!'

The glare stabbed into Pat's eyes, blinding him.  He took a step
the wrong way--then back.  Six other people were in the take--a
gangster's hide-out--and it seemed that each was in his way.

'All right . . .  Roll 'em . . .  We're turning!'

In his panic Pat had stepped behind a flat which would effectually
conceal him.  While the actors played their scene he stood there
trembling a little, his back hunched--quite unaware that it was a
'trolley shot', that the camera, moving forward on its track, was
almost upon him.

'You by the window--hey you, GYP! hands up.'

Like a man in a dream Pat raised his hands--only then did he
realize that he was looking directly into a great black lens--in an
instant it also included the English leading woman, who ran past
him and jumped out the window.  After an interminable second Pat
heard the order 'Cut.'

Then he rushed blindly through a property door, around a corner,
tripping over a cable, recovering himself and tearing for the
entrance.  He heard footsteps running behind him and increased his
gait, but in the doorway itself he was overtaken and turned
defensively.

It was the English actress.

'Hurry up!' she cried.  'That finishes my work.  I'm flying home to
England.'

As she scrambled into her waiting limousine she threw back a last
irrelevant remark.  'I'm catching a New York plane in an hour.'

Who cares!  Pat thought bitterly, as he scurried away.

He was unaware that her repatriation was to change the course of
his life.


II


And he did not have the five--he feared that this particular five
was forever out of range.  Other means must be found to keep the
wolf from the two doors of his coupe.  Pat left the lot with
despair in his heart, stopping only momentarily to get gas for the
car and gin for himself, possibly the last of many drinks they had
had together.

Next morning he awoke with an aggravated problem.  For once he did
not want to go to the studio.  It was not merely Gyp McCarthy he
feared--it was the whole corporate might of a moving picture
company, nay of an industry.  Actually to have interfered with the
shooting of a movie was somehow a major delinquency, compared to
which expensive fumblings on the part of producers or writers went
comparatively unpunished.

On the other hand zero hour for the car was the day after tomorrow
and Louie, the studio bookie, seemed positively the last resource
and a poor one at that.

Nerving himself with an unpalatable snack from the bottom of the
bottle, he went to the studio at ten with his coat collar turned up
and his hat pulled low over his ears.  He knew a sort of
underground railway through the make-up department and the
commissary kitchen which might get him to Louie's suite unobserved.

Two studio policemen seized him as he rounded the corner by the
barber shop.

'Hey, I got a pass!' he protested, 'Good for a week--signed by Jack
Berners.'

'Mr Berners specially wants to see you.'

Here it was then--he would be barred from the lot.

'We could sue you!' cried Jack Berners.  'But we couldn't recover.'

'What's one take?' demanded Pat.  'You can use another.'

'No we can't--the camera jammed.  And this morning Lily Keatts took
a plane to England.  She thought she was through.'

'Cut the scene,' suggested Pat--and then on inspiration, 'I bet I
could fix it for you.'

'You fixed it, all right!' Berners assured him.  'If there was any
way to fix it back I wouldn't have sent for you.'

He paused, looked speculatively at Pat.  His buzzer sounded and a
secretary's voice said 'Mr Hilliard'.

'Send him in.'

George Hilliard was a huge man and the glance he bent upon Pat was
not kindly.  But there was some other element besides anger in it
and Pat squirmed doubtfully as the two men regarded him with almost
impersonal curiosity--as if he were a candidate for a cannibal's
frying pan.

'Well, goodbye,' he suggested uneasily.

'What do you think, George?' demanded Berners.

'Well--' said Hilliard, hesitantly, 'we could black out a couple of
teeth.'

Pat rose hurriedly and took a step toward the door, but Hilliard
seized him and faced him around.

'Let's hear you talk,' he said.

'You can't beat me up,' Pat clamoured.  'You knock my teeth out and
I'll sue you.'

There was a pause.

'What do you think?' demanded Berners.

'He can't talk,' said Hilliard.

'You damn right I can talk!' said Pat.

'We can dub three or four lines,' continued Hilliard, 'and
nobody'll know the difference.  Half the guys you get to play rats
can't talk.  The point is this one's got the physique and the
camera will pull it out of his face too.'

Berners nodded.

'All right, Pat--you're an actor.  You've got to play the part this
McCarthy had.  Only a couple of scenes but they're important.
You'll have papers to sign with the Guild and Central Casting and
you can report for work this afternoon.'

'What is this!' Pat demanded.  'I'm no ham--'  Remembering that
Hilliard had once been a leading man he recoiled from this
attitude:  'I'm a writer.'

'The character you play is called "The Rat",' continued Berners.
He explained why it was necessary for Pat to continue his impromptu
appearance of yesterday.  The scenes which included Miss Keatts had
been shot first, so that she could fulfil an English engagement.
But in the filling out of the skeleton it was necessary to show how
the gangsters reached their hide-out, and what they did after Miss
Keatts dove from the window.  Having irrevocably appeared in the
shot with Miss Keatts, Pat must appear in half a dozen other shots,
to be taken in the next few days.

'What kind of jack is it?' Pat inquired.

'We were paying McCarthy fifty a day--wait a minute Pat--but I
thought I'd pay you your last writing price, two-fifty for the
week.'

'How about my reputation?' objected Pat.

'I won't answer that one,' said Berners.  'But if Benchley can act
and Don Stewart and Lewis and Wilder and Woollcott, I guess it
won't ruin you.'

Pat drew a long breath.

'Can you let me have fifty on account,' he asked, 'because really I
earned that yester--'

'If you got what you earned yesterday you'd be in a hospital.  And
you're not going on any bat.  Here's ten dollars and that's all you
see for a week.'

'How about my car--'

'To hell with your car.'


III


'The Rat' was the die-hard of the gang who were engaged in sabotage
for an unidentified government of N-zis.  His speeches were
simplicity itself--Pat had written their like many times.  'Don't
finish him till the Brain comes'; 'Let's get out of here'; 'Fella,
you're going out feet first.'  Pat found it pleasant--mostly
waiting around as in all picture work--and he hoped it might lead
to other openings in this line.  He was sorry that the job was so
short.

His last scene was on location.  He knew 'The Rat' was to touch off
an explosion in which he himself was killed but Pat had watched
such scenes and was certain he would be in no slightest danger.
Out on the back lot he was mildly curious when they measured him
around the waist and chest.

'Making a dummy?' he asked.

'Not exactly,' the prop man said.  'This thing is all made but it
was for Gyp McCarthy and I want to see if it'll fit you.'

'Does it?'

'Just exactly.'

'What is it?'

'Well--it's a sort of protector.'

A slight draught of uneasiness blew in Pat's mind.

'Protector for what?  Against the explosion?'

'Heck no!  The explosion is phony--just a process shot.  This is
something else.'

'What is it?' persisted Pat.  'If I got to be protected against
something I got a right to know what it is.'

Near the false front of a warehouse a battery of cameras were
getting into position.  George Hilliard came suddenly out of a
group and toward Pat and putting his arm on his shoulder steered
him toward the actors' dressing tent.  Once inside he handed Pat a
flask.

'Have a drink, old man.'

Pat took a long pull.

'There's a bit of business, Pat,' Hilliard said, 'needs some new
costuming.  I'll explain it while they dress you.'

Pat was divested of coat and vest, his trousers were loosened and
in an instant a hinged iron doublet was fastened about his middle,
extending from his armpits to his crotch very much like a plaster
cast.

'This is the very finest strongest iron, Pat,' Hilliard assured
him.  'The very best in tensile strength and resistance.  It was
built in Pittsburgh.'

Pat suddenly resisted the attempts of two dressers to pull his
trousers up over the thing and to slip on his coat and vest.

'What's it for?' he demanded, arms flailing.  'I want to know.
You're not going to shoot at me if that's what--'

'No shooting.'

'Then what IS it?  I'm no stunt man--'

'You signed a contract just like McCarthy's to do anything within
reason--and our lawyers have certified this.'

'What IS it?'  Pat's mouth was dry.

'It's an automobile.'

'You're going to hit me with an automobile.'

'Give me a chance to tell you,' begged Hilliard.  'Nobody's going
to hit you.  The auto's going to pass over you, that's all.  This
case is so strong--'

'Oh no!' said Pat.  'Oh no!'  He tore at the iron corselet.  'Not
on your--'

George Hilliard pinioned his arms firmly.

'Pat, you almost wrecked this picture once--you're not going to do
it again.  Be a man.'

'That's what I'm going to be.  You're not going to squash me out
flat like that extra last month.'

He broke off.  Behind Hilliard he saw a face he knew--a hateful and
dreaded face--that of the collector for the North Hollywood Finance
and Loan Company.  Over in the parking lot stood his coupe,
faithful pal and servant since 1934, companion of his misfortunes,
his only certain home.

'Either you fill your contract,' said George Hilliard, '--or you're
out of pictures for keeps.'

The man from the finance company had taken a step forward.  Pat
turned to Hilliard.

'Will you loan me--' he faltered, '--will you advance me twenty-
five dollars?'

'Sure,' said Hilliard.

Pat spoke fiercely to the credit man:

'You hear that?  You'll get your money, but if this thing breaks,
my death'll be on your head.'

The next few minutes passed in a dream.  He heard Hilliard's last
instructions as they walked from the tent.  Pat was to be lying in
a shallow ditch to touch off the dynamite--and then the hero would
drive the car slowly across his middle.  Pat listened dimly.  A
picture of himself, cracked like an egg by the factory wall, lay a-
thwart his mind.

He picked up the torch and lay down in the ditch.  Afar off he
heard the call 'Quiet', then Hilliard's voice and the noise of the
car warming up.

'Action!' called someone.  There was the sound of the car growing
nearer--louder.  And then Pat Hobby knew no more.


IV


When he awoke it was dark and quiet.  For some moments he failed to
recognize his whereabouts.  Then he saw that stars were out in the
California sky and that he was somewhere alone--no--he was held
tight in someone's arms.  But the arms were of iron and he realized
that he was still in the metallic casing.  And then it all came
back to him--up to the moment when he heard the approach of the
car.

As far as he could determine he was unhurt--but why out here and
alone?

He struggled to get up but found it was impossible and after a
horrified moment he let out a cry for help.  For five minutes he
called out at intervals until finally a voice came from far away;
and assistance arrived in the form of a studio policeman.

'What is it fella?  A drop too much?'

'Hell no,' cried Pat.  'I was in the shooting this afternoon.  It
was a lousy trick to go off and leave me in this ditch.'

'They must have forgot you in the excitement.'

'Forgot me!  _I_ was the excitement.  If you don't believe me then
feel what I got on!'

The cop helped him to his feet.

'They was upset,' he explained.  'A star don't break his leg every
day.'

'What's that?  Did something happen?'

'Well, as I heard, he was supposed to drive the car at a bump and
the car turned over and broke his leg.  They had to stop shooting
and they're all kind of gloomy.'

'And they leave me inside this--this stove.  How do I get it off
tonight?  How'm I going to drive my car?'

But for all his rage Pat felt a certain fierce pride.  He was
Something in this set-up--someone to be reckoned with after years
of neglect.  He had managed to hold up the picture once more.




PAT HOBBY'S PREVIEW

Esquire (October 1940)


I


'I haven't got a job for you,' said Berners.  'We've got more
writers now than we can use.'

'I didn't ask for a job,' said Pat with dignity.  'But I rate some
tickets for the preview tonight--since I got a half credit.'

'Oh yes, I want to talk to you about that,' Berners frowned.  'We
may have to take your name off the screen credits.'

'WHAT?' exclaimed Pat.  'Why, it's already on!  I saw it in the
Reporter.  "By Ward Wainwright and Pat Hobby."'

'But we may have to take it off when we release the picture.
Wainwright's back from the East and raising hell.  He says that you
claimed lines where all you did was change "No" to "No sir" and
"crimson" to "red", and stuff like that.'

'I been in this business twenty years,' said Pat.  'I know my
rights.  That guy laid an egg.  I was called in to revise a
turkey!'

'You were not,' Berners assured him.  'After Wainwright went to New
York I called you in to fix one small character.  If I hadn't gone
fishing you wouldn't have got away with sticking your name on the
script.'  Jack Berners broke off, touched by Pat's dismal, red-
streaked eyes.  'Still, I was glad to see you get a credit after so
long.'

'I'll join the Screen Writers Guild and fight it.'

'You don't stand a chance.  Anyhow, Pat, your name's on it tonight
at least, and it'll remind everybody you're alive.  And I'll dig
you up some tickets--but keep an eye out for Wainwright.  It isn't
good for you to get socked if you're over fifty.'

'I'm in my forties,' said Pat, who was forty-nine.

The Dictograph buzzed.  Berners switched it on.

'It's Mr Wainwright.'

'Tell him to wait.'  He turned to Pat:  'That's Wainwright.  Better
go out the side door.'

'How about the tickets?'

'Drop by this afternoon.'

To a rising young screen poet this might have been a crushing blow
but Pat was made of sterner stuff.  Sterner not upon himself, but
on the harsh fate that had dogged him for nearly a decade.  With
all his experience, and with the help of every poisonous herb that
blossoms between Washington Boulevard and Ventura, between Santa
Monica and Vine--he continued to slip.  Sometimes he grabbed
momentarily at a bush, found a few weeks' surcease upon the island
of a 'patch job', but in general the slide continued at a pace that
would have dizzied a lesser man.

Once safely out of Berners' office, for instance, Pat looked ahead
and not behind.  He visioned a drink with Louie, the studio bookie,
and then a call on some old friends on the lot.  Occasionally, but
less often every year, some of these calls developed into jobs
before you could say 'Santa Anita'.  But after he had had his drink
his eyes fell upon a lost girl.

She was obviously lost.  She stood staring very prettily at the
trucks full of extras that rolled toward the commissary.  And then
gazed about helpless--so helpless that a truck was almost upon her
when Pat reached out and plucked her aside.

'Oh, thanks,' she said, 'thanks, I came with a party for a tour of
the studio and a policeman made me leave my camera in some office.
Then I went to stage five where the guide said, but it was closed.'

She was a 'Cute Little Blonde'.  To Pat's liverish eye, cute little
blondes seemed as much alike as a string of paper dolls.  Of course
they had different names.

'We'll see about it,' said Pat.

'You're very nice.  I'm Eleanor Carter from Boise, Idaho.'

He told her his name and that he was a writer.  She seemed first
disappointed--then delighted.

'A writer? . . .  Oh, of course.  I knew they had to have writers
but I guess I never heard about one before.'

'Writers get as much as three grand a week,' he assured her firmly.
'Writers are some of the biggest shots in Hollywood.'

'You see, I never thought of it that way.'

'Bernud Shaw was out here,' he said, '--and Einstein, but they
couldn't make the grade.'

They walked to the Bulletin Board and Pat found that there was work
scheduled on three stages--and one of the directors was a friend
out of the past.

'What did you write?' Eleanor asked.

A great male Star loomed on the horizon and Eleanor was all eyes
till he had passed.  Anyhow the names of Pat's pictures would have
been unfamiliar to her.

'Those were all silents,' he said.

'Oh.  Well, what did you write last?'

'Well, I worked on a thing at Universal--I don't know what they
called it finally--'  He saw that he was not impressing her at all.
He thought quickly.  What did they know in Boise, Idaho?'  I wrote
Captains Courageous,' he said boldly.  'And Test Pilot and
Wuthering Heights and--and The Awful Truth and Mr Smith Goes to
Washington.'

'Oh!' she exclaimed.  'Those are all my favourite pictures.  And
Test Pilot is my boy friend's favourite picture and Dark Victory is
mine.'

'I thought Dark Victory stank,' he said modestly.  'Highbrow
stuff,' and he added to balance the scales of truth, 'I been here
twenty years.'

They came to a stage and went in.  Pat sent his name to the
director and they were passed.  They watched while Ronald Colman
rehearsed a scene.

'Did you write this?' Eleanor whispered.

'They asked me to,' Pat said, 'but I was busy.'

He felt young again, authoritative and active, with a hand in many
schemes.  Then he remembered something.

'I've got a picture opening tonight.'

'You HAVE?'

He nodded.

'I was going to take Claudette Colbert but she's got a cold.  Would
you like to go?'


II


He was alarmed when she mentioned a family, relieved when she said
it was only a resident aunt.  It would be like old times walking
with a cute little blonde past the staring crowds on the sidewalk.
His car was Class of 1933 but he could say it was borrowed--one of
his Jap servants had smashed his limousine.  Then what? he didn't
quite know, but he could put on a good act for one night.

He bought her lunch in the commissary and was so stirred that he
thought of borrowing somebody's apartment for the day.  There was
the old line about 'getting her a test'.  But Eleanor was thinking
only of getting to a hair-dresser to prepare for tonight, and he
escorted her reluctantly to the gate.  He had another drink with
Louie and went to Jack Berners' office for the tickets.

Berners' secretary had them ready in an envelope.

'We had trouble about these, Mr Hobby.'

'Trouble?  Why?  Can't a man go to his own preview?  Is this
something new?'

'It's not that, Mr Hobby,' she said.  'The picture's been talked
about so much, every seat is gone.'

Unreconciled, he complained, 'And they just didn't think of me.'

'I'm sorry.'  She hesitated.  'These are really Mr Wainwright's
tickets.  He was so angry about something that he said he wouldn't
go--and threw them on my desk.  I shouldn't be telling you this.'

'These are HIS seats?'

'Yes, Mr Hobby.'

Pat sucked his tongue.  This was in the nature of a triumph.
Wainwright had lost his temper, which was the last thing you should
ever do in pictures--you could only pretend to lose it--so perhaps
his applecart wasn't so steady.  Perhaps Pat ought to join the
Screen Writers Guild and present his case--if the Screen Writers
Guild would take him in.

This problem was academic.  He was calling for Eleanor at five
o'clock and taking her 'somewhere for a cocktail'.  He bought a two-
dollar shirt, changing into it in the shop, and a four-dollar
Alpine hat--thus halving his bank account which, since the Bank
Holiday of 1933, he carried cautiously in his pocket.

The modest bungalow in West Hollywood yielded up Eleanor without a
struggle.  On his advice she was not in evening dress but she was
as trim and shining as any cute little blonde out of his past.
Eager too--running over with enthusiasm and gratitude.  He must
think of someone whose apartment he could borrow for tomorrow.

'You'd like a test?' he asked as they entered the Brown Derby bar.

'What girl wouldn't?'

'Some wouldn't--for a million dollars.'  Pat had had setbacks in
his love life.  'Some of them would rather go on pounding the keys
or just hanging around.  You'd be surprised.'

'I'd do almost anything for a test,' Eleanor said.

Looking at her two hours later he wondered honestly to himself if
it couldn't be arranged.  There was Harry Gooddorf--there was Jack
Berners--but his credit was low on all sides.  He could do
SOMETHING for her, he decided.  He would try at least to get an
agent interested--if all went well tomorrow.

'What are you doing tomorrow?' he asked.

'Nothing,' she answered promptly.  'Hadn't we better eat and get to
the preview?'

'Sure, sure.'

He made a further inroad on his bank account to pay for his six
whiskeys--you certainly had the right to celebrate before your own
preview--and took her into the restaurant for dinner.  They ate
little.  Eleanor was too excited--Pat had taken his calories in
another form.

It was a long time since he had seen a picture with his name on it.
Pat Hobby.  As a man of the people he always appeared in the credit
titles as Pat Hobby.  It would be nice to see it again and though
he did not expect his old friends to stand up and sing Happy
Birthday to You, he was sure there would be back-slapping and even
a little turn of attention toward him as the crowd swayed out of
the theatre.  That would be nice.

'I'm frightened,' said Eleanor as they walked through the alley of
packed fans.

'They're looking at you,' he said confidently.  'They look at that
pretty pan and try to think if you're an actress.'

A fan shoved an autograph album and pencil toward Eleanor but Pat
moved her firmly along.  It was late--the equivalent of' 'all
aboard' was being shouted around the entrance.

'Show your tickets, please sir.'

Pat opened the envelope and handed them to the doorman.  Then he
said to Eleanor:

'The seats are reserved--it doesn't matter that we're late.'

She pressed close to him, clinging--it was, as it turned out, the
high point of her debut.  Less than three steps inside the theatre
a hand fell on Pat's shoulder.

'Hey Buddy, these aren't tickets for here.'

Before they knew it they were back outside the door, glared at with
suspicious eyes.

'I'm Pat Hobby.  I wrote this picture.'

For an instant credulity wandered to his side.  Then the hard-
boiled doorman sniffed at Pat and stepped in close.

'Buddy you're drunk.  These are tickets to another show.'

Eleanor looked and felt uneasy but Pat was cool.

'Go inside and ask Jack Berners,' Pat said.  'He'll tell you.'

'Now listen,' said the husky guard, 'these are tickets for a
burlesque down in L.A.'  He was steadily edging Pat to the side.
'You go to your show, you and your girl friend.  And be happy.'

'You don't understand.  I wrote this picture.'

'Sure.  In a pipe dream.'

'Look at the programme.  My name's on it.  I'm Pat Hobby.'

'Can you prove it?  Let's see your auto licence.'

As Pat handed it over he whispered to Eleanor, 'Don't worry!'

'This doesn't say Pat Hobby,' announced the doorman.  'This says
the car's owned by the North Hollywood Finance and Loan Company.
Is that you?'

For once in his life Pat could think of nothing to say--he cast one
quick glance at Eleanor.  Nothing in her face indicated that he was
anything but what he thought he was--all alone.


III


Though the preview crowd had begun to drift away, with that vague
American wonder as to why they had come at all, one little cluster
found something arresting and poignant in the faces of Pat and
Eleanor.  They were obviously gate-crashers, outsiders like
themselves, but the crowd resented the temerity of their effort to
get in--a temerity which the crowd did not share.  Little jeering
jests were audible.  Then, with Eleanor already edging away from
the distasteful scene, there was a flurry by the door.  A well-
dressed six-footer strode out of the theatre and stood gazing till
he saw Pat.

'There you are!' he shouted.

Pat recognized Ward Wainwright.

'Go in and look at it!' Wainwright roared.  'Look at it.  Here's
some ticket stubs!  I think the prop boy directed it!  Go and
look!'  To the doorman he said:  'It's all right!  He wrote it.  I
wouldn't have my name on an inch of it.'

Trembling with frustration, Wainwright threw up his hands and
strode off into the curious crowd.

Eleanor was terrified.  But the same spirit that had inspired 'I'd
do anything to get in the movies', kept her standing there--though
she felt invisible fingers reaching forth to drag her back to
Boise.  She had been intending to run--hard and fast.  The hard-
boiled doorman and the tall stranger had crystallized her feelings
that Pat was 'rather simple'.  She would never let those red-rimmed
eyes come close to her--at least for any more than a doorstep kiss.
She was saving herself for somebody--and it wasn't Pat.  Yet she
felt that the lingering crowd was a tribute to her--such as she had
never exacted before.  Several times she threw a glance at the
crowd--a glance that now changed from wavering fear into a sort of
queenliness.

She felt exactly like a star.

Pat, too, was all confidence.  This was HIS preview; all had been
delivered into his hands: his name would stand alone on the screen
when the picture was released.  There had to be somebody's name,
didn't there?--and Wainwright had withdrawn.

SCREENPLAY BY PAT HOBBY.

He seized Eleanor's elbow in a firm grasp and steered her
triumphantly towards the door:

'Cheer up, baby.  That's the way it is.  You see?'




NO HARM TRYING

Esquire (November 1940)


Pat hobby's apartment lay athwart a delicatessen shop on Wilshire
Boulevard.  And there lay Pat himself, surrounded by his books--the
Motion Picture Almanac of 1928 and Barton's Track Guide, 1939--by
his pictures, authentically signed photographs of Mabel Normand and
Barbara LaMarr (who, being deceased, had no value in the pawn-
shops)--and by his dogs in their cracked leather oxfords, perched
on the arm of a slanting settee.

Pat was at "the end of his resources"--though this term is too
ominous to describe a fairly usual condition in his life.  He was
an old-timer in pictures; he had once known sumptuous living, but
for the past ten years jobs had been hard to hold--harder to hold
than glasses.

"Think of it," he often mourned.  "Only a writer--at forty-nine."

All this afternoon he had turned the pages of The Times and The
Examiner for an idea.  Though he did not intend to compose a motion
picture from this idea, he needed it to get him inside a studio.
If you had nothing to submit it was increasingly difficult to pass
the gate.  But though these two newspapers, together with Life,
were the sources most commonly combed for "originals," they yielded
him nothing this afternoon.  There were wars, a fire in Topanga
Canyon, press releases from the studios, municipal corruptions, and
always the redeeming deeds of "The Trojuns," but Pat found nothing
that competed in human interest with the betting page.

--If I could get out to Santa Anita, he thought--I could maybe get
an idea about the nags.

This cheering idea was interrupted by his landlord, from the
delicatessen store below.

"I told you I wouldn't deliver any more messages," said Nick, "and
STILL I won't.  But Mr. Carl Le Vigne is telephoning in person from
the studio and wants you should go over right away."

The prospect of a job did something to Pat.  It anesthetized the
crumbled, struggling remnants of his manhood, and inoculated him
instead with a bland, easygoing confidence.  The set speeches and
attitudes of success returned to him.  His manner as he winked at a
studio policeman, stopped to chat with Louie, the bookie, and
presented himself to Mr. Le Vigne's secretary, indicated that he
had been engaged with momentous tasks in other parts of the globe.
By saluting Le Vigne with a facetious "Hel-LO Captain!" he behaved
almost as an equal, a trusted lieutenant who had never really been
away.

"Pat, your wife's in the hospital," Le Vigne said.  "It'll probably
be in the papers this afternoon."

Pat started.

"My wife?" he said.  "What wife?"

"Estelle.  She tried to cut her wrists."

"Estelle!" Pat exclaimed.  "You mean ESTELLE?  Say, I was only
married to her three weeks!"

"She was the best girl you ever had," said Le Vigne grimly.

"I haven't even heard of her for ten years."

"You're hearing about her now.  They called all the studios trying
to locate you."

"I had nothing to do with it."

"I know--she's only been here a week.  She had a run of hard luck
wherever it was she lived--New Orleans?  Husband died, child died,
no money . . ."

Pat breathed easier.  They weren't trying to hang anything on him.

"Anyhow she'll live," Le Vigne reassured him superfluously, "--and
she was the best script girl on the lot once.  We'd like to take
care of her.  We thought the way was give you a job.  Not exactly a
job, because I know you're not up to it."  He glanced into Pat's
red-rimmed eyes.  "More of a sinecure."

Pat became uneasy.  He didn't recognize the word, but "sin"
disturbed him and "cure" brought a whole flood of unpleasant
memories.

"You're on the payroll at two-fifty a week for three weeks," said
Le Vigne, "--but one-fifty of that goes to the hospital for your
wife's bill."

"But we're divorced!" Pat protested.  "No Mexican stuff either.
I've been married since, and so has--"

"Take it or leave it.  You can have an office here, and if anything
you can do comes up we'll let you know."

"I never worked for a hundred a week."

"We're not asking you to work.  If you want you can stay home."

Pat reversed his field.

"Oh, I'll work," he said quickly.  "You dig me up a good story and
I'll show you whether I can work or not."

Le Vigne wrote something on a slip of paper.

"All right.  They'll find you an office."

Outside Pat looked at the memorandum.

"Mrs. John Devlin," it read, "Good Samaritan Hospital."

The very words irritated him.

"Good Samaritan!" he exclaimed.  "Good gyp joint!  One hundred and
fifty bucks a week!"



Pat had been given many a charity job but this was the first one
that made him feel ashamed.  He did not mind not EARN-ing his
salary, but not getting it was another matter.  And he wondered if
other people on the lot who were obviously doing nothing, were
being fairly paid for it.  There were, for example, a number of
beautiful young ladies who walked aloof as stars, and whom Pat took
for stock girls, until Eric, the callboy, told him they were
imports from Vienna and Budapest, not yet cast for pictures.  Did
half their pay checks go to keep husbands they had only had for
three weeks!

The loveliest of these was Lizzette Starheim, a violet-eyed little
blonde with an ill-concealed air of disillusion.  Pat saw her alone
at tea almost every afternoon in the commissary--and made her
acquaintance one day by simply sliding into a chair opposite.

"Hello, Lizzette," he said.  "I'm Pat Hobby, the writer."

"Oh, hel-LO!"

She flashed such a dazzling smile that for a moment he thought she
must have heard of him.

"When they going to cast you?" he demanded.

"I don't know."  Her accent was faint and poignant.

"Don't let them give you the run-around.  Not with a face like
yours."  Her beauty roused a rusty eloquence.  "Sometimes they just
keep you under contract till your teeth fall out, because you look
too much like their big star."

"Oh no," she said distressfully.

"Oh yes!" he assured her.  "I'm telling YOU.  Why don't you go to
another company and get borrowed?  Have you thought of that idea?"

"I think it's wonderful."

He intended to go further into the subject but Miss Starheim looked
at her watch and got up.

"I must go now, Mr.--"

"Hobby.  Pat Hobby."

Pat joined Dutch Waggoner, the director, who was shooting dice with
a waitress at another table.

"Between pictures, Dutch?"

"Between pictures hell!" said Dutch.  "I haven't done a picture for
six months and my contract's got six months to run.  I'm trying to
break it.  Who was the little blonde?"

Afterwards, back in his office, Pat discussed these encounters with
Eric the callboy.

"All signed up and no place to go," said Eric.  "Look at this Jeff
Manfred, now--an associate producer!  Sits in his office and sends
notes to the big shots--and I carry back word they're in Palm
Springs.  It breaks my heart.  Yesterday he put his head on his
desk and boo-hoo'd."

"What's the answer?" asked Pat.

"Changa management," suggested Eric, darkly.  "Shake-up coming."

"Who's going to the top?" Pat asked, with scarcely concealed
excitement.

"Nobody knows," said Eric.  "But wouldn't I like to land uphill!
Boy!  I want a writer's job.  I got three ideas so new they're wet
behind the ears."

"It's no life at all," Pat assured him with conviction.  "I'd trade
with you right now."

In the hall next day he intercepted Jeff Manfred who walked with
the unconvincing hurry of one without a destination.

"What's the rush, Jeff?" Pat demanded, falling into step.

"Reading some scripts," Jeff panted without conviction.

Pat drew him unwillingly into his office.

"Jeff, have you heard about the shake-up?"

"Listen now, Pat--"  Jeff looked nervously at the walls.  "What
shake-up?" he demanded.

"I heard that this Harmon Shaver is going to be the new boss,"
ventured Pat, "Wall Street control."

"Harmon Shaver!" Jeff scoffed.  "He doesn't know anything about
pictures--he's just a money man.  He wanders around like a lost
soul."  Jeff sat back and considered.  "Still--if you're RIGHT,
he'd be a man you could get to."  He turned mournful eyes on Pat.
"I haven't been able to see Le Vigne or Barnes or Bill Behrer for a
month.  Can't get an assignment, can't get an actor, can't get a
story."  He broke off.  "I've thought of drumming up something on
my own.  Got any ideas?"

"Have I?" said Pat.  "I got three ideas so new they're wet behind
the ears."

"Who for?"

"Lizzette Starheim," said Pat, "with Dutch Waggoner directing--
see?"



"I'm with you all a hundred per cent," said Harmon Shaver.  "This
is the most encouraging experience I've had in pictures."  He had a
bright bond-salesman's chuckle.  "By God, it reminds me of a circus
we got up when I was a boy."

They had come to his office inconspicuously like conspirators--Jeff
Manfred, Waggoner, Miss Starheim and Pat Hobby.

"You like the idea, Miss Starheim?" Shaver continued.

"I think it's wonderful."

"And you, Mr. Waggoner?"

"I've heard only the general line," said Waggoner with director's
caution, "but it seems to have the old emotional socko."  He winked
at Pat.  "I didn't know this old tramp had it in him."

Pat glowed with pride.  Jeff Manfred, though he was elated, was
less sanguine.

"It's important nobody talks," he said nervously.  "The Big Boys
would find some way of killing it.  In a week, when we've got the
script done we'll go to them."

"I agree," said Shaver.  "They have run the studio so long that--
well, I don't trust my own secretaries--I sent them to the races
this afternoon."

Back in Pat's office Eric, the callboy, was waiting.  He did not
know that he was the hinge upon which swung a great affair.

"You like the stuff, eh?" he asked eagerly.

"Pretty good," said Pat with calculated indifference.

"You said you'd pay more for the next batch."

"Have a heart!"  Pat was aggrieved.  "How many callboys get seventy-
five a week?"

"How many callboys can write?"

Pat considered.  Out of the two hundred a week Jeff Manfred was
advancing from his own pocket, he had naturally awarded himself a
commission of sixty per cent.

"I'll make it a hundred," he said.  "Now check yourself off the lot
and meet me in front of Benny's bar."

At the hospital, Estelle Hobby Devlin sat up in bed, overwhelmed by
the unexpected visit.

"I'm glad you came, Pat," she said, "you've been very kind.  Did
you get my note?"

"Forget it," Pat said gruffly.  He had never liked this wife.  She
had loved him too much--until she found suddenly that he was a poor
lover.  In her presence he felt inferior.

"I got a guy outside," he said.

"What for?"

"I thought maybe you had nothing to do and you might want to pay me
back for all this jack--"

He waved his hand around the bare hospital room.

"You were a swell script girl once.  Do you think if I got a
typewriter you could put some good stuff into continuity?"

"Why--yes.  I suppose I could."

"It's a secret.  We can't trust anybody at the studio."

"All right," she said.

"I'll send this kid in with the stuff.  I got a conference."

"All right--and--oh Pat--come and see me again."

"Sure, I'll come."

But he knew he wouldn't.  He didn't like sickrooms--he lived in one
himself.  From now on he was done with poverty and failure.  He
admired strength--he was taking Lizzette Starheim to a wrestling
match that night.



In his private musings Harmon Shaver referred to the showdown as
"the surprise party."  He was going to confront Le Vigne with a
fait accompli and he gathered his coterie before phoning Le Vigne
to come over to his office.

"What for?" demanded Le Vigne.  "Couldn't you tell me now--I'm busy
as hell."

This arrogance irritated Shaver--who was here to watch over the
interests of Eastern stockholders.

"I don't ask much," he said sharply, "I let you fellows laugh at me
behind my back and freeze me out of things.  But now I've got
something and I'd like you to come over."

"All right--all right."

Le Vigne's eyebrows lifted as he saw the members of the new
production unit but he said nothing--sprawled into an arm chair
with his eyes on the floor and his fingers over his mouth.

Mr. Shaver came around the desk and poured forth words that had
been fermenting in him for months.  Simmered to its essentials, his
protest was:  "You would not let me play, but I'm going to play
anyhow."  Then he nodded to Jeff Manfred--who opened the script and
read aloud.  This took an hour, and still Le Vigne sat motionless
and silent.

"There you are," said Shaver triumphantly.  "Unless you've got any
objection I think we ought to assign a budget to this proposition
and get going.  I'll answer to my people."

Le Vigne spoke at last.

"You like it, Miss Starheim?"

"I think it's wonderful."

"What language you going to play it in?"

To everyone's surprise Miss Starheim got to her feet.

"I must go now," she said with her faint poignant accent.

"Sit down and answer me," said Le Vigne.  "What language are you
playing it in?"

Miss Starheim looked tearful.

"Wenn I gute teachers hätte konnte ich dann thees rôle gut
spielen," she faltered.

"But you like the script."

She hesitated.

"I think it's wonderful."

Le Vigne turned to the others.

"Miss Starheim has been here eight months," he said.  "She's had
three teachers.  Unless things have changed in the past two weeks
she can say just three sentences.  She can say, 'How do you do';
she can say, 'I think it's wonderful'; and she can say, 'I must go
now.'  Miss Starheim has turned out to be a pinhead--I'm not
insulting her because she doesn't know what it means.  Anyhow--
there's your Star."

He turned to Dutch Waggoner, but Dutch was already on his feet.

"Now Carl--" he said defensively.

"You force me to it," said Le Vigne.  "I've trusted drunks up to a
point, but I'll be goddam if I'll trust a hophead."

He turned to Harmon Shaver.

"Dutch has been good for exactly one week apiece on his last four
pictures.  He's all right now but as soon as the heat goes on he
reaches for the little white powders.  Now Dutch!  Don't say
anything you'll regret.  We're carrying you in HOPES--but you won't
get on a stage till we've had a doctor's certificate for a year."

Again he turned to Harmon.

"There's your director.  Your supervisor, Jeff Manfred, is here for
one reason only--because he's Behrer's wife's cousin.  There's
nothing against him but he belongs to silent days as much as--as
much as--"  His eyes fell upon a quavering broken man, "--as much
as Pat Hobby."

"What do you mean?" demanded Jeff.

"You trusted Hobby, didn't you?  That tells the whole story."  He
turned back to Shaver.  "Jeff's a weeper and a wisher and a
dreamer.  Mr. Shaver, you have bought a lot of condemned building
material."

"Well, I've bought a good story," said Shaver defiantly.

"Yes.  That's right.  We'll make that story."

"Isn't that something?" demanded Shaver.  "With all this secrecy
how was I to know about Mr. Waggoner and Miss Starheim?  But I do
know a good story."

"Yes," said Le Vigne absently.  He got up.  "Yes--it's a good
story. . . .  Come along to my office, Pat."

He was already at the door.  Pat cast an agonized look at Mr.
Shaver as if for support.  Then, weakly, he followed.

"Sit down, Pat."

"That Eric's got talent, hasn't he?" said Le Vigne.  "He'll go
places.  How'd you come to dig him up?"

Pat felt the straps of the electric chair being adjusted.

"Oh--I just dug him up.  He--came in my office."

"We're putting him on salary," said Le Vigne.  "We ought to have
some system to give these kids a chance."

He took a call on his Dictograph, then swung back to Pat.

"But how did you ever get mixed up with this goddam Shaver.  YOU,
Pat--an old-timer like you."

"Well, I thought--"

"Why doesn't he go back East?" continued Le Vigne disgustedly.
"Getting all you poops stirred up!"

Blood flowed back into Pat's veins.  He recognized his signal, his
dog-call.

"Well, I got you a story, didn't I?" he said, with almost a
swagger.  And he added, "How'd you know about it?"

"I went down to see Estelle in the hospital.  She and this kid were
working on it.  I walked right in on them."

"Oh," said Pat.

"I knew the kid by sight.  Now, Pat, tell me this--did Jeff Manfred
think you wrote it--or was he in on the racket?"

"Oh God," Pat mourned.  "What do I have to answer that for?"

Le Vigne leaned forward intensely.

"Pat, you're sitting over a trap door!" he said with savage eyes.
"Do you see how the carpet's cut?  I just have to press this button
and drop you down to hell!  Will you TALK?"

Pat was on his feet, staring wildly at the floor.

"Sure I will!" he cried.  He believed it--he believed such things.

"All right," said Le Vigne relaxing.  "There's whiskey in the
sideboard there.  Talk quick and I'll give you another month at two-
fifty.  I kinda like having you around."




A PATRIOTIC SHORT

Esquire (December 1940)


Pat Hobby, the writer and the man, had his great success in
Hollywood during what Irving Cobb refers to as 'the mosaic swimming-
pool age--just before the era when they had to have a shinbone of
St Sebastian for a clutch lever.'

Mr Cobb no doubt exaggerates, for when Pat had his pool in those
fat days of silent pictures, it was entirely cement, unless you
should count the cracks where the water stubbornly sought its own
level through the mud.

'But it WAS a pool,' he assured himself one afternoon more than a
decade later.  Though he was now more than grateful for this small
chore he had assigned him by producer Berners--one week at two-
fifty--all the insolence of office could not take that memory away.

He had been called in to the studio to work upon an humble short.
It was based on the career of General Fitzhugh Lee who fought for
the Confederacy and later for the U.S.A. against Spain--so it would
offend neither North nor South.  And in the recent conference Pat
had tried to co-operate.

'I was thinking--' he suggested to Jack Berners '--that it might be
a good thing if we could give it a Jewish touch.'

'What do you mean?' demanded Jack Berners quickly.

'Well I thought--the way things are and all, it would be a sort of
good thing to show that there were a number of Jews in it too.'

'In what?'

'In the Civil War.'  Quickly he reviewed his meagre history.  'They
were, weren't they?'

'Naturally,' said Berners, with some impatience, 'I suppose
everybody was except the Quakers.'

'Well, my idea was that we could have this Fitzhugh Lee in love
with a Jewish girl.  He's going to be shot at curfew so she grabs a
church bell--'

Jack Berners leaned forward earnestly.

'Say, Pat, you want this job, don't you?  Well, I told you the
story.  You got the first script.  If you thought up this tripe to
please me you're losing your grip.'

Was that a way to treat a man who had once owned a pool which had
been talked about by--

That was how he happened to be thinking about his long lost
swimming pool as he entered the shorts department.  He was
remembering a certain day over a decade ago in all its details, how
he had arrived at the studio in his car driven by a Filipino in
uniform; the deferential bow of the guard at the gate which had
admitted car and all to the lot, his ascent to that long lost
office which had a room for the secretary and was really a
director's office . . .

His reverie was broken off by the voice of Ben Brown, head of the
shorts department, who walked him into his own chambers.

'Jack Berners just phoned me,' he said.  'We don't want any new
angles, Pat.  We've got a good story.  Fitzhugh Lee was a dashing
cavalry commander.  He was a nephew of Robert E. Lee and we want to
show him at Appomattox, pretty bitter and all that.  And then show
how he became reconciled--we'll have to be careful because Virginia
is swarming with Lees--and how he finally accepts a U.S. commission
from President McKinley--'

Pat's mind darted back again into the past.  The President--that
was the magic word that had gone around that morning many years
ago.  The President of the United States was going to make a visit
to the lot.  Everyone had been agog about it--it seemed to mark a
new era in pictures because a President of the United States had
never visited a studio before.  The executives of the company were
all dressed up--from a window of his long lost Beverly Hills house
Pat had seen Mr Maranda, whose mansion was next door to him, bustle
down his walk in a cutaway coat at nine o'clock, and had known that
something was up.  He thought maybe it was clergy but when he
reached the lot he had found it was the President of the United
States himself who was coming . . .

'Clean up the stuff about Spain,' Ben Brown was saying.  'The guy
that wrote it was a Red and he's got all the Spanish officers with
ants in their pants.  Fix up that.'

In the office assigned him Pat looked at the script of True to Two
Flags.  The first scene showed General Fitzhugh Lee at the head of
his cavalry receiving word that Petersburg had been evacuated.  In
the script Lee took the blow in pantomime, but Pat was getting two-
fifty a week--so, casually and without effort, he wrote in one of
his favourite lines:


Lee (to his officers)

Well, what are you standing here gawking for?  DO something!  6.
Medium Shot Officers pepping up, slapping each other on back, etc.

Dissolve to:


To what?  Pat's mind dissolved once more into the glamorous past.
On that happy day in the twenties his phone had rung at about noon.
It had been Mr Maranda.

'Pat, the President is lunching in the private dining room.  Doug
Fairbanks can't come so there's a place empty and anyhow we think
there ought to be one writer there.'

His memory of the luncheon was palpitant with glamour.  The Great
Man had asked some questions about pictures and had told a joke and
Pat had laughed and laughed with the others--all of them solid men
together--rich, happy and successful.

Afterwards the President was to go on some sets and see some scenes
taken and still later he was going to Mr Maranda's house to meet
some of the women stars at tea.  Pat was not invited to that party
but he went home early anyhow and from his veranda saw the cortège
drive up, with Mr Maranda beside the President in the back seat.
Ah he was proud of pictures then--of his position in them--of the
President of the happy country where he was born . . .

Returning to reality Pat looked down at the script of True to Two
Flags and wrote slowly and thoughtfully:


Insert: A calendar--with the years plainly marked and the sheets
blowing off in a cold wind, to show Fitzhugh Lee growing older and
older.


His labours had made him thirsty--not for water, but he knew better
than to take anything else his first day on the job.  He got up and
went out into the hall and along the corridor to the water-cooler.

As he walked he slipped back into his reverie.

That had been a lovely California afternoon so Mr Maranda had taken
his exalted guest and the coterie of stars into his garden, which
adjoined Pat's garden.  Pat had gone out his back door and followed
a low privet hedge keeping out of sight--and then accidentally come
face to face with the Presidential party.

The President had smiled and nodded.  Mr Maranda smiled and nodded.

'You met Mr Hobby at lunch,' Mr Maranda said to the President.
'He's one of our writers.'

'Oh yes,' said the President, 'you write the pictures.'

'Yes I do,' said Pat.

The President glanced over into Pat's property.

'I suppose--' he said, '--that you get lots of inspiration sitting
by the side of that fine pool.'

'Yes,' said Pat, 'yes, I do,'

. . . Pat filled his cup at the cooler.  Down the hall there was a
group approaching--Jack Berners, Ben Brown and several other
executives and with them a girl to whom they were very attentive
and deferential.  He recognized her face--she was the girl of the
year, the It girl, the Oomph girl, the Glamour Girl, the girl for
whose services every studio was in violent competition.

Pat lingered over his drink.  He had seen many phonies break in and
break out again, but this girl was the real thing, someone to stir
every pulse in the nation.  He felt his own heart beat faster.
Finally, as the procession drew near, he put down the cup, dabbed
at his hair with his hand and took a step out into the corridor.

The girl looked at him--he looked at the girl.  Then she took one
arm of Jack Berners' and one of Ben Brown's and suddenly the party
seemed to walk right through him--so that he had to take a step
back against the wall.

An instant later Jack Berners turned around and said back to him,
'Hello, Pat.'  And then some of the others threw half glances
around but no one else spoke, so interested were they in the girl.

In his office, Pat looked at the scene where President McKinley
offers a United States commission to Fitzhugh Lee.  Suddenly he
gritted his teeth and bore down on his pencil as he wrote:


Lee

Mr President, you can take your commission and go straight to hell.


Then he bent down over his desk, his shoulders shaking as he
thought of that happy day when he had had a swimming pool.




ON THE TRAIL OF PAT HOBBY

Esquire (January 1941)


I


The day was dark from the outset, and a California fog crept
everywhere.  It had followed Pat in his headlong, hatless flight
across the city.  His destination, his refuge, was the studio,
where he was not employed but which had been home to him for twenty
years.

Was it his imagination or did the policeman at the gate give him
and his pass an especially long look?  It might be the lack of a
hat--Hollywood was full of hatless men but Pat felt marked,
especially as there had been no opportunity to part his thin grey
hair.

In the Writers' Building he went into the lavatory.  Then he
remembered: by some inspired ukase from above, all mirrors had been
removed from the Writers' Building a year ago.

Across the hall he saw Bee McIlvaine's door ajar, and discerned her
plump person.

'Bee, can you loan me your compact box?' he asked.

Bee looked at him suspiciously, then frowned and dug it from her
purse.

'You on the lot?' she inquired.

'Will be next week,' he prophesied.  He put the compact on her desk
and bent over it with his comb.  'Why won't they put mirrors back
in the johnnies?  Do they think writers would look at themselves
all day?'

'Remember when they took out the couches?' said Bee.  'In nineteen
thirty-two.  And they put them back in thirty-four.'

'I worked at home,' said Pat feelingly.

Finished with her mirror he wondered if she were good for a loan--
enough to buy a hat and something to eat.  Bee must have seen the
look in his eyes for she forestalled him.

'The Finns got all my money,' she said, 'and I'm worried about my
job.  Either my picture starts tomorrow or it's going to be
shelved.  We haven't even got a title.'

She handed him a mimeographed bulletin from the scenario department
and Pat glanced at the headline.


TO ALL DEPARTMENTS

TITLE WANTED--FIFTY DOLLARS REWARD
SUMMARY FOLLOWS


'I could use fifty,' Pat said.  'What's it about?'

'It's written there.  It's about a lot of stuff that goes on in
tourist cabins.'

Pat started and looked at her wild-eyed.  He had thought to be safe
here behind the guarded gates but news travelled fast.  This was a
friendly or perhaps not so friendly warning.  He must move on.  He
was a hunted man now, with nowhere to lay his hatless head.

'I don't know anything about that,' he mumbled and walked hastily
from the room.


II


Just inside the door of the commissary Pat looked around.  There
was no guardian except the girl at the cigarette stand but
obtaining another person's hat was subject to one complication: it
was hard to judge the size by a cursory glance, while the sight of
a man trying on several hats in a check room was unavoidably
suspicious.

Personal taste also obtruded itself.  Pat was beguiled by a green
fedora with a sprightly feather but it was too readily identifiable.
This was also true of a fine white Stetson for the open spaces.
Finally he decided on a sturdy grey Homburg which looked as if it
would give him good service.  With trembling hands he put it on.
It fitted.  He walked out--in painful, interminable slow motion.

His confidence was partly restored in the next hour by the fact
that no one he encountered made references to tourists' cabins.  It
had been a lean three months for Pat.  He had regarded his job as
night clerk for the Selecto Tourists Cabins as a mere fill-in,
never to be mentioned to his friends.  But when the police squad
came this morning they held up the raid long enough to assure Pat,
or Don Smith as he called himself, that he would be wanted as a
witness.  The story of his escape lies in the realm of melodrama,
how he went out a side door, bought a half pint of what he so
desperately needed at the corner drug-store, hitchhiked his way
across the great city, going limp at the sight of traffic cops and
only breathing free when he saw the studio's high-flown sign.

After a call on Louie, the studio bookie, whose great patron he
once had been, he dropped in on Jack Berners.  He had no idea to
submit, but he caught Jack in a hurried moment flying off to a
producers' conference and was unexpectedly invited to step in and
wait for his return.

The office was rich and comfortable.  There were no letters worth
reading on the desk, but there were a decanter and glasses in a
cupboard and presently he lay down on a big soft couch and fell
asleep.

He was awakened by Berners' return, in high indignation.

'Of all the damn nonsense!  We get a hurry call--heads of all
departments.  One man is late and we wait for him.  He comes in and
gets a bawling out for wasting thousands of dollars worth of time.
Then what do you suppose: Mr Marcus has lost his favourite hat!'

Pat failed to associate the fact with himself.

'All the department heads stop production!' continued Berners.
'Two thousand people look for a grey Homburg hat!'  He sank
despairingly into a chair, 'I can't talk to you today, Pat.  By
four o'clock, I've got to get a title to a picture about a tourist
camp.  Got an idea?'

'No,' said Pat.  'No.'

'Well, go up to Bee McIlvaine's office and help her figure
something out.  There's fifty dollars in it.'

In a daze Pat wandered to the door.

'Hey,' said Berners, 'don't forget your hat.'


III


Feeling the effects of his day outside the law, and of a tumbler
full of Berners' brandy, Pat sat in Bee McIlvaine's office.

'We've got to get a title,' said Bee gloomily.

She handed Pat the mimeograph offering fifty dollars reward and put
a pencil in his hand.  Pat stared at the paper unseeingly.

'How about it?' she asked.  'Who's got a title?'

There was a long silence.

'Test Pilot's been used, hasn't it?' he said with a vague tone.

'Wake up!  This isn't about aviation.'

'Well, I was just thinking it was a good title.'

'So's The Birth of a Nation.'

'But not for this picture,' Pat muttered.  'Birth of a Nation
wouldn't suit this picture.'

'But not for this picture,' Pat muttered.  'Birth of a Nation
wouldn't suit this picture.'

'Are you ribbing me?' demanded Bee.  'Or are you losing your mind?
This is serious.'

'Sure--I know.'  Feebly he scrawled words at the bottom of the
page.  'I've had a couple of drinks that's all.  My head'll clear
up in a minute.  I'm trying to think what have been the most
successful titles.  The trouble is they've all been used, like It
Happened One Night.'

Bee looked at him uneasily.  He was having trouble keeping his eyes
open and she did not want him to pass out in her office.  After a
minute she called Jack Berners.

'Could you possibly come up?  I've got some title ideas.'

Jack arrived with a sheaf of suggestions sent in from here and
there in the studio, but digging through them yielded no ore.

'How about it, Pat?  Got anything?'

Pat braced himself to an effort.

'I like It Happened One Morning,' he said--then looked desperately
at his scrawl on the mimeograph paper, 'or else--Grand Motel.'

Berners smiled.

'Grand Motel,' he repeated.  'By God!  I think you've got
something.  Grand Motel.'

'I said Grand Hotel,' said Pat.

'No, you didn't.  You said Grand Motel--and for my money it wins
the fifty.'

'I've got to go lie down,' announced Pat.  'I feel sick.'

'There's an empty office across the way.  That's a funny idea Pat,
Grand Motel--or else Motel Clerk.  How do you like that?'

As the fugitive quickened his step out the door Bee pressed the hat
into his hands.

'Good work, old timer,' she said.

Pat seized Mr Marcus' hat, and stood holding it there like a bowl
of soup.

'Feel--better--now,' he mumbled after a moment.  'Be back for the
money.'

And carrying his burden he shambled toward the lavatory.





FUN IN AN ARTIST'S STUDIO

Esquire (February 1941)


I


This was back in 1938 when few people except the Germans knew that
they had already won their war in Europe.  People still cared about
art and tried to make it out of everything from old clothes to
orange peel and that was how the Princess Dignanni found Pat.  She
wanted to make art out of him.

'No, not you, Mr DeTinc.' she said, 'I can't paint you.  You are a
very standardized product, Mr DeTinc.'

Mr DeTinc, who was a power in pictures and had even been
photographed with Mr Duchman, the Secret Sin specialist, stepped
smoothly out of the way.  He was not offended--in his whole life Mr
DeTinc had never been offended--but especially not now, for the
Princess did not want to paint Clark Gable or Spencer Rooney or
Vivien Leigh either.

She saw Pat in the commissary and found he was a writer, and asked
that he be invited to Mr DeTinc's party.  The Princess was a pretty
woman born in Boston, Massachusetts and Pat was forty-nine with red-
rimmed eyes and a soft purr of whiskey on his breath.

'You write scenarios, Mr Hobby?'

'I help,' said Pat.  'Takes more than one person to prepare a
script.'

He was flattered by this attention and not a little suspicious.  It
was only because his supervisor was a nervous wreck that he
happened to have a job at all.  His supervisor had forgotten a week
ago that he had hired Pat, and when Pat was spotted in the
commissary and told he was wanted at Mr DeTinc's house, the writer
had passed a mauvais quart d'heure.  It did not even look like the
kind of party that Pat had known in his prosperous days.  There was
not so much as a drunk passed out in the downstairs toilet.

'I imagine scenario writing is very well-paid,' said the Princess.

Pat glanced around to see who was within hearing.  Mr DeTinc had
withdrawn his huge bulk somewhat, but one of his apparently
independent eyes seemed fixed glittering on Pat.

'Very well paid,' said Pat--and he added in a lower voice, '--if
you can get it.'

The Princess seemed to understand and lowered her voice too.

'You mean writers have trouble getting work?'

He nodded.

'Too many of 'em get in these unions.'  He raised his voice a
little for Mr DeTinc's benefit.  'They're all Reds, most of these
writers.'

The Princess nodded.

'Will you turn your face a little to the light?' she said politely.
'There, that's fine.  You won't mind coming to my studio tomorrow,
will you?  Just to pose for me an hour?'

He scrutinized her again.

'Naked?' he asked cautiously.

'Oh, no,' she averred.  'Just the head.'

Mr DeTinc moved nearer and nodded.

'You ought to go.  Princess Dignanni is going to paint some of the
biggest stars here.  Going to paint Jack Benny and Baby Sandy and
Hedy Lamarr--isn't that a fact, Princess?'

The artist didn't answer.  She was a pretty good portrait painter
and she knew just how good she was and just how much of it was her
title.  She was hesitating between her several manners--Picasso's
rose period with a flash of Boldini, or straight Reginald Marsh.
But she knew what she was going to call it.  She was going to call
it Hollywood and Vine.


II


In spite of the reassurance that he would be clothed Pat approached
the rendezvous with uneasiness.  In his young and impressionable
years he had looked through a peep-hole into a machine where two
dozen postcards slapped before his eyes in sequence.  The story
unfolded was Fun in an Artist's Studio.  Even now with the strip
tease a legalized municipal project, he was a little shocked at the
remembrance, and when he presented himself next day at the
Princess's bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel it would not have
surprised him if she had met him in a turkish towel.  He was
disappointed.  She wore a smock and her black hair was brushed
straight back like a boy's.

Pat had stopped off for a couple of drinks on the way, but his
first words:  'How'ya Duchess?' failed to set a jovial note for the
occasion.

'Well, Mr Hobby,' she said coolly, 'it's nice of you to spare me an
afternoon.'

'We don't work too hard in Hollywood,' he assured her.  'Everything
is "Mañana"--in Spanish that means tomorrow.'

She led him forthwith into a rear apartment where an easel stood on
a square of canvas by the window.  There was a couch and they sat
down.

'I want to get used to you for a minute,' she said.  'Did you ever
pose before?'

'Do I look that way?'  He winked, and when she smiled he felt
better and asked:  'You haven't got a drink around, have you?'

The Princess hesitated.  She had wanted him to look as if he NEEDED
one.  Compromising, she went to the ice box and fixed him a small
highball.  She returned to find that he had taken off his coat and
tie and lay informally upon the couch.

'That IS better,' the Princess said.  'That shirt you're wearing.
I think they make them for Hollywood--like the special prints they
make for Ceylon and Guatemala.  Now drink this and we'll get to
work.'

'Why don't you have a drink too and make it friendly?' Pat
suggested.

'I had one in the pantry,' she lied.

'Married woman?' he asked.

'I have been married.  Now would you mind sitting on this stool?'

Reluctantly Pat got up, took down the highball, somewhat thwarted
by the thin taste, and moved to the stool.  'Now sit very still,'
she said.

He sat silent as she worked.  It was three o'clock.  They were
running the third race at Santa Anita and he had ten bucks on the
nose.  That made sixty he owed Louie, the studio bookie, and Louie
stood determinedly beside him at the pay window every Thursday.
This dame had good legs under the easel--her red lips pleased him
and the way her bare arms moved as she worked.  Once upon a time he
wouldn't have looked at a woman over twenty-five, unless it was a
secretary right in the office with him.  But the kids you saw
around now were snooty--always talking about calling the police.

'Please sit still, Mr Hobby.'

'What say we knock off,' he suggested.  'This work makes you
thirsty.'

The Princess had been painting half an hour.  Now she stopped and
stared at him a moment.

'Mr Hobby, you were loaned me by Mr DeTinc.  Why don't you act just
as if you were working over at the studio?  I'll be through in
another half-hour.'

'What do I get out of it?' he demanded, 'I'm no poser--I'm a
writer.'

'Your studio salary has not stopped,' she said, resuming her work.
'What does it matter if Mr DeTinc wants you to do this?'

'It's different.  You're a dame.  I've got my self-respect to think
of.'

'What do you expect me to do--flirt with you?'

'No--that's old stuff.  But I thought we could sit around and have
a drink.'

'Perhaps later,' she said, and then, 'Is this harder work than the
studio?  Am I so difficult to look at?'

'I don't mind looking at you but why couldn't we sit on the sofa?'

'You don't sit on the sofa at the studio.'

'Sure you do.  Listen, if you tried all the doors in the Writers'
Building you'd find a lot of them locked and don't you forget it.'

She stepped back and squinted at him.

'Locked?  To be undisturbed?'  She put down her brush.  'I'll get
you a drink.'

When she returned she stopped for a moment in the doorway--Pat had
removed his shirt and stood rather sheepishly in the middle of the
floor holding it toward her.

'Here's that shirt,' he said.  'You can have it.  I know where I
can get a lot more.'

For a moment longer she regarded him; then she took the shirt and
put it on the sofa.

'Sit down and let me finish,' she said.  As he hesitated she added,
'Then we'll have a drink together.'

'When'll that be?'

'Fifteen minutes.'

She worked quickly--several times she was content with the lower
face--several times she deliberated and started over.  Something
that she had seen in the commissary was missing.

'Been an artist a long time?' Pat asked.

'Many years.'

'Been around artists' studios a lot?'

'Quite a lot--I've had my own studios.'

'I guess a lot goes on around those studios.  Did you ever--'

He hesitated.

'Ever what?' she queried.

'Did you ever paint a naked man?'

'Don't talk for one minute, please.'  She paused with brush
uplifted, seemed to listen, then made a swift stroke and looked
doubtfully at the result.

'Do you know you're difficult to paint?' she said, laying down the
brush.

'I don't like this posing around,' he admitted.  'Let's call it a
day.'  He stood up.  'Why don't you--why don't you slip into
something so you'll be comfortable?'

The Princess smiled.  She would tell her friends this story--it
would sort of go with the picture, if the picture was any good,
which she now doubted.

'You ought to revise your methods,' she said.  'Do you have much
success with this approach?'

Pat lit a cigarette and sat down.

'If you were eighteen, see, I'd give you that line about being nuts
about you.'

'But why any line at all?'

'Oh, come off it!' he advised her.  'You wanted to paint me, didn't
you?'

'Yes.'

'Well, when a dame wants to paint a guy--'  Pat reached down and
undid his shoe strings, kicked his shoes onto the floor, put his
stockinged feet on the couch.  '--when a dame wants to see a guy
about something or a guy wants to see a dame, there's a payoff,
see.'

The Princess sighed.  'Well I seem to be trapped,' she said.  'But
it makes it rather difficult when a dame just wants to paint a
guy.'

'When a dame wants to paint a guy--'  Pat half closed his eyes,
nodded and flapped his hands expressively.  As his thumbs went
suddenly toward his suspenders, she spoke in a louder voice.

'Officer!'

There was a sound behind Pat.  He turned to see a young man in
khaki with shining black gloves, standing in the door.

'Officer, this man is an employee of Mr DeTinc's.  Mr DeTinc lent
him to me for the afternoon.'

The policeman looked at the staring image of guilt upon the couch.

'Get fresh?' he inquired.

'I don't want to prefer charges--I called the desk to be on the
safe side.  He was to pose for me in the nude and now he refuses.'
She walked casually to her easel.'  Mr Hobby, why don't you stop
this mock-modesty--you'll find a turkish towel in the bathroom.'

Pat reached stupidly for his shoes.  Somehow it flashed into his
mind that they were running the eighth race at Santa Anita--

'Shake it up, you,' said the cop.  'You heard what the lady said.'

Pat stood up vaguely and fixed a long poignant look on the
Princess.

'You told me--' he said hoarsely, 'you wanted to paint--'

'You told me I meant something else.  Hurry please.  And officer,
there's a drink in the pantry.'

. . . A few minutes later as Pat sat shivering in the centre of the
room his memory went back to those peep-shows of his youth--though
at the moment he could see little resemblance.  He was grateful at
least for the turkish towel, even now failing to realize that the
Princess was not interested in his shattered frame but in his face.

It wore the exact expression that had wooed her in the commissary,
the expression of Hollywood and Vine, the other self of Mr DeTinc--
and she worked fast while there was still light enough to paint by.





TWO OLD-TIMERS

Esquire (March 1941)


Phil Macedon, once the Star of Stars, and Pat Hobby, script writer,
had collided out on Sunset near the Beverly Hills Hotel.  It was
five in the morning and there was liquor in the air as they argued
and Sergeant Gaspar took them around to the station house.  Pat
Hobby, a man of forty-nine, showed fight, apparently because Phil
Macedon failed to acknowledge that they were old acquaintances.

He accidentally bumped Sergeant Gaspar who was so provoked that he
put him in a little barred room while they waited for the Captain
to arrive.

Chronologically Phil Macedon belonged between Eugene O'Brien and
Robert Taylor.  He was still a handsome man in his early fifties
and he had saved enough from his great days for a hacienda in the
San Fernando Valley; there he rested as full of honours, as
rolicksome and with the same purposes in life as Man o' War.

With Pat Hobby life had dealt otherwise.  After twenty-one years in
the industry, script and publicity, the accident found him driving
a 1933 car which had lately become the property of the North
Hollywood Finance and Loan Co.  And once, back in 1928, he had
reached a point of getting bids for a private swimming pool.

He glowered from his confinement, still resenting Macedon's failure
to acknowledge that they had ever met before.

'I suppose you don't remember Coleman,' he said sarcastically.  'Or
Connie Talmadge or Bill Corker or Allan Dwan.'

Macedon lit a cigarette with the sort of timing in which the silent
screen has never been surpassed, and offered one to Sergeant
Gaspar.

'Couldn't I come in tomorrow?' he asked.  'I have a horse to
exercise--'

'I'm sorry, Mr Macedon,' said the cop--sincerely for the actor was
an old favourite of his.  'The Captain is due here any minute.
After that we won't be holding YOU.'

'It's just a formality,' said Pat, from his cell.

'Yeah, it's just a--'  Sergeant Gaspar glared at Pat.  'It may not
be any formality for YOU.  Did you ever hear of the sobriety test?'

Macedon flicked his cigarette out the door and lit another.

'Suppose I come back in a couple of hours,' he suggested.

'No,' regretted Sergeant Gaspar.  'And since I have to detain you,
Mr Macedon, I want to take the opportunity to tell you what you
meant to me once.  It was that picture you made, The Final Push, it
meant a lot to every man who was in the war.'

'Oh, yes,' said Macedon, smiling.

'I used to try to tell my wife about the war--how it was, with the
shells and the machine guns--I was in there seven months with the
26th New England--but she never understood.  She'd point her finger
at me and say "Boom!  you're dead," and so I'd laugh and stop
trying to make her understand.'

'Hey, can I get out of here?' demanded Pat.

'You shut up!' said Gaspar fiercely.  'You probably wasn't in the
war.'

'I was in the Motion Picture Home Guard,' said Pat.  'I had bad
eyes.'

'Listen to him,' said Gaspar disgustedly.  'That's what all them
slackers say.  Well, the war was something.  And after my wife saw
that picture of yours I never had to explain to her.  She knew.
She always spoke different about it after that--never just pointed
her finger at me and said "Boom!"  I'll never forget the part where
you was in that shell hole.  That was so real it made my hands
sweat.'

'Thanks,' said Macedon graciously.  He lit another cigarette, 'You
see, I was in the war myself and I knew how it was.  I knew how it
felt.'

'Yes sir,' said Gaspar appreciatively.  'Well; I'm glad of the
opportunity to tell you what you did for me.  You--you explained
the war to my wife.'

'What are you talking about?' demanded Pat Hobby suddenly.  'That
war picture Bill Corker did in 1925?'

'There he goes again,' said Gaspar.  'Sure--The Birth of a Nation.
Now you pipe down till the Captain comes.'

'Phil Macedon knew me then all right,' said Pat resentfully, 'I
even watched him work on it one day.'

'I just don't happen to remember you, old man,' said Macedon
politely, 'I can't help that.'

'You remember the day Bill Corker shot that shell hole sequence
don't you?  Your first day on the picture?'

There was a moment's silence.

'When will the Captain be here?' Macedon asked.

'Any minute now,' Mr Macedon.'

'Well, I remember,' said Pat, '--because I was there when he had
that shell hole dug.  He was out there on the back lot at nine
o'clock in the morning with a gang of hunkies to dig the hole and
four cameras.  He called you up from a field telephone and told you
to go to the costumer and get into a soldier suit.  Now you
remember?'

'I don't load my mind with details, old man.'

'You called up that they didn't have one to fit you and Corker told
you to shut up and get into one anyhow.  When you got out to the
back lot you were sore as hell because your suit didn't fit.'

Macedon smiled charmingly.

'You have a most remarkable memory.  Are you sure you have the
right picture--and the right actor?' he asked.

'Am I!' said Pat grimly.  'I can see you right now.  Only you
didn't have much time to complain about the uniform because that
wasn't Corker's plan.  He always thought you were the toughest ham
in Hollywood to get anything natural out of--and he had a scheme.
He was going to get the heart of the picture shot by noon--before
you even knew you were acting.  He turned you around and shoved you
down into that shell hole on your fanny, and yelled "Camera".'

'That's a lie,' said Phil Macedon.  'I GOT down.'

'Then why did you start yelling?' demanded Pat.  'I can still hear
you:  "Hey, what's the idea!  Is this some -- -- gag?  You get me
out of here or I'll walk out on you!"

'--and all the time you were trying to claw your way up the side of
that pit, so damn mad you couldn't see.  You'd almost get up and
then you'd slide back and lie there with your face working--till
finally you began to bawl and all this time Bill had four cameras
on you.  After about twenty minutes you gave up and just lay there,
heaving.  Bill took a hundred feet of that and then he had a couple
of prop men pull you out.'

The police Captain had arrived in the squad car.  He stood in the
doorway against the first grey of dawn.

'What you got here, Sergeant?  A drunk?'

Sergeant Gaspar walked over to the cell, unlocked it and beckoned
Pat to come out.  Pat blinked a moment--then his eyes fell on Phil
Macedon and he shook his finger at him.

'So you see I DO know you,' he said.  'Bill Corker cut that piece
of film and titled it so you were supposed to be a doughboy whose
pal had just been killed.  You wanted to climb out and get at the
Germans in revenge, but the shells bursting all around and the
concussions kept knocking you back in.'

'What's it about?' demanded the Captain.

'I want to prove I know this guy,' said Pat.  'Bill said the best
moment in the picture was when Phil was yelling "I've al-READY
broken my first finger nail!"  Bill titled it "Ten Huns will go to
hell to shine your shoes!"'

'You've got here "collision with alcohol",' said the Captain
looking at the blotter.  'Let's take these guys down to the
hospital and give them the test.'

'Look here now,' said the actor, with his flashing smile, 'my
name's Phil Macedon.'

The Captain was a political appointee and very young.  He
remembered the name and the face but he was not especially
impressed because Hollywood was full of has-beens.

They all got into the squad car at the door.

After the test Macedon was held at the station house until friends
could arrange bail.  Pat Hobby was discharged but his car would not
run, so Sergeant Gaspar offered to drive him home.

'Where do you live?' he asked as they started off.

'I don't live anywhere tonight,' said Pat.  'That's why I was
driving around.  When a friend of mine wakes up I'll touch him for
a couple of bucks and go to a hotel.'

'Well now,' said Sergeant Gaspar, 'I got a couple of bucks that
ain't working.'

The great mansions of Beverly Hills slid by and Pat waved his hand
at them in salute.

'In the good old days,' he said, 'I used to be able to drop into
some of those houses day or night.  And Sunday mornings--'

'Is that all true you said in the station,' Gaspar asked, '--about
how they put him in the hole?'

'Sure, it is,' said Pat.  'That guy needn't have been so upstage.
He's just an old-timer like me.'





MIGHTIER THAN THE SWORD

Esquire (April 1941)


I


The swarthy man, with eyes that snapped back and forward on a
rubber band from the rear of his head, answered to the alias of
Dick Dale.  The tall, spectacled man who was put together like a
camel without a hump--and you missed the hump--answered to the name
of E. Brunswick Hudson.  The scene was a shoeshine stand,
insignificant unit of the great studio.  We perceive it through the
red-rimmed eyes of Pat Hobby who sat in the chair beside Director
Dale.

The stand was out of doors, opposite the commissary.  The voice of
E. Brunswick Hudson quivered with passion but it was pitched low so
as not to reach passers-by.

'I don't know what a writer like me is doing out here anyhow,' he
said, with vibrations.

Pat Hobby, who was an old-timer, could have supplied the answer,
but he had not the acquaintance of the other two.

'It's a funny business,' said Dick Dale, and to the shoe-shine boy,
'Use that saddle soap.'

'Funny!' thundered E., 'It's SUS-pect!  Here against my better
judgement I write just what you tell me--and the office tells me to
get out because we can't seem to agree.'

'That's polite,' explained Dick Dale.  'What do you want me to do--
knock you down?'

E. Brunswick Hudson removed his glasses.

'Try it!' he suggested.  'I weigh a hundred and sixty-two and I
haven't got an ounce of flesh on me.'  He hesitated and redeemed
himself from this extremity.  'I mean FAT on me.'

'Oh, to hell with that!' said Dick Dale contemptuously, 'I can't
mix it up with you.  I got to figure this picture.  You go back
East and write one of your books and forget it.'  Momentarily he
looked at Pat Hobby, smiling as if HE would understand, as if
anyone would understand except E. Brunswick Hudson.  'I can't tell
you all about pictures in three weeks.'

Hudson replaced his spectacles.

'When I DO write a book,' he said, 'I'll make you the laughing
stock of the nation.'

He withdrew, ineffectual, baffled, defeated.  After a minute Pat
spoke.

'Those guys can never get the idea,' he commented.  'I've never
seen one get the idea and I been in this business, publicity and
script, for twenty years.'

'You on the lot?' Dale asked.

Pat hesitated.

'Just finished a job,' he said.

That was five months before.

'What screen credits you got?' Dale asked.

'I got credits going all the way back to 1920.'

'Come up to my office,' Dick Dale said, 'I got something I'd like
to talk over--now that bastard is gone back to his New England
farm.  Why do they have to get a New England farm--with the whole
West not settled?'

Pat gave his second-to-last dime to the bootblack and climbed down
from the stand.


II


We are in the midst of technicalities.

'The trouble is this composer Reginald de Koven didn't have any
colour,' said Dick Dale.  'He wasn't deaf like Beethoven or a
singing waiter or get put in jail or anything.  All he did was
write music and all we got for an angle is that song O Promise Me.
We got to weave something around that--a dame promises him
something and in the end he collects.'

'I want time to think it over in my mind,' said Pat.  'If Jack
Berners will put me on the picture--'

'He'll put you on,' said Dick Dale.  'From now on I'm picking my
own writers.  What do you get--fifteen hundred?'  He looked at
Pat's shoes, 'Seven-fifty?'

Pat stared at him blankly for a moment; then out of thin air,
produced his best piece of imaginative fiction in a decade.

'I was mixed up with a producer's wife,' he said, 'and they ganged
up on me.  I only get three-fifty now.'

In some ways it was the easiest job he had ever had.  Director Dick
Dale was a type that, fifty years ago, could be found in any
American town.  Generally he was the local photographer, usually he
was the originator of small mechanical contrivances and a leader in
bizarre local movements, almost always he contributed verse to the
local press.  All the most energetic embodiments of this 'Sensation
Type' had migrated to Hollywood between 1910 and 1930, and there
they had achieved a psychological fulfilment inconceivable in any
other time or place.  At last, and on a large scale, they were able
to have their way.  In the weeks that Pat Hobby and Mabel Hatman,
Mr Dale's script girl, sat beside him and worked on the script, not
a movement, not a word went into it that was not Dick Dale's
coinage.  Pat would venture a suggestion, something that was
'Always good'.

'Wait a minute!  Wait a minute!'  Dick Dale was on his feet, his
hands outspread.  'I seem to see a dog.'  They would wait, tense
and breathless, while he saw a dog.

'Two dogs.'

A second dog took its place beside the first in their obedient
visions.

'We open on a dog on a leash--pull the camera back to show another
dog--now they're snapping at each other.  We pull back further--the
leashes are attached to tables--the tables tip over.  See it?'

Or else, out of a clear sky.

'I seem to see De Koven as a plasterer's apprentice.'

'Yes.'  This hopefully.

'He goes to Santa Anita and plasters the walls, singing at his
work.  Take that down, Mabel.'  He continued on . . .

In a month they had the requisite hundred and twenty pages.
Reginald de Koven, it seemed, though not an alcoholic, was too fond
of 'The Little Brown Jug'.  The father of the girl he loved had
died of drink, and after the wedding when she found him drinking
from the Little Brown Jug, nothing would do but that she should go
away, for twenty years.  He became famous and she sang his songs as
Maid Marian but he never knew it was the same girl.

The script, marked 'Temporary Complete.  From Pat Hobby' went up to
the head office.  The schedule called for Dale to begin shooting in
a week.

Twenty-four hours later he sat with his staff in his office, in an
atmosphere of blue gloom.  Pat Hobby was the least depressed.  Four
weeks at three-fifty, even allowing for the two hundred that had
slipped away at Santa Anita, was a far cry from the twenty cents he
had owned on the shoeshine stand.

'That's pictures, Dick,' he said consolingly.  'You're up--you're
down--you're in, you're out.  Any old-timer knows.'

'Yes,' said Dick Dale absently.  'Mabel, phone that E. Brunswick
Hudson.  He's on his New England farm--maybe milking bees.'

In a few minutes she reported.

'He flew into Hollywood this morning, Mr Dale.  I've located him at
the Beverly Wilshire Hotel.'

Dick Dale pressed his ear to the phone.  His voice was bland and
friendly as he said:

'Mr Hudson, there was one day here you had an idea I liked.  You
said you were going to write it up.  It was about this De Koven
stealing his music from a sheepherder up in Vermont.  Remember?'

'Yes.'

'Well, Berners wants to go into production right away, or else we
can't have the cast, so we're on the spot, if you know what I mean.
Do you happen to have that stuff?'

'You remember when I brought it to you?' Hudson asked.  'You kept
me waiting two hours--then you looked at it for two minutes.  Your
neck hurt you--I think it needed wringing.  God, how it hurt you.
That was the only nice thing about that morning.'

'In picture business--'

'I'm so glad you're stuck.  I wouldn't tell you the story of The
Three Bears for fifty grand.'

As the phones clicked Dick Dale turned to Pat.

'Goddam writers!' he said savagely.  'What do we pay you for?
Millions--and you write a lot of tripe I can't photograph and get
sore if we don't read your lousy stuff!  How can a man make
pictures when they give me two bastards like you and Hudson.  How?
How do you think--you old whiskey bum!'

Pat rose--took a step toward the door.  He didn't know, he said.

'Get out of here!' cried Dick Dale.  'You're off the payroll.  Get
off the lot.'

Fate had not dealt Pat a farm in New England, but there was a café
just across from the studio where bucolic dreams blossomed in
bottles if you had the money.  He did not like to leave the lot,
which for many years had been home for him, so he came back at six
and went up to his office.  It was locked.  He saw that they had
already allotted it to another writer--the name on the door was E.
Brunswick Hudson.

He spent an hour in the commissary, made another visit to the bar,
and then some instinct led him to a stage where there was a bedroom
set.  He passed the night upon a couch occupied by Claudette
Colbert in the fluffiest ruffles only that afternoon.

Morning was bleaker, but he had a little in his bottle and almost a
hundred dollars in his pocket.  The horses were running at Santa
Anita and he might double it by night.

On his way out of the lot he hesitated beside the barber shop but
he felt too nervous for a shave.  Then he paused, for from the
direction of the shoeshine stand he heard Dick Dale's voice.

'Miss Hatman found your other script, and it happens to be the
property of the company.'

E. Brunswick Hudson stood at the foot of the stand.

'I won't have my name used,' he said.

'That's good.  I'll put her name on it.  Berners thinks it's great,
if the De Koven family will stand for it.  Hell--the sheepbreeder
never would have been able to market those tunes anyhow.  Ever hear
of any sheepherder drawing down jack from ASCAP?'

Hudson took off his spectacles.

'I weigh a hundred and sixty-three--'

Pat moved in closer.

'Join the army,' said Dale contemptuously, 'I got no time for
mixing it up.  I got to make a picture.'  His eyes fell on Pat.
'Hello old-timer.'

'Hello Dick,' said Pat smiling.  Then knowing the advantage of the
psychological moment he took his chance.

'When do we work?' he said.

'How much?' Dick Dale asked the shoeshine boy--and to Pat, 'It's
all done.  I promised Mabel a screen credit for a long time.  Look
me up some day when you got an idea.'

He hailed someone by the barber shop and hurried off.  Hudson and
Hobby, men of letters who had never met, regarded each other.
There were tears of anger in Hudson's eyes.

'Authors get a tough break out here,' Pat said sympathetically.
'They never ought to come.'

'Who'd make up the stories--these feebs?'

'Well anyhow, not authors,' said Pat.  'They don't want authors.
They want writers--like me.'




PAT HOBBY'S COLLEGE DAYS

Esquire (May 1941)


I


The afternoon was dark.  The walls of Topanga Canyon rose sheer on
either side.  Get rid of it she must.  The clank clank in the back
seat frightened her.  Evylyn did not like the business at all.  It
was not what she came out here to do.  Then she thought of Mr
Hobby.  He believed in her, trusted her--and she was doing this for
him.

But the mission was arduous.  Evylyn Lascalles left the canyon and
cruised along the inhospitable shores of Beverly Hills.  Several
times she turned up alleys, several times she parked beside vacant
lots--but always some pedestrian or loiterer threw her into a mood
of nervous anxiety.  Once her heart almost stopped as she was eyed
with appreciation--or was it suspicion--by a man who looked like a
detective.

--He had no right to ask me this, she said to herself.  Never
again.  I'll tell him so.  Never again.

Night was fast descending.  Evylyn Lascalles had never seen it come
down so fast.  Back to the canyon then, to the wild, free life.
She drove up a paint-box corridor which gave its last pastel shades
to the day.  And reached a certain security at a bend overlooking
plateau land far below.

Here there could be no complication.  As she threw each article
over the cliff it would be as far removed from her as if she were
in a different state of the Union.

Miss Lascalles was from Brooklyn.  She had wanted very much to come
to Hollywood and be a secretary in pictures--now she wished that
she had never left her home.

On with the job though--she must part with her cargo--as soon as
this next car passed the bend . . .


II


. . . Meanwhile her employer, Pat Hobby, stood in front of the
barber shop talking to Louie, the studio bookie.  Pat's four weeks
at two-fifty would be up tomorrow and he had begun to have that
harassed and aghast feeling of those who live always on the edge of
solvency.

'Four lousy weeks on a bad script,' he said.  'That's all I've had
in six months.'

'How do you live?' asked Louie--without too much show of interest.

'I don't live.  The days go by, the weeks go by.  But who cares?
Who cares--after twenty years.'

'You had a good time in your day,' Louie reminded him.

Pat looked after a dress extra in a shimmering lamé gown.

'Sure,' he admitted, 'I had three wives.  All anybody could want.'

'You mean THAT was one of your wives?' asked Louie.

Pat peered after the disappearing figure.

'No-o.  I didn't say THAT was one.  But I've had plenty of them
feeding out of my pocket.  Not now though--a man of forty-nine is
not considered human.'

'You've got a cute little secretary,' said Louie.  'Look Pat, I'll
give you a tip--'

'Can't use it,' said Pat, 'I got fifty cents.'

'I don't mean that kind of tip.  Listen--Jack Berners wants to make
a picture about U.W.C. because he's got a kid there that plays
basketball.  He can't get a story.  Why don't you go over and see
the Athaletic Superintendent named Doolan at U.W.C.?  That
superintendent owes me three grand on the nags, and he could maybe
give you an idea for a college picture.  And then you bring it back
and sell it to Berners.  You're on salary, ain't you?'

'Till tomorrow,' said Pat gloomily.

'Go and see Jim Kresge that hangs out in the Campus Sport Shop.
He'll introduce you to the Athaletic Superintendent.  Look, Pat, I
got to make a collection now.  Just remember, Pat, that Doolan owes
me three grand.'


III


It didn't seem hopeful to Pat but it was better than nothing.
Returning for his coat to his room in the Writers' Building he was
in time to pick up a plainting telephone.

'This is Evylyn,' said a fluttering voice.  'I can't get rid of it
this afternoon.  There's cars on every road--'

'I can't talk about it here,' said Pat quickly, 'I got to go over
to U.W.C. on a notion.'

'I've tried,' she wailed, '--and TRIED!  And every time, some car
comes along--'

'Aw, please!'  He hung up--he had enough on his mind.

For years Pat had followed the deeds of 'the Trojums' of U.S.C. and
the almost as fabulous doings of 'the Roller Coasters', who
represented the Univ. of the Western Coast.  His interest was not
so much physiological, tactical or intellectual as it was
mathematical--but the Rollers had cost him plenty in their day--and
thus it was with a sense of vague proprietorship that he stepped
upon the half De Mille, half Aztec campus.

He located Kresge who conducted him to Superintendent Kit Doolan.
Mr Doolan, a famous ex-tackle, was in excellent humour.  With five
coloured giants in this year's line, none of them quite old enough
for pensions, but all men of experience, his team was in a fair way
to conquer his section.

'Glad to be of help to your studio,' he said.  'Glad to help Mr
Berners--or Louie.  What can I do for you?  You want to make a
picture? . . .  Well, we can always use publicity.  Mr Hobby, I got
a meeting of the Faculty Committee in just five minutes and perhaps
you'd like to tell them your notion.'

'I don't know,' said Pat doubtfully.  'What I thought was maybe I
could have a spiel with you.  We could go somewhere and hoist one.'

'Afraid not,' said Doolan jovially.  'If those smarties smelt
liquor on me--Boy!  Come on over to the meeting--somebody's been
getting away with watches and jewellery on the campus and we're
sure it's a student.'

Mr Kresge, having played his role, got up to leave.

'Like something good for the fifth tomorrow?'

'Not me,' said Mr Doolan.

'You, Mr Hobby?'

'Not me,' said Pat.


IV


Ending their alliance with the underworld, Pat Hobby and
Superintendent Doolan walked down the corridor of the Administration
Building.  Outside the Dean's office Doolan said:  'As soon as
I can, I'll bring you in and introduce you.'  As an accredited
representative neither of Jack Berners' nor of the studio, Pat
waited with a certain malaise.  He did not look forward to
confronting a group of highbrows but he remembered that he bore
an humble but warming piece of merchandise in his threadbare
overcoat.  The Dean's assistant had left her desk to take notes at
the conference so he repleated his calories with a long, gagging
draught.

In a moment, there was a responsive glow and he settled down in his
chair, his eye fixed on the door marked:


                      SAMUEL K. WISKETH

                  DEAN OF THE STUDENT BODY


It might be a somewhat formidable encounter.

. . . but why?  There were stuffed shirts--everybody knew that.
They had college degrees but they could be bought.  If they'd play
ball with the studio they'd get a lot of good publicity for U.W.C.
And that meant bigger salaries for them, didn't it, and more jack?

The door to the conference room opened and closed tentatively.  No
one came out but Pat sat up and readied himself.  Representing the
fourth biggest industry in America, or ALMOST representing it, he
must not let a bunch of highbrows stare him down.  He was not
without an inside view of higher education--in his early youth he
had once been the 'Buttons' in the DKE House at the University of
Pennsylvania.  And with encouraging chauvinism he assured himself
that Pennsylvania had it over this pioneer enterprise like a tent.

The door opened--a flustered young man with beads of sweat on his
forehead came tearing out, tore through--and disappeared.  Mr
Doolan stood calmly in the doorway.

'All right, Mr Hobby,' he said.

Nothing to be scared of.  Memories of old college days continued to
flood over Pat as he walked in.  And instantaneously, as the juice
of confidence flowed through his system, he had his idea . . .

'. . . it's more of a realistic idea,' he was saying five minutes
later.  'Understand?'

Dean Wiskith, a tall, pale man with an earphone, seemed to
understand--if not exactly to approve.  Pat hammered in his point
again.

'It's up-to-the-minute,' he said patiently, 'what we call "a
topical".  You admit that young squirt who went out of here was
stealing watches, don't you?'

The faculty committee, all except Doolan, exchanged glances, but no
one interrupted.

'There you are,' went on Pat triumphantly.  'You turn him in to the
newspapers.  But here's the twist.  In the Picture we make it turns
out he steals the watches to support his young BRO-ther--and his
young brother is the mainstay of the football team!  He's the
climax runner.  We probably try to borrow Tyrone Power but we use
one of YOUR players as a double.'

Pat paused, trying to think of everything.

'--of course, we've got to release it in the southern states, so
it's got to be one of your players that's white.'

There was an unquiet pause.  Mr Doolan came to his rescue.

'Not a bad idea,' he suggested.

'It's an appalling idea,' broke out Dean Wiskith.  'It's--'

Doolan's face tightened slowly.

'Wait a minute,' he said.  'Who's telling WHO around here?  You
listen to him!'

The Dean's assistant, who had recently vanished from the room at
the call of a buzzer, had reappeared and was whispering in the
Dean's ear.  The latter started.

'Just a minute, Mr Doolan,' he said.  He turned to the other
members of the committee.

'The proctor has a disciplinary case outside and he can't legally
hold the offender.  Can we settle it first?  And then get back to
this--'  He glared at Mr Doolan,'--to this preposterous idea?'

At his nod the assistant opened the door.

This proctor, thought Pat, ranging back to his days on the
vineclad, leafy campus, looked like all proctors, an intimidated
cop, a scarcely civilized beast of prey.

'Gentlemen,' the proctor said, with delicately modulated respect,
'I've got something that can't be explained away.'  He shook his
head, puzzled, and then continued:  'I know it's all wrong--but I
can't seem to get to the point of it.  I'd like to turn it over to
YOU--I'll just show you the evidence and the offender . . .  Come
in, you.'

As Evylyn Lascalles entered, followed shortly by a big clinking
pillow cover which the proctor deposited beside her, Pat thought
once more of the elm-covered campus of the University of
Pennsylvania.  He wished passionately that he were there.  He
wished it more than anything in the world.  Next to that he wished
that Doolan's back, behind which he tried to hide by a shifting of
his chair, were broader still.

'There you are!' she cried gratefully.  'Oh, Mr Hobby--Thank God!
I couldn't get rid of them--and I couldn't take them home--my
mother would kill me.  So I came here to find you--and this man
packed into the back seat of my car.'

'What's in that sack?' demanded Dean Wiskith.  'Bombs?  What?'

Seconds before the proctor had picked up the sack and bounced it on
the floor, so that it gave out a clear unmistakable sound, Pat
could have told them.  There were dead soldiers--pints, half-pints,
quarts--the evidence of four strained weeks at two-fifty--empty
bottles collected from his office drawers.  Since his contract was
up tomorrow he had thought it best not to leave such witnesses
behind.

Seeking for escape his mind reached back for the last time to those
careless days of fetch and carry at the University of Pennsylvania.

'I'll take it,' he said rising.

Slinging the sack over his shoulder, he faced the faculty committee
and said surprisingly:

'Think it over.'


V


'We did,' Mr Doolan told his wife that night.  'But we never made
head nor tail of it.'

'It's kind of spooky,' said Mrs Doolan.  'I hope I don't dream
tonight.  The poor man with that sack!  I keep thinking he'll be
down in purgatory--and they'll make him carve a ship in EVERY ONE
of those bottles--before he can go to heaven.'

'Don't!' said Doolan quickly.  'You'll have ME dreaming.  There
were plenty bottles.'


	
Mr. Cass knew he couldn't go to sleep so he put his tie on again and went back to the lobby. The guests were all gone to bed but a little aura of activity seemed to linger about a half-finished picture puzzle, and the night watchman was putting a big log on the fire.

Mr. Cass limped slowly across the soft carpet, stopped behind him and grunted, "Heavy?"

The watchman, a wiry old mountaineer, looked around sharply.

"A hundred pound. It's wet—it'll be one o'clock before it's burning good."

Mr. Cass let himself into a chair. Last year he had been active, driving his own car—but he had suffered a stroke before coming South last month and now life was like waiting for an unwelcome train. He was very lonely.

The watchman built burning chunks about the wet log.

"Thought you was somebody else when you came in," he said.

"Who did you think I was?"

"I thought you was the fella who's always coming in late. First night I was on duty he came in at two without any noise and give me a start. Every night he comes in late."

After a pause Mr. Cass asked:

"What's his name?"

"I never did ask him his name."

Another pause. The fire leapt into a premature, short-lived glow.

"How do you know he's a guest here?"

"Oh, he's a guest here." But the watchman considered the matter for the first time. "I hear him go down the corridor and around the corner and then I hear his door shut."

"He may be a burglar," said Mr. Cass.

"Oh, he's no burglar. He said he'd been coming here a long time."

"Did he tell you he wasn't a burglar?"

The watchman laughed.

"I never asked him that."

The log slipped and the old man adjusted it; Mr. Cass envied his strength. It seemed to him that if he had strength he could run out of here, hurry along the roads of the world, the roads that led back, and not sit waiting.

Almost every evening he played bridge with the two clerks, and one night last week he simply passed away during a bridge hand, shrinking up through space, up through the ceilings like a wisp of smoke, looking back, looking down at his body hunched at the table, his white fist clutching the cards. He heard the bids and his own voice speaking—then the two clerks were helping him into his room and one of them sat with him till the doctor came. After awhile Mr. Cass had to go to the bathroom and he decided to go to the public one. It took him some time. When he came back to the lobby the watchman said:

"That fella came in late again. I found out he's in number nineteen."

"What's his name?"

"I didn't like to ask him that—I knew I could find out from his number."

Mr. Cass sat down.

"I'm number eighteen," he said. "I thought there were just some women next to me."

The watchman went behind the desk to the mail rack. After a moment he reported.

"Funny thing—his box ain't here. There's number eighteen, that's Mr. Cass—"

"That's me."

"—and the next one is twenty, on the second floor. I must of understood him wrong."

"I told you he was a burglar. What did he look like?"

"Well, now he wasn't an old man and he wasn't a young man. He seemed like he'd been sick and he had little holes all over his face."

Despite its inadequacy the description somehow conjured up a picture for Mr. Cass. His partner, John Canisius, had never looked old or young and he had little holes in his face.

Suddenly Mr. Cass felt the same sensation stealing over him that he had felt the other night. Dimly he was aware that the watchman had gone to the door and dimly he heard his own voice saying:

"Leave it open;" then the cold air swept in and his spirit left him and romped around the room with it.

He saw John Canisius come in the open door and look at him and advance toward him, and then realized it was the watchman, pouring a paper cup of water into his mouth and spilling it on his collar.

"Thanks."

"Feel all right now?"

"Did I faint?" he muttered.

"You fell over kind of funny. Reckon I better help you get back into your room."

At the door of number eighteen Mr. Cass halted and pointed his cane at the room next door.

"What's that number?"

"Seventeen. And that one without a number is the manager's rooms. There ain't any nineteen."

"Do you think I'd better go in?"

"Sure thing." The watchman lowered his voice. "If you're thinking about that fella, I must of heard him wrong. I can't go looking for him tonight."

"He's in here," said Mr. Cass.

"No, he ain't."

"Yes, he is. He's waiting for me."

"Shucks, I'll go in with you."

He opened the door, turned on the light and took a quick look around.

"See—ain't nobody here."

Mr. Cass slept well and the next day was full Spring, so he decided to go out. It took him a long time to walk down the hill from the hotel and his progress across the double tracks took a good three minutes and attracted solicitous attention, but it was practically a country stroll compared to his negotiation of the highway which was accompanied by a great caterwauling of horns and screech of brakes. A welcoming committee waited him on the curb and helped him into the drug store where, exhausted by his adventure, he called a taxi to go home.

Because of this he fell asleep while undressing and waking at twelve felt dismal and oppressed.

Finding it difficult to rise he rang, and the night watchman answered the bell.

"Glad to help you, Mr. Cass, if you'll wait five minutes. It's turned cold again and I want to get in a big log of wood."

"Oh," said Mr. Cass, and then, "Has the guest come in yet?"

"He just got in now."

"Did you ask him if he's a burglar?"

"He's no burglar, Mr. Cass. He's a nice fella. He's going to help me with this big log. I'll be right back."

"Did he say what room—" But the watchman was gone and Mr. Cass could only wait.

He waited five minutes, he waited ten. Then he gradually realized that the watchman was not coming back. It was plain that the watchman had been sent for.

Everyone tried to keep distressing things from Mr. Cass, and it was not until the following evening that he heard what had happened from some whispering at the desk.

The man had collapsed trying to lift a log too heavy for him. Mr. Cass said nothing because he knew that old people have to be careful what they say. Only he knew the watchman had not been alone.

After Easter the hotel's short season faded out and it was not worth while to hire a new watchman, but Mr. Cass continued to have lonely nights and often he sat in the lobby after the other guests went to bed. One April night he dozed there for awhile, awakening to find that it was after two and he was not alone in the lobby.

The current of cooler air might have roused him, for a man he did not know had just come in the door.

The man was of no special age but even by the single light left burning Mr. Cass could see that he was a pale man, that there were little holes in his face like the ravages of some disease and he did not look like John Canisius, his partner.

"Good evening," said the stranger.

"Hm," said Mr. Cass, and then as the man turned down the corridor he spoke up in a strong voice:

"You're out late."

"Yes, quite late."

"You a guest here?"

"Yes."

Mr. Cass dragged himself to his feet and stood leaning on his cane.

"I suppose you live in room nineteen," he said.

"As it happens, I do."

"You needn't lie to me," said Mr. Cass, "I'm not an ignorant mountaineer. Are you a burglar—or did you come for some one?"

The man's face seemed to grow even whiter.

"I don't understand you," he said.

"In any case I want you to get out of here," said Mr. Cass. He was growing angry and it gave him a certain strength. "Otherwise I'm going to arouse the hotel."

The stranger hesitated.

"There's no need of doing that," he said quietly. "That would be—"

Mr. Cass raised his cane menacingly, held it up a moment, then let it down slowly.

"Wait a minute," he said, "I may want you to do something for me."

"What is it?"

"It's getting cold in here. I want you to help me bring in a log to put on the fire."

The stranger was startled by the request.

"Are you strong enough?" he asked.

"Of course I'm strong enough," Mr. Cass stood very upright, throwing back his shoulders.

"I can get it alone."

"No, you can't. You help me or I'll arouse the house."

They went out and down the back steps, Mr. Cass refusing the stranger's arm.

He found, in fact, that he could walk much better than he thought and he left his cane by the stoop so that both hands were free for the log.

It was dark in the woodshed and the stranger lit a match. There was only one log, but it was over a hundred pounds, quite big enough to amply fill the small fireplace.

"Hadn't I better do this?" said the stranger.

Mr. Cass did not answer, but bent and put his hands on the rough surface. The touch seemed to stimulate him, he felt no pain or strain in his back at all.

"Catch hold there," he ordered.

"Are you sure—"

"Catch hold!"

Mr. Cass took a long breath of cool air into his lungs and shifted his hands on the log. His arms tightened, then his shoulders and the muscles on his back.

"Lift," he grunted. And suddenly the log moved, came up with him as he straightened, and for a triumphant moment he stood there squarely, cradling it against him. Then out into space he went, very slowly, carrying the log which seemed lighter and lighter, seeming to melt away in his arms. He wanted to call back some word of mockery and derision to the stranger, but he was already too far away, out on the old roads that led back where he wished to be.

Everyone in the hotel was sorry to lose Mr. Cass, the manager especially, for he read the open letter on Mr. Cass' desk saying that no further money could be remitted that year.

"What a shame. He'd been here so many years that we'd have been glad to carry him awhile until he made arrangements."

Mr. Cass was the right sort of client—it was because of such guests that the manager had tried to keep his brother out of sight all winter.

The brother, a tough number, was considerably shaken by what had happened.

"That's what I get for trying to be a help," he said, "I should have known better. Both those old guys looked exactly like death itself to me."

THE END


The last prisoner was a man—his masculinity was not much in evidence, it is true; he would perhaps better be described as a "person," but he undoubtedly came under that general heading and was so classified in the court record. He was a small, somewhat shriveled, somewhat wrinkled American who had been living along for probably thirty-five years.

His body looked as if it had been left by accident in his suit the last time it went to the tailor's and pressed out with hot, heavy irons to its present sharpness. His face was merely a face. It was the kind of face that makes up crowds, gray in color with ears that shrank back against the head as if fearing the clamor of the city, and with the tired, tired eyes of one whose forebears have been underdogs for five thousand years.

Brought into the dock between two towering Celts in executive blue he seemed like the representative of a long extinct race, a very fagged out and shriveled elf who had been caught poaching on a buttercup in Central Park.

"What's your name?"

"Stuart."

"Stuart what?"

"Charles David Stuart."

The clerk recorded it without comment in the book of little crimes and great mistakes.

"Age?"

"Thirty."

"Occupation?"

"Night cashier."

The clerk paused and looked at the judge. The judge yawned.

"Wha's charge?" he asked.

"The charge is"—the clerk looked down at the notation in his hand—"the charge is that he pushed a lady in the face."

"Pleads guilty?"

"Yes."

The preliminaries were now disposed of. Charles David Stuart, looking very harmless and uneasy, was on trial for assault and battery.

The evidence disclosed, rather to the judge's surprise, that the lady whose face had been pushed was not the defendant's wife.

On the contrary the victim was an absolute stranger—the prisoner had never seen her before in his life. His reasons for the assault had been two: first, that she talked during a theatrical performance; and, second, that she kept joggling the back of his chair with her knees. When this had gone on for some time he had turned around and without any warning pushed her severely in the face.

"Call the plaintiff," said the judge, sitting up a little in his chair. "Let's hear what she has to say."

The courtroom, sparsely crowded and unusually languid in the hot afternoon, had become suddenly alert. Several men in the back of the room moved into benches near the desk and a young reporter leaned over the clerk's shoulder and copied the defendant's name on the back of an envelope.

The plaintiff arose. She was a woman just this side of fifty with a determined, rather overbearing face under yellowish white hair. Her dress was a dignified black and she gave the impression of wearing glasses; indeed the young reporter, who believed in observation, had so described her in his mind before he realized that no such adornment sat upon her thin, beaked nose.

It developed that she was Mrs. George D. Robinson of 1219 Riverside Drive. She had always been fond of the theater and sometimes she went to the matinee. There had been two ladies with her yesterday, her cousin, who lived with her, and a Miss Ingles—both ladies were in court.

This is what had occurred:

As the curtain went up for the first act a woman sitting behind had asked her to remove her hat. Mrs. Robinson had been about to do so anyhow, and so she was a little annoyed at the request and had remarked as much to Miss Ingles and her cousin. At this point she had first noticed the defendant who was sitting directly in front, for he had turned around and looked at her quickly in a most insolent way. Then she had forgotten his existence until just before the end of the act when she made some remark to Miss Ingles—when suddenly he had stood up, turned around and pushed her in the face.

"Was it a hard blow?" asked the judge at this point.

"A hard blow!" said Mrs. Robinson indignantly, "I should say it was. I had hot and cold applications on my nose all night."

"—on her nose all night."

This echo came from the witness bench where two faded ladies were leaning forward eagerly and nodding their heads in corroboration.

"Were the lights on?" asked the judge.

No, but everyone around had seen the incident and some people had taken hold of the man right then and there.

This concluded the case for the plaintiff. Her two companions gave similar evidence and in the minds of everyone in the courtroom the incident defined itself as one of unprovoked and inexcusable brutality.

The one element which did not fit in with this interpretation was the physiognomy of the prisoner himself. Of any one of a number of minor offenses he might have appeared guilty—pickpockets were notoriously mild-mannered, for example—but of this particular assault in a crowded theater he seemed physically incapable. He did not have the kind of voice or the kind of clothes or the kind of mustache that went with such an attack.

"Charles David Stuart," said the judge, "you've heard the evidence against you?"

"Yes."

"And you plead guilty?"

"Yes."

"Have you anything to say before I sentence you?"

"No." The prisoner shook his head hopelessly. His small hands were trembling.

"Not one word in extenuation of this unwarranted assault?"

The prisoner appeared to hesitate.

"Go on," said the judge. "Speak up—it's your last chance."

"Well," said Stuart with an effort, "she began talking about the plumber's stomach."

There was a stir in the courtroom. The judge leaned forward.

"What do you mean?"

"Why, at first she was only talking about her own stomach to—to those two ladies there"—he indicated the cousin and Miss Ingles—"and that wasn't so bad. But when she began talking about the plumber's stomach it got different."

"How do you mean—different?"

Charles Stuart looked around helplessly.

"I can't explain," he said, his mustache wavering a little, "but when she began talking about the plumber's stomach you—you had to listen."

A snicker ran about the courtroom. Mrs. Robinson and her attendant ladies on the bench were visibly horrified. The guard took a step nearer as if at a nod from the judge he would whisk off this criminal to the dingiest dungeon in Manhattan.

But much to his surprise the judge settled himself comfortably in his chair.

"Tell us about it, Stuart," he said not unkindly. "Tell us the whole story from the beginning."

This request was a shock to the prisoner and for a moment he looked as though he would have preferred the order of condemnation. Then after one nervous look around the room he put his hands on the edge of the desk, like the paws of a fox-terrier just being trained to sit up, and began to speak in a quivering voice.

"Well, I'm a night cashier, your honor, in T. Cushmael's restaurant on Third Avenue. I'm not married"—he smiled a little, as if he knew they had all guessed that—"and so on Wednesday and Saturday afternoons I usually go to the matinee. It helps to pass the time till dinner. There's a drug store, maybe you know, where you can get tickets for a dollar sixty-five to some of the shows and I usually go there and pick out something. They got awful prices at the box office now." He gave out a long silent whistle and looked feelingly at the judge. "Four or five dollars for one seat—"

The judge nodded his head.

"Well," continued Charles Stuart, "when I pay even a dollar sixty-five I expect to see my money's worth. About two weeks ago I went to one of these here mystery plays where they have one fella that did the crime and nobody knows who it was. Well, the fun at a thing like that is to guess who did it. And there was a lady behind me that'd been there before and she gave it all away to the fella with her. Gee"—his face fell and he shook his head from side to side—"I like to died right there. When I got home to my room I was so mad that they had to come and ask me to stop walking up and down. Dollar sixty-five of my money gone for nothing.

"Well, Wednesday came around again, and this show was one show I wanted to see. I'd been wanting to see it for months, and every time I went into the drug store I asked them if they had any tickets. But they never did." He hesitated. "So Tuesday I took a chance and went over to the box office and got a seat. Two seventy-five it cost me." He nodded impressively. "Two seventy-five. Like throwing money away. But I wanted to see that show."

Mrs. Robinson in the front row rose suddenly to her feet.

"I don't see what all this story has to do with it," she broke out a little shrilly. "I'm sure I don't care—"

The judge brought his gavel sharply down on the desk.

"Sit down, please," he said.

"This is a court of law, not a matinee."

Mrs. Robinson sat down, drawing herself up into a thin line and sniffing a little as if to say she'd see about this after a while. The judge pulled out his watch.

"Go on," he said to Stuart. "Take all the time you want."

"I got there first," continued Stuart in a flustered voice. "There wasn't anybody in there but me and the fella that was cleaning up. After awhile the audience came in, and it got dark and the play started, but just as I was all settled in my seat and ready to have a good time I heard an awful row directly behind me. Somebody had asked this lady"—he pointed directly to Mrs. Robinson—"to remove her hat like she should of done anyhow and she was sore about it. She kept telling the two ladies that was with her how she'd been at the theater before and knew enough to take off her hat. She kept that up for a long time, five minutes maybe, and then every once in a while she'd think of something new and say it in a loud voice. So finally I turned around and looked at her because I wanted to see what a lady looked like that could be so inconsiderate as that. Soon as I turned back she began on me. She said I was insolent and then she said 'Tchk! Tchk! Tchk!' a lot with her tongue and the two ladies that was with her said 'Tchk! Tchk! Tchk!' until you could hardly hear yourself think, much less listen to the play. You'd have thought I'd done something terrible.

"By and by, after they calmed down and I began to catch up with what was doing on the stage, I felt my seat sort of creak forward and then creak back again and I knew the lady had her feet on it and I was in for a good rock. Gosh!" he wiped his pale, narrow brow on which the sweat had gathered thinly, "it was awful. I hope to tell you I wished I'd never come at all. Once I got excited at a show and rocked a man's chair without knowing it and I was glad when he asked me to stop. But I knew this lady wouldn't be glad if I asked her. She'd of just rocked harder than ever."

Some time before, the population of the courtroom had begun stealing glances at the middle-aged lady with yellowish-white hair. She was of a deep, life-like lobster color with rage.

"It got to be near the end of the act," went on the little pale man, "and I was enjoying it as well as I could, seeing that sometimes she'd push me toward the stage and sometimes she'd let go, and the seat and me would fall back into place. Then all of a sudden she began to talk. She said she had an operation or something—I remember she said she told the doctor that she guessed she knew more about her own stomach than he did. The play was getting good just then—the people next to me had their handkerchiefs out and was weeping—and I was feeling sort of that way myself. And all of a sudden this lady began to tell her friends what she told the plumber about his indigestion. Gosh!" Again he shook his head from side to side; his pale eyes fell involuntarily on Mrs. Robinson—then looked quickly away. "You couldn't help but hear some and I began missing things and then missing more things and then everybody began laughing and I didn't know what they were laughing at and, as soon as they'd leave off, her voice would begin again. Then there was a great big laugh that lasted for a long time and everybody bent over double and kept laughing and laughing, and I hadn't heard a word. First thing I knew the curtain came down and then I don't know what happened. I must of been a little crazy or something because I got up and closed my seat, and reached back and pushed the lady in the face."

As he concluded there was a long sigh in the courtroom as though everyone had been holding in his breath waiting for the climax. Even the judge gasped a little and the three ladies on the witness bench burst into a shrill chatter and grew louder and louder and shriller and shriller until the judge's gavel rang out again upon his desk.

"Charles Stuart," said the judge in a slightly raised voice, "is this the only extenuation you can make for raising your hand against a woman of the plaintiff's age?"

Charles Stuart's head sank a little between his shoulders, seeming to withdraw as far as it was able into the poor shelter of his body.

"Yes, sir," he said faintly.

Mrs. Robinson sprang to her feet.

"Yes, judge," she cried shrilly, "and there's more than that. He's a liar too, a dirty little liar. He's just proclaimed himself a dirty little—"

"Silence!" cried the judge in a terrible voice. "I'm running this court, and I'm capable of making my own decisions!" He paused. "I will now pronounce sentence upon Charles Stuart," he referred to the register, "upon Charles David Stuart of 212½ West 22nd St."

The courtroom was silent. The reporter drew nearer—he hoped the sentence would be light—just a few days on the Island in lieu of a fine.

The judge leaned back in his chair and hid his thumbs somewhere under his black robe.

"Assault justified," he said. "Case dismissed."

The little man Charles Stuart came blinking out into the sunshine, pausing for a moment at the door of the court and looking furtively behind him as if he half expected that it was a judicial error. Then, sniffling once or twice, not because he had a cold but for those dim psychological reasons that make people sniff, he moved slowly south with an eye out for a subway station.

He stopped at a news-stand to buy a morning paper; then entering the subway was borne south to Eighteenth Street where he disembarked and walked east to Third Avenue. Here he was employed in an all-night restaurant built of glass and plaster white tile. Here he sat at a desk from curfew until dawn, taking in money and balancing the books of T. Cushmael, the proprietor. And here, through the interminable nights, his eyes, by turning a little to right or left, could rest upon the starched linen uniform of Miss Edna Schaeffer.

Miss Edna Schaeffer was twenty-three, with a sweet mild face and hair that was a living example of how henna should not be applied. She was unaware of this latter fact, because all the girls she knew used henna just this way, so perhaps the odd vermilion tint of her coiffure did not matter.

Charles Stuart had forgotten about the color of her hair long ago—if he had ever noticed its strangeness at all. He was much more interested in her eyes, and in her white hands which, as they moved deftly among piles of plates and cups, always looked as if they should be playing the piano. He had almost asked her to go to a matinee with him once, but when she had faced him her lips half-parted in a weary, cheerful smile, she had seemed so beautiful that he had lost courage and mumbled something else instead.

It was not to see Edna Schaeffer, however, that he had come to the restaurant so early in the afternoon. It was to consult with T. Cushmael, his employer, and discover if he had lost his job during his night in jail. T. Cushmael was standing in the front of the restaurant looking gloomily out the plate-glass window, and Charles Stuart approached him with ominous forebodings.

"Where've you been?" demanded T. Cushmael.

"Nowhere," answered Charles Stuart discreetly.

"Well, you're fired."

Stuart winced.

"Right now?"

Cushmael waved his hands apathetically.

"Stay two or three days if you want to, till I find somebody. Then"—he made a gesture of expulsion—"outside for you."

Charles Stuart assented with a weary little nod. He assented to everything. At nine o'clock, after a depressed interval during which he brooded upon the penalty of spending a night among the police, he reported for work.

"Hello, Mr. Stuart," said Edna Schaeffer, sauntering curiously toward him as he took his place behind the desk. "What became of you last night? Get pinched?"

She laughed, cheerfully, huskily, charmingly he thought, at her joke.

"Yes," he answered on a sudden impulse, "I was in the Thirty-fifth Street jail."

"Yes, you were," she scoffed.

"That's the truth," he insisted, "I was arrested."

Her face grew serious at once.

"Go on. What did you do?"

He hesitated.

"I pushed somebody in the face."

Suddenly she began to laugh, at first with amusement and then immoderately.

"It's a fact," mumbled Stuart, "I almost got sent to prison account of it."

Setting her hand firmly over her mouth Edna turned away from him and retired to the refuge of the kitchen. A little later, when he was pretending to be busy at the accounts, he saw her retailing the story to the two other girls.

The night wore on. The little man in the grayish suit with the grayish face attracted no more attention from the customers than the whirring electric fan over his head. They gave him their money and his hand slid their change into a little hollow in the marble counter. But to Charles Stuart the hours of this night, this last night, began to assume a quality of romance. The slow routine of a hundred other nights unrolled with a new enchantment before his eyes. Midnight was always a sort of a dividing point—after that the intimate part of the evening began. Fewer people came in, and the ones that did seemed depressed and tired: a casual ragged man for coffee, the beggar from the street corner who ate a heavy meal of cakes and a beefsteak, a few nightbound street-women and a watchman with a red face who exchanged warning phrases with him about his health.

Midnight seemed to come early tonight and business was brisk until after one. When Edna began to fold napkins at a nearby table he was tempted to ask her if she too had not found the night unusually short. Vainly he wished that he might impress himself on her in some way, make some remark to her, some sign of his devotion that she would remember forever.

She finished folding the vast pile of napkins, loaded it onto the stand and bore it away, humming to herself. A few minutes later the door opened and two customers came in. He recognized them immediately, and as he did so a flush of jealousy went over him. One of them, a young man in a handsome brown suit, cut away rakishly from his abdomen, had been a frequent visitor for the last ten days. He came in always at about this hour, sat down at one of Edna's tables, and drank two cups of coffee with lingering ease. On his last two visits he had been accompanied by his present companion, a swarthy Greek with sour eyes who ordered in a loud voice and gave vent to noisy sarcasm when anything was not to his taste.

It was chiefly the young man, though, who annoyed Charles Stuart. The young man's eyes followed Edna wherever she went, and on his last two visits he had made unnecessary requests in order to bring her more often to his table.

"Good evening, girlie," Stuart heard him say to-night. "How's tricks?"

"O.K.," answered Edna formally. "What'll it be?"

"What have you?" smiled the young man. "Everything, eh? Well, what'd you recommend?"

Edna did not answer. Her eyes were staring straight over his head into some invisible distance.

He ordered finally at the urging of his companion. Edna withdrew and Stuart saw the young man turn and whisper to his friend, indicating Edna with his head.

Stuart shifted uncomfortably in his seat. He hated that young man and wished passionately that he would go away. It seemed as if his last night here, his last chance to watch Edna, and perhaps even in some blessed moment to talk to her a little, was marred by every moment this man stayed.

Half a dozen more people had drifted into the restaurant—two or three workmen, the newsdealer from over the way—and Edna was too busy for a few minutes to be bothered with attentions. Suddenly Charles Stuart became aware that the sour-eyed Greek had raised his hand and was beckoning him. Somewhat puzzled he left his desk and approached the table.

"Say, fella," said the Greek, "what time does the boss come in?"

"Why—two o'clock. Just a few minutes now."

"All right. That's all. I just wanted to speak to him about something."

Stuart realized that Edna was standing beside the table; both men turned toward her.

"Say, girlie," said the young man, "I want to talk to you. Sit down."

"I can't."

"Sure you can. The boss don't mind." He turned menacingly to Stuart.

"She can sit down, can't she?"

Stuart did not answer.

"I say she can sit down, can't she?" said the young man more intently, and added, "Speak up, you little dummy."

Still Stuart did not answer. Strange blood currents were flowing all over his body. He was frightened; anything said determinedly had a way of frightening him. But he could not move.

"Sh!" said the Greek to his companion.

But the younger man was angered.

"Say," he broke out, "some time somebody's going to take a paste at you when you don't answer what they say. Go on back to your desk!"

Still Stuart did not move.

"Go on away!" repeated the young man in a dangerous voice. "Hurry up! Run!"

Then Stuart ran. He ran as hard as he was able. But instead of running away from the young man he ran toward him, stretching out his hands as he came near in a sort of straight arm that brought his two palms, with all the force of his hundred and thirty pounds, against his victim's face. With a crash of china the young man went over backward in his chair and, his head striking the edge of the next table, lay motionless on the floor.

The restaurant was in a small uproar. There was a terrified scream from Edna, an indignant protest from the Greek, and the customers arose with exclamations from their tables. Just at this moment the door opened and Mr. Cushmael came in.

"Why you little fool!" cried Edna wrathfully. "What are you trying to do? Lose me my job?"

"What's this?" demanded Mr. Cushmael, hurrying over. "What's the idea?"

"Mr. Stuart pushed a customer in the face!" cried a waitress, taking Edna's cue. "For no reason at all!"

The population of the restaurant had now gathered around the prostrate victim. He was doused thoroughly with water and a folded tablecloth was placed under his head.

"Oh, he did, did he?" shouted Mr. Cushmael in a terrible voice, seizing Stuart by the lapels of his coat.

"He's raving crazy!" sobbed Edna. "He was in jail last night for pushing a lady in the face. He told me so himself!"

A large laborer reached over and grasped Stuart's small trembling arm. Stuart gazed around dumbly. His mouth was quivering.

"Look what you done!" shouted Mr. Cushmael. "You like to kill a man."

Stuart shivered violently. His mouth opened and he fought the air for a moment. Then he uttered a half-articulate sentence:

"Only meant to push him in the face."

"Push him in the face?" ejaculated Cushmael in a frenzy. "So you got to be a pusher-in-the-face, eh? Well, we'll push your face right into jail!"

"I—I couldn't help it," gasped Stuart. "Sometimes I can't help it." His voice rose unevenly. "I guess I'm a dangerous man and you better take me and lock me up!" He turned wildly to Cushmael, "I'd push you in the face if he'd let go my arm. Yes, I would! I'd push you—right-in-the-face!"

For a moment an astonished silence fell, broken by the voice of one of the waitresses who had been groping under the table.

"Some stuff dropped out of this fella's back pocket when he tipped over," she explained, getting to her feet. "It's—why, it's a revolver and—"

She had been about to say handkerchief, but as she looked at what she was holding her mouth fell open and she dropped the thing quickly on the table. It was a small black mask about the size of her hand.

Simultaneously the Greek, who had been shifting uneasily upon his feet ever since the accident, seemed to remember an important engagement that had slipped his mind. He dashed suddenly around the table and made for the front door, but it opened just at that moment to admit several customers who, at the cry of "Stop him!" obligingly spread out their arms. Barred in that direction, he jumped an overturned chair, vaulted over the delicatessen counter, and set out for the kitchen, collapsing precipitately in the firm grasp of the chef in the doorway.

"Hold him! Hold him!" screamed Mr. Cushmael, realizing the turn of the situation. "They're after my cash drawer!"

Willing hands assisted the Greek over the counter, where he stood panting and gasping under two dozen excited eyes.

"After my money, hey?" shouted the proprietor, shaking his fist under the captive's nose.

The stout man nodded, panting.

"We'd of got it too!" he gasped, "if it hadn't been for that little pusher-in-the-face."

Two dozen eyes looked around eagerly. The little pusher-in-the-face had disappeared.

The beggar on the corner had just decided to tip the policeman and shut up shop for the night when he suddenly felt a small, somewhat excited hand fall on his shoulder.

"Help a poor man get a place to sleep—" he was beginning automatically when he recognized the little cashier from the restaurant. "Hello, brother," he added, leering up at him and changing his tone.

"You know what?" cried the little cashier in a strangely ominous tone. "I'm going to push you in the face!"

"What do you mean?" snarled the beggar. "Why, you Ga—"

He got no farther. The little man seemed to run at him suddenly, holding out his hands, and there was a sharp, smacking sound as the beggar came in contact with the sidewalk.

"You're a fakir!" shouted Charles Stuart wildly. "I gave you a dollar when I first came here, before I found out you had ten times as much as I had. And you never gave it back!"

A stout, faintly intoxicated gentleman who was strutting expansively along the other sidewalk had seen the incident and came running benevolently across the street.

"What does this mean!" he exclaimed in a hearty, shocked voice. "Why, poor fellow—" He turned indignant eyes on Charles Stuart and knelt unsteadily to raise the beggar.

The beggar stopped cursing and assumed a piteous whine.

"I'm a poor man, Cap'n—"

"This is—this is horrible!" cried the Samaritan, with tears in his eyes. "It's a disgrace! Police! Pol—!"

He got no farther. His hands, which he was raising for a megaphone, never reached his face—other hands reached his face, however, hands held stiffly out from a one-hundred-and-thirty-pound body! He sank down suddenly upon the beggar's abdomen, forcing out a sharp curse which faded into a groan.

"This beggar'll take you home in his car!" shouted the little man who stood over him. "He's got it parked around the corner."

Turning his face toward the hot strip of sky which lowered over the city the little man began to laugh, with amusement at first, then loudly and triumphantly until his high laughter ran out in the quiet street with a weird, elfish sound, echoing up the sides of the tall buildings, growing shriller and shriller until people blocks away heard its eerie cadence on the air and stopped to listen.

Still laughing the little man divested himself of his coat and then of his vest and hurriedly freed his neck of tie and collar. Then he spat upon his hands and with a wild, shrill, exultant cry began to run down the dark street.

He was going to clean up New York, and his first objective was the disagreeable policeman on the corner!

They caught him at two o'clock, and the crowd which had joined in the chase were flabbergasted when they found that the ruffian was only a weeping little man in his shirt sleeves. Someone at the station house was wise enough to give him an opiate instead of a padded cell, and in the morning he felt much better.

Mr. Cushmael, accompanied by an anxious young lady with crimson hair, called at the jail before noon.

"I'll get you out," cried Mr. Cushmael, shaking hands excitedly through the bars. "One policeman, he'll explain it all to the other."

"And there's a surprise for you too," added Edna softly, taking his other hand. "Mr. Cushmael's got a big heart and he's going to make you his day man now."

"All right," agreed Charles Stuart calmly. "But I can't start till to-morrow."

"Why not?"

"Because this afternoon I got to go to a matinee—with a friend."

He relinquished his employer's hand but kept Edna's white fingers twined firmly in his.

"One more thing," he went on in a strong, confident voice that was new to him, "if you want to get me off don't have the case come up in the Thirty-fifth Street court."

"Why not?"

"Because," he answered with a touch of swagger in his voice, "that's the judge I had when I was arrested last time."

"Charles," whispered Edna suddenly, "what would you do if I refused to go with you this afternoon?"

He bristled. Color came into his cheeks and he rose defiantly from his bench.

"Why, I'd—I'd—"

"Never mind," she said, flushing slightly. "You'd do nothing of the kind."

THE END


They could hardly hear it for a while. It was a slow gleam of pale blue and creamy pink. Then there was a tall room where there were many young people and finally they began to feel it and hear it.

What were they—no. This is about music.

He went to the band-stand; the piano player let him lean over his shoulder to read:

"From No, No, Nanette by Vincent Youmans."

"Thank you," he said, "I'd like to drop something in the horn but when an interne has a dollar bill and two coins in the world he might get married instead."

"Never mind, doctor. That's about what I had when I got married last winter."

When he came back to the table she said:

"Did you find out who wrote that thing?"

"No! When do we go from here?"

"When they stop playing 'Tea for Two.'"

Later as she came out of the women's dressing room, she asked the man: "Who played it?"

"My God, how do I know. The band played it."

It dripped out the door now:

Tea...two
Two...tea

"We can never get married. I'm not even a nurse yet."

"Well, let's kill the idea—let's spend the rest of our lives going around and listening to tunes. What did you say that writer's name was?"

"What did you say? You went over and looked, din't you?"

"Didn't you," he corrected her.

"You're so swell all the time."

"Well, at least I found out who wrote it."

"Who?"

"Somebody named Vincent Youmans."

She hummed it over:

And you...
...for me
And me...
...for you
Al—o-o-n-n

Their arms went about each other for a moment in the corridor outside the red room.

"If you lost the dollar bill and the other nickel I'd still marry you," she said. This is now years later but there was still music. There was "All Alone" and "Remember" and "Always" and "Blue Skies" and "How About Me."

He was back from Vienna but it didn't seem to matter so much as it had before.

"Wait in here a moment," she said outside the operating room. "Turn on the radio if you want to."

"You've got mighty important, haven't you?"

He turned on:

Re-mem-ber the night
the night you said—

"Are you high-hatting me?" she inquired, "or did medicine begin and end in Vienna?"

"No it didn't," he said humbly. "I'm impressed—evidently you can supervise the resident or the surgeons—"

"I've got an operation of Doctor Menafee's coming in and there's a tonsillectomy that's got to be postponed. I'm a working girl. I'm supervising the operating room."

"But you'll go out with me tonight—won't you? We'll get them to play 'All Alone.'"

She paused, regarding him.

"Yes, I've been all alone for a lot of time now. I'm somebody—you don't seem to realize it. Say who is this Berlin anyhow? He was a singer in a dive, wasn't he? My brother ran a roadhouse and he gave me money to get started with. But I thought I was away from all that. Who is this Irving Berlin? I hear he's just married a society girl—"

"He's just married—"

She had to go: "Excuse me. I've got to fire an interne before this gets going."

"I was an interne once. I understand."

They were out at last. She was making three thousand a year now and he was still being of a conservative old Vermont family.

"This Irving Berlin now. Is he happy with this Mackay girl? Those songs don't sound—"

"I guess he is. The point is how happy are you?"

"Oh, we discussed that so long ago. What do I matter? I matter in a big way—but when I was a little country girl your family decided—

"Not you," she said at the alarm in his eyes. "I know you never did."

"I knew something else about you. I knew three things—that you were a Yonkers' girl—and didn't pronounce the language like I did—"

"And that I wanted to marry you. Let's forget it. Your friend Mr. Berlin can talk better than we can. Listen to him."

"I'm listening."

"No. But lisden, I mean."

Not for just a year but—

"Why do you say my friend Mr. Berlin? I never saw the guy."

"I thought maybe you'd met him in Vienna in all these years."

"I never saw him."

"He married the girl—didn't he?"

"What are you crying about?"

"I'm not crying. I just said he married the girl—didn't he? Isn't that all right to say? When you've come so far—when—"

"You are crying," he said.

"No, I'm not. Honest. It's this work. It wears down your eyes. Let's dance."

—o—ver—head
They were playing.
Blue skies o—
—ver head

She looked up out of his arms suddenly. "Do you suppose they're happy?"

"Who?"

"Irving Berlin and the Mackay girl?"

"How should I know whether they're happy? I tell you I never knew them—never saw them."

A moment later she whispered: "We all knew them."

This story is about tunes. Perhaps the tunes swing the people or the people the tunes. Anyhow:

"We'll never do it," he remarked with some finality.

"Smoke gets in your eyes," said the music.

"Why?"

"Because we're too old. You wouldn't want to anyhow—you've got that job at Duke's hospital."

"I just got it."

"Well, you've just got it. And it's going to pay you four thousand."

"That's probably half what you make."

"You mean you want to try it anyhow?"

When your heart's on fire

"No. I guess you're right. It's too late."

"—Too late for what?"

"Just too late—like you told me."

"But I didn't mean it."

"You were right though...Be quiet:

Lovely
to look at
Romantic to know

"You're all those things in the song," he said passionately.

"What? Lovely to look at and all that? You should have told me that fifteen years ago. Now I'm superintendent of a woman's hospital." She added: "And I'm still a woman." Then she added: "But I'm not the woman you knew any more. I'm another woman."

—lovely to look at, the orchestra repeated.

"Yes, I was lovely to look at when I was nothing—when I couldn't even talk plain—"

"I never knew—"

"Oh let's not go over it. Listen to what they're playing."

"It's called 'Lovely to Look At.'"

"Who's it by?"

"A man named Jerome Kern."

"Did you meet him when you went back to Europe the second time? Is he a friend of yours?"

"I never saw him. What gives you the impression I met all these big shots? I'm a doctor. Not a musician."

She wondered about her own bitterness.

"I suppose because all those years I met nobody," she said finally. "Sure, I once saw Doctor Kelly at a distance. But here I am—because I got good at my job."

"And here I am, because—"

"You'll always be wonderful to me. What did you say this man's name was?"

"Kern. And I didn't say it was. I said it is."

"That's the way you used to talk to me. And now both of us are fat and—sort of middle-aged. We never had much. Did we?"

"It wasn't my fault."

"It wasn't anybody's fault. It was just meant to be like that. Let's dance. That's a good tune. What did you say was this man's name?"

"Kern."

They asked me how I knew-ew-ew—

"We've had all that anyhow, haven't we?" she asked him. "All those people—that Youmans, that Berlin, that Kern. They must have been through hell to be able to write like that. And we sort of listened to them, didn't we?"

"But my God, that's so little—" he began but her mood changed and she said: "Let's not say anything about it. It was all we had—everything we'll ever know about life. What were their names—you knew their names."

"Their names were—"

"Didn't you ever know any of them in that fifteen years around Europe?"

"I never saw one of them."

"Well, I never will." She hesitated before the wide horizon of how she might have lived. How she might have married this man, borne him children, died for him—of how she had lived out of sordid poverty and education—into power—and spinsterhood. And she cared not a damn for her man any more because he had never gone off with her. But she wondered how these composers had lived. Youmans and Irving Berlin and Jerome Kern and she thought that if any of their wives turned up in this hospital she would try to make them happy.

THE END



	
I.

Bryan didn't know exactly why Mrs. Hannaman was there. He thought it was something about his being a widower who should be looked after in some way. He had come home early from his office to catch up on certain aspects of his daughter.

"She has such beautiful manners," Mrs. Hannaman was saying. "Old-fashioned manners."

"Thank you," he said. "We brought up Gwen in the Continental style, and when we came back here, we tried to keep up the general idea."

"You taught her languages, and all that?"

"Lord, no! I never learned anything but waiter's French, but I'm strict with Gwen. I don't let her go to the movies, for instance—"

Had Mrs. Hannaman's memory betrayed her, or had she heard her little niece Clara say that she and Gwen sat through three straight performances of Top Hat, and would see it again if they could find it at one of the smaller theaters.

"We have a phonograph," Bryan Bowers continued, "so Gwen can play music of her own choice, but I won't give her a radio. Children ought to make their own music."

He heard himself saying this, only half believing it, wishing Gwen would come home.

"She plays the piano?"

"Well, she did. She took piano lessons for years, but this year there was so much work at school that we just let it go. I mean we postponed it. She's just thirteen, and she's got plenty of time."

"Of course," agreed Mrs. Hannaman dryly.

When Mrs. Hannaman left, Bryan went back to work on the apartment. They were really settled at last. At least he was settled; it seemed rather likely that Gwen never would be settled. Glancing into his daughter's room now, he uttered a short exclamation of despair. Everything was just as it had been for the past three weeks. He had told the maid that nothing must be touched except the bed, because Gwen should do her own straightening up. She had been to camp this past summer; if this was the system she had learned, that was time wasted. A pair of crushed jodhpur breeches lay in the corner where they had been stepped out of, a section of them rising resentfully above the rest, as if trying to straighten up of its own accord; a stack of letters from boys—a stack that had once worn a neat elastic band—was spread along the top of the bureau like a pack of cards ready for the draw; three knitted sweaters in various preliminary stages of creation and the beginnings of many tidying-ups lay like abandoned foundations about the room. The business was always to be completed on the following Sunday, but Sunday was always the day when the unforeseen came up: Gwen was invited to do something very healthy, or she had so much homework, or he had to take her out with him because he didn't want to leave her alone. For a while it had been a fine idea to let her live in this mess until she was impelled to act from within, but as October crept into November the confusion increased. She was late for everything because nothing could be found. The maid complained it had become absolutely impossible to sweep the room, save with the cautious steps of Eliza on the ice.

He heard his daughter come in and, with the problem in his mind, went to meet her in the living room.

They faced each other in a moment of happiness. They looked alike. He had been handsome once, but middle age had added flesh in the unappealing places. When he spoke of the past, Gwen was never able to imagine him in romantic situations. She was an arresting little beauty, black-eyed, with soft bay hair and with an extraordinarily infectious laugh—a rare laugh that had a peal in it, and yet managed not to get on people's nerves.

She had thrown herself full length on a couch, scattering her books on the floor. When Bryan came in, she moved her feet so that they just projected over the side of the couch. He noted the gesture, and suggested:

"Pull down your skirt or else take it off altogether."

"Daddy! Don't be so vulgar!"

"That's the only way I can get through to you sometimes."

"Daddy, I got credit plus in geometry. Cute?"

"What's credit plus?"

"Ninety-two."

"Why don't they just say ninety-two?"

"Daddy, did you get the tickets for the Harvard game?"

"I told you I'd take you."

She nodded, and remarked as if absently:

"Dizzy's father's taking her to the Harvard game and the Navy game. And her uncle's taking her to the Dartmouth game. Isn't that cute?"

"What's cute about it? Do you know what you said to Doctor Parker the other day, when he asked you if you liked Caesar? You said you thought Caesar was cute." He walked around the room in helpless laughter. "A man conquers the whole known world, and a little schoolgirl comes along a thousand years afterwards and says he's cute!"

"Two thousand years," remarked Gwen, unruffled. "Daddy, Mr. Campbell's driving them up to the Harvard game in their new car. Isn't that cu—isn't that fine?"

She was always like this in the first half hour home from school or a party—outer worlds where she lived with such intensity that she carried it into the slower tempo of life at home like weather on her shoes. This is what made her say:

"It'd take forever the way you drive, daddy."

"I drive fast enough."

"Once I drove ninety miles an hour—"

Startled, he stared at her, and Gwen should have been acute enough to minimize the statement immediately. But still in her worldly daze, she continued "—on the way to Turtle Lake this summer."

"Who with?"

"With a girl."

"A girl your age driving a car!"

"No. The girl was nineteen—she's a sister of a girl I was visiting. But I won't tell you who. Probably you'd never let me go there again, daddy."

She was very sorry that she had ever spoken.

"You might as well tell me. I know who you've visited this summer and I can find out who's got a sister nineteen years old. I'm not going to have you mangled up against a telegraph post because some young—"

Momentarily Gwen was saved by the maid calling her father to the phone. As a sort of propitiation, she hung her overcoat in the closet, picked up her books and went on into her own room.

She examined it, as usual, with a vast surprise. She knew it was rather terrible, but she had some system of her own as to what to do about it—a system that never seemed to work out in actuality. She bounced with a cry upon the wastebasket—it was her record of "Cheek to Cheek," broken, but preserved to remind her to get another. She cradled it to her arms, and as if this, in turn, reminded her of something else, she decided to telephone Dizzy Campbell. This required a certain diplomacy. Bryan had become adamant on the matter of long phone conversations.

"This is about Latin," she assured him.

"All right, but make it short, daughter."

He read the paper in the living room, waiting for supper; for some time he had been aware of a prolonged murmur which confused itself in his mind with distant guns in Ethiopia and China. Only when he turned to the financial page and read the day's quotation on American Tel. and Tel. did he spring to his feet.

"She's on the phone again!" he exclaimed to himself; but even as the paper billowed to rest in front of him, Gwen appeared, all radiant and on the run.

"Oh, daddy, the best thing! You won't have to take me to the game, after all! I mean you will to the game, but not up to the game. Dizzy's aunt, Mrs. Charles Wrotten Ray, or something like that—somebody that's all right, that they know about, that they can trust, and all that sort of thing—"

While she panted, he inquired politely:

"What about her? Has she made the Princeton team?"

"No. She lives up there and she has some nephews or uncles or something—it was all kind of complicated on the phone—that go to some kind of prep school that are about our age—about fifteen or sixteen—"

"I thought you were thirteen."

"The boy is always older," she assured him. "Anyhow, she—"

"Don't ever say 'she.'"

"Well, excuse me, daddy. Well, anyhow, this sort of person—you know, not 'she,' but this sort of Mrs. Wrotten Ray, or whatever her name is—she wants Dizzy—"

"Now, calm yourself, calm yourself."

"I can't, daddy; she's waiting on the phone."

"Who? Mrs. Wrotten Ray?"

"Oh, that isn't her name, but it's something like that. Anyhow, Mrs. Wrotten Ray wants Dizzy to bring Clara Hannaman and one other girl up to a little dance the night before the game. And Dizzy wants me to be the other girl, and can I go?"

"This is all a little sudden. I don't like such things during a school term, and you know that." He hated to refuse her, though, for, excepting an occasional indiscretion of speech, she was a trustworthy child; she made good grades in school and conscientiously wrestled with her ebullient temperament.

"Well, can I, daddy? Dizzy's waiting; she has to know."

"I suppose you can."

"Oh, thanks. Mrs. Campbell's going to call you up, but Dizzy couldn't wait to tell me. Cute?"

She vanished, and in a moment the low murmur behind the door began again.

Something told Bryan that she'd be leading a simpler life at boarding school, but didn't Helen Hannaman say something today about her old-fashioned manners? He couldn't afford it this year anyhow, and, besides, she was such a bright little thing to have around the house.

But if he'd known that the movies were going to produce this Top Hat—She had broken the record of "Cheek to Cheek," but there was still the one about sitting on his top hat and climbing up his shirt front—

Curiously, he opened the door to the dining room and discovered the phonograph going and his daughter in a crouching posture, arms outspread, head projecting from its proper neck, eyes half closed. When she saw him, she straightened up.

"I thought that this 'Cheek by Jowl' was broken," he said.

"It is, but you can still play the inside a little. See, it's over already. You certainly can't object to that much of a record."

"Let's put it on again," he suggested facetiously, "and we'll dance."

She looked at him with infinite compassion.

"Who do you imagine you are, daddy? Fred Astaire? What I want to know is if I can go to Princeton."

"I said yes, didn't I?"

"But you didn't say it like when you mean it."

"Yes, then—yes. Get enough rope and hang yourself."

"Then I can go?"

"Yes, of course. Why not? Where do you think you're going? To the prom or something? Of course, you can go."

II.

Having lunch on the train, the three girls were a little bit mad with excitement. Clara Hannaman and Dizzy Campbell were fourteen, a year older than Gwen, and Clara was already somewhat taller, but they were all dressed alike in suits that might have been worn by their mothers. Their jewelry consisted of thin rings and chains, legacies from grandmothers, supplemented by flamboyant Koh-i-noors from the five-and-ten; and it was true that their coats might once have responded to wheedling calls of "Pussy," "Bunny," or "Nanny." But it was their attacks of hysteria that stamped them as of a certain age.

Clara had asked: "What kind of a joint is this we're going to?" She was temporarily under the spell of Una Merkel and the hard-boiled school, and this question was enough to start a rat-tat-tat of laughter, to the extent that eating was suspended, napkins called into play. One word was usually enough to send them off; frequently it was a boy's name that had some private meaning to them, and for a whole afternoon or evening this single word would serve as detonator. At other times a curious soberness fell upon all of them, a sort of quietude. They faced both ways—toward a world they were fast leaving and a world they had never met—and the contradiction was externalized in the uncanny mirth.

There was a sober moment now when they all looked at the girl across the way, who was the débutante of the year and bound for the fall prom. They looked with respect, even a certain awe, impressed with her ease and tranquility in the face of her ordeal. It made them feel very young and awkward, and they were both glad and sorry that they were too young for the prom. Last year that girl had been only the captain of the basketball team at school; now she was in the Great Game, and they had noted the men who came to see her off at the station with flowers and adjurations not to "fall for any babies up there. Be five years before they get a job."

After luncheon, the three girls planned to study—they had conscientiously brought books along—but the excitement of the train was such that they never got any farther than the phrase "jeweled stomacher" from an English-history lesson—which thereafter became their phrase for the day. They reached Princeton in an uncanny, explosive quiet, because Dizzy claimed to have forgotten her jeweled stomacher on the train, but their wild chuckles changed to a well-bred reserve as they were greeted on the platform by Miss Ray, young and lovely and twenty.

Where were the boys? They peered for them through the early dusk, not expecting to be greeted like prom girls, but there might have been someone of their own age, the one for whom they had dressed and dreamed and waved their locks sidewise in these last twenty-four hours. When they reached the house, Miss Ray exploded the bomb; while they took off their coats, she said:

"You're due for a disappointment. I tried to reach you by telegraphing and telephone, too, but you'd already left."

Their eyes turned toward her, apprehensive, already stricken.

"Seems that grandmother's not well, and mother felt she had to go up to Albany. So, before I was even awake, she called off the little dance, and she'd phoned everybody. I tried to fix it up, but it was too late."

Now their faces were utterly expressionless.

"Mother was excited, that's all," continued Miss Ray. "Grandmother'll live to be a hundred. I've been on the phone all afternoon trying to find some company for you girls for this evening, but the town's a madhouse and nobody's available—the boys for the little dance were coming from New York. Lord, if I'd only waked up before eleven o'clock!"

"We don't mind," Dizzy lied gently. "Really we don't, Esther. We can amuse ourselves."

"Oh, darling, I know how you feel!"

"Yes," they said together, and Dizzy asked, "Where's Shorty? Did he have to go to Albany too?"

"No, he's here. But he's only sixteen and—I hardly know how to explain it, but he's the youngest man in his class in college, and very small, and this year he's just impossibly shy. When the party was called off, he just refused to appear as the only boy; said he'd stay in his room and study chemistry, and there he is. And he won't come out."

Gwen formed a mental picture of him. Better that he remained in his hermitage; they could have more fun without him.

"Anyhow, you'll have the game tomorrow."

"Yes," they said together.

That was that. Upstairs they took out their evening gowns, which, according to modern acceptance, were as long and as chic as any adult evening gowns, and laid them on their beds. They brought out their silk hosiery, their gold or silver sandal dancing shoes, and surveyed the glittering exhibit. At that age, their mothers would have worn ruffles, flounces and cotton stockings to brand them as adolescent. But this historical fact, dinned into them for many years, was small consolation now.

After they had dressed, things seemed better, even though they were only dressing for one another; when they went down to dinner, they gave such an impression of amiability and gaiety that they convinced even Esther Ray. It was difficult, though, when Miss Ray's escort called to take her to the Harvard-Princeton concert, and she must have seen it in their eyes.

"I've got an idea," she said. "I think we can get you into the concert, but you may have to stand up in back."

That was something indeed. They brightened. They ran for coats; and Gwen caught sight of a very hurried young man in the upper hall with a plate in one hand and a cup in the other, but he disappeared into his room before she could see him plainly.

In any event, the concert turned out as precariously as most improvisations—it was jammed, and they were obliged to stand behind rows of taller people and to listen to tantalizing bursts of laughter and fragments of song—while from Clara's superior three inches they gathered such information as they could as to what it looked like.

When it was over, they were washed out with the happy, excited crowd, driven back to the Rays', and dumped almost brusquely on the doorstep.

"Good night. Thanks."

"Thanks a lot."

"It was fine!"

"Thanks. Good night."

Upstairs they moved around in silence, casting stray glances at themselves in the mirror and rearranging, to no purpose now, some bit of awry finery. Dizzy had even taken off her necklace of seed pearls, when Gwen said suddenly:

"I want to go to the prom."

"Who doesn't?" Clara said. Suddenly she looked at Gwen sharply and asked: "What do you mean, Gwen?"

Gwen was drawing her lips in the mirror with Dizzy's lipstick. She would have had one along herself, save it had melted going through Alabama on the way to the ranch last summer, and she had never since been able to get the top off it. Clara watched her until Gwen said:

"How would you make up if you were going to the prom?"

"Like this," Clara suggested.

In a minute they were all at it.

"Not like that; that looks very ordinary." And: "Remember, that's Esther's eye pencil. That's too much, Dizzy."

"Not with powder, it isn't."

Within half an hour they had somehow managed to age themselves by several years, and crying: "Bring on my jeweled stomacher," they minced, paraded and danced around the room.

"I'll tell you what," Gwen said. "I just sort of want to go to the outside of the prom. I mean I don't want to do anything bad, you know, but I want to see how they work it."

"Esther might see us."

"She won't," said Gwen sagely. "She's probably having herself a time, and that girl on the train too—that Marion Lamb—you know, we used to know her in school. You take a lot of these débutantes," she continued, "and when they get by themselves—pretty cute is what I would say, if you asked me."

Dizzy looked like white-pine shavings; even her eyes were so light and virginal that what she said now came as a sort of shock to the other two:

"We'll do it—we'll go to the prom. We've got more what it takes than most of those girls."

"Of course this isn't like a city," Clara suggested uncertainly. "It's perfectly all right; it's just the same as going out in your yard."

This remark was calming to their consciences, but they were really less concerned with kidnappers or molesters of womanhood than with what Gwen's plan was. Gwen had no plan. She had literally nothing on her mind except a certain disparity between the picture of herself wandering around a college campus at night with rouged lips, and a little scene that had taken place a week before, when she had argued with her father that she wanted to set up her doll's house in her room instead of having it sent to storage.

The deciding factor was that they had been cheated by their elders. Though Bryan had never met Mrs. Ray, he somehow seemed to share in her disastrous excitability of the morning. This was the sort of thing that parents did as a class. The sort of thing for which they had joint responsibility. Before Gwen and Dizzy had agreed to the excursion in words, they bumped shoulders around the mirror, modifying their faces until the theatrical quality yielded to the more seemly pigmentation of an embassy ball. In the last burst of conservatism, for they might run inadvertently into Esther Ray, they cleansed the area around their eyes, leaving only the faintest patina of evening on lips and noses. The ten-cent crown jewels disappeared from ear and wrist and throat so quickly that when they went downstairs all taint of the side show had disappeared. Taste had triumphed.

Issuing into a clear brilliant November night, they walked along a high exuberant street beneath the dark trees of Liberty Place—though that meant nothing to them. A dog panicked them momentarily from behind a hedge, but they met no further obstacle until it was necessary to pass beneath a bright arc on Mercer Street.

"Where are we going?" Clara asked.

"Up to where we can hear it."

She stopped. Figures had loomed up ahead, and they linked arms protectively, but it was only two colored women carrying a basket of laundry between them.

"Come on," Gwen said.

"Come on to where?"

"To where we're going."

They reached a cathedral-like structure which Clara recognized as a corner of the campus, and by a sort of instinct they turned into an archway, threaded a deserted cloister and came out into a wider vista of terraces and Gothic buildings, and suddenly there was music in the air. After a few hundred yards, Dizzy pulled them up short.

"I see it," she whispered. "It's that big building down there with all the lights. That's the gymnasium."

"Let's go closer," said Gwen. "There isn't anybody around. Let's go till we see somebody, anyhow."

Arms linked, they marched on in the shadow of the long halls. They were getting dangerously close to the zone of activity, could distinguish figures against the blur of the gymnasium entrance, and hear the applause in the intervals. Once more they stopped, afraid either to go on or to hold their ground, for there were voices and footsteps approaching out of the darkness.

"Over at the other side," Clara suggested. "It's dark there and we can get really close."

They left the path and ran across the turf; stopped, breathless, in the haven of a group of parked cars. Here they huddled silently, feeling like spies behind the enemy lines. Within the great bulky walls, fifty feet away, a sonorous orchestra proclaimed a feeling that someone was fooling, announced that someone was its lucky star, and demanded if it wasn't a lovely day to be caught in the rain. Inside those walls existed ineffable romance—an orchid-colored dream in which floated prototypes of their future selves, surrounded, engulfed, buoyed up by unnumbered boys. No one spoke; there was no more to say than the orchestra was saying to their young hearts, and when the music stopped, they did not speak; then suddenly they realized that they were not alone.

"We can eat later," a man's voice said.

"I don't care about it at all, when I'm with you."

The three young girls caught their breath in a gasp, clutched at one another's arms. The voices came from a car not five feet from where they stood; it was turned away from the gymnasium, so that under cover of the music, their approach had gone unobserved.

"What's one supper," the girl continued, "when I think of all the suppers we'll have together all through life?"

"Beginning next June, darling."

"Beginning next June, darling, darling, darling."

And once again a clutching went on among the listeners. For the girl's voice was that of Marion Lamb, the débutante who had been on the train.

At this point, because it was a rather cool night and her evening cloak was thin, Dizzy sneezed—sneezed loudly and sneezed again.

III.

"But how do we know you kids won't tell?" the man was demanding. He turned to Marion: "Can't you explain to them how important it is not to tell? Explain that it'll absolutely wreck your début at home."

"But I don't care, Harry. I'd be proud—"

"I care. It simply can't get around now."

"We won't tell," the young girls chorused ardently. And Gwen added: "We think it's cute."

"Do you realize you're the only ones that know?" he asked sternly. "The only ones! And if it slipped out, I'd know who told, and—"

There were such sinister threats in his voice that instinctively the trio recoiled a step.

"That isn't the way to talk to them," said Marion. "I went to school with these girls and I know they won't tell. Anyhow, they know it's not serious—that I get engaged every few weeks or so."

"Marion," cried the young man, "I can't stand hearing you talk like that!"

"Oh, Harry, I didn't mean to hurt you!" she gasped, equally upset. "You know there's never been anyone but you."

He groaned.

"Well, how are we going to silence this gallery?" Distraught, he fumbled in his pocket for money.

"No, Harry. They'll keep quiet." But looking at those six eyes, she felt a vast misgiving. "Listen, what would you three like more than anything in the world?"

They laughed and looked at one another.

"To go to the prom, I guess," said Gwen frankly. "But of course, we wouldn't be allowed to. Our parents wouldn't let us, even if we were invited—I mean—"

"I've got the idea," said Harry. "I'll tell you what I'll do. I know a side entrance that leads up to the indoor track. How would you like to sit up there in the dark and look on awhile without anybody seeing you?"

"Whew!" said Dizzy.

"If I take you up there, will you give me your sacred words of honor that you'll never breathe a word of what you heard tonight?"

"Will we!" they exclaimed together.

IV.

Leaving them on the running track, the focusing eye must move down momentarily to the thick of the dance below. Or rather to its outskirts, where a person had just appeared who has hitherto played a small and sorry part in this history, and there he stood uncertainly, his view obscured by a throbbing Harvard-Princeton stag line. If, half an hour before, anyone had told Shorty Ray that eleven o'clock would find him in his present situation, he would not even have said, "Huh!" Some boys of inconsiderable height are compensated by an almost passionate temerity. Not Shorty; since adolescence, he never had been able to face girls with a minimum of dignity. The dance at home was part of a campaign to break him of his shyness, and it had seemed a stroke of luck to him that if his grandmother's health were going to fail anyhow, it should have chosen this particular day.

As if in retribution for this irreverence, a telegram from Albany addressed to his sister had come to the house at the very moment when he had started to turn out his lights.

An older man would have torn open the telegram and read it, but anything sealed was sacred to him, and such telegrams spelled emergencies. There was nothing for it save to get it to Esther in the gymnasium as quickly as possible.

One thing he knew—he would not go upon the dance floor in search of her. After he had argued his way past the doorkeeper, he was simply standing there feeling helpless, when Dizzy spied him from above.

"There's Tommy!" she exclaimed.

"Where?"

"The short boy by the door. Well, that's pathetic, if you ask me! He wouldn't even come out and look at us, and then he goes to the prom."

"He doesn't seem to be having much of a time," said Clara.

"Let's go down and cheer him up," Gwen suggested.

"Not me," said Dizzy. "For one thing, I wouldn't want the Rays to know we were here."

"I forgot about that."

"Anyhow, he's gone now."

He was gone, but not, as they supposed, into the delirious carnival. Irresolute, he had finally conceived the idea of mounting to the running track and trying to locate Esther among the dancers. Even as Dizzy spoke, he was there at her elbow, to their mutual surprise.

"I thought you were in bed!" he exclaimed, as he recognized his cousin.

"I thought you were studying."

"I was studying when a telegram came, and now I've got to find Esther."

He was introduced with great formality; Gwen and Clara immediately adopting the convention that they had not known of his existence in the same town.

"Esther was in one of the boxes a while ago," said Gwen. "No. 18."

Grasping at this, Tommy turned to Dizzy.

"Then I wonder if you'd mind going over and giving her this telegram?"

"I would so mind," said Dizzy. "Why don't you give it to her yourself? We're not supposed to be here."

"Neither am I; they let me in. But I can't just walk across there all by myself, and you can," he said earnestly.

Gwen had been looking at him in a curiously intent way for some moments. He was not at all the person she had pictured—in fact, she decided that he was one of the handsomest boys she had ever seen in her life.

"I'll take it to her," she said suddenly.

"Will you?" For the first time he seemed to see Gwen—a girl who looked like the pictures in the magazines, and yet was smaller than himself. He thrust the telegram at her. "Thanks! Gosh, I certainly am—"

"I'm not going downstairs alone," she interrupted. "You've got to take me part way."

As they descended, he looked at her again out of the corner of his eye; at the big arch he paused.

"Now you take it the rest of the way," he said.

"The best way would be to do it together."

"Oh, no!" he exclaimed. "You didn't say that. I'm not going to walk across the floor."

"I didn't mean walk. If we walked, everybody'd kind of look at us, but if we danced across to the box, nobody would notice it."

"You said you'd take it!" he said indignantly.

"I will, but you've got to take me." And she added innocently, "That makes it easy for us both."

"I won't do it," he declared.

"Then you can take it yourself."

"I never—"

Suddenly, before he realized it, she was in the circle of his arm, his hand was on what was apparently a forgotten seam in her dress just between shoulder blades, and they were moving across the floor.

Through the line of stags and out into the kaleidoscope. Gwen was at home; all hesitancy at the daring of her idea vanishing like the tension of a football player after the kick-off. By some inexorable right, this was her world. This was, perhaps, not the time set for entering it, but, maybe because her generation had ceased to move in the old Euclidian world, her age ceased to matter after a moment. She felt as old as any girl on the floor.

And now, miracle of miracles, the lights dimmed, and at the signal, the divine spark passed from one orchestra to another, and Gwen was dancing onward in a breathless trance to the melody of "Cheek to Cheek."

***

In the Laurel Club box, the ladies were growing weary. Chaperonage, they decided, was too lightly undertaken, too poorly compensated for. They were tired of the parade of animation, of lovely, confident faces, and one of them said as much to the middle-aged man who sat at her side. He, too, wore the look of speculating upon the texture of cool pillowcases and the beatitude of absolute quiet.

"I had to come," she said, "but I still don't understand why you came."

"Perhaps because I saw in the morning paper that you'd be here, after all these years."

"This is no place to say that to a woman of my age; the competition makes me feel very old. Look at that odd-looking couple—like a pair of midgets. I haven't seen them before."

He looked, but they seemed like just the sort of eccentrics to wander into any doze, so, after vaguely replying, "Aren't they cute?" he glazed his eyes for a while, until she commented: "There they are again. Such little people. That girl—why, she can't be more than fourteen, and she's like a blasé, world-weary woman of twenty. Can you imagine what her parents could have been thinking of, to let her come here tonight?"

He looked again; then, after a long pause, he said, rather wearily:

"Yes, I can imagine."

"You think it's all right then?" she demanded. "Why, it seems to me—"

"No, Helen, I just meant I can imagine what they would be thinking if they knew about it. Because the girl seems to be my daughter."

V.

It was not in Bryan's nature to rush out and snatch Gwen from the floor. Should she pass near him again, he intended to bow to her very formally indeed and let the next step be hers. He was not angry with her—he supposed her hostess was behind the matter—but he was angry at a system which permitted a baby disguised as a young woman, a marriageable young woman, to dance at a semi-public ball.

At his undergraduate club the next day, he wended his way from group to group, stopping to chat momentarily here and there, but with his eye always out for Gwen, who was to meet him there. When the crowd was drifting out and down to the stadium, he called the Rays' house, and found her still there.

"You better meet me at the game," he said, glad he had given her the ticket. "I want to go down now and see the teams practice."

"Daddy, I hate to say it but I've lost it." Her voice was hushed and solemn. "I searched and searched, and then I remembered I stuck it in the mirror at home with some invitations, to see how it would look, and forgot to—"

The connection was broken, and a male voice demanded if there were rooms at the club tonight and if the steward had delivered a brown lunch basket to Thomas Pickering, '96. For ten minutes more he jangled the receiver; he wanted to tell her to buy a bad seat in the end stand and work her way around to him, but the phone service in Princeton shared the hysteria of the crowd.

People began going by the booth, looking at their watches and hurrying to get to the kick-off; in another five minutes there was no one going by the booth, and there was sweat upon Bryan's brow. He had played freshman football in college; it meant to him what war or chess might have meant to his grandfather. Resentment possessed him suddenly.

"After all, she had her fun last night, and now I have a right to mine. Let her miss it. She doesn't care, really."

But on the way to the stadium he was torn between the human roar that went up at momentary intervals behind that massive wall and the picture of Gwen making a last desperate search for that precious counter that gleamed uselessly in a mirror at home.

He hardened himself.

"It's that disorderliness. This will be a better lesson than any lecture."

Nevertheless, at the very gate Bryan paused once more; he and Gwen were very close, and he could still go after her, but a huge swelling cry from the arena decided him; he went in with the last dribble of the crowd.

It was as he reached his seat that he saw that there was a hand signaling him, heard a voice hailing him.

"Oh, daddy, here we are! We thought maybe you'd—"

"Sit down," he whispered, breathlessly slipping into his place. "People want to see. Did you find your ticket?"

"No, daddy. I had a terrible time—but this is Tommy Ray, daddy. He hasn't got a seat here; he was just keeping your seat till you came. He can sit anywhere because he—"

"Be quiet, Baby! You can tell me later. What's happened on the field? What's on that Scoreboard?"

"What Scoreboard?"

From the aisle steps whither he had moved, Tommy supplied the information that it was nothing to nothing; Bryan bent his whole attention upon the game.

At the quarter, he relaxed and demanded:

"How did you manage to get in?"

"Well, you see, Tommy Ray"—she lowered her voice—"this boy beside me—he's one of the ticket takers. And I knew he'd be somewhere, because he told me last night that was why he had to go home—"

She stopped herself.

"I understand," Bryan said dryly. "I wondered what you found to talk about in that remarkable dancing position."

"You were there?" she cried in dismay. "You—"

"Listen to that Harvard band," he interrupted, "jazzing old marching songs—seems sort of irreverent. Of course, you'd probably like them to play 'Cheek by Jowl.'"

"Daddy!"

But for a moment her eyes were far off on the gray horizon, listening, not to the band, but to that sweeter and somehow older tune.

"What did you think?" she asked, after a moment. "I mean when you saw me there?"

"What did I think? I thought you were just too cute for words."

"You didn't! I don't care how you punish me, but please don't ever say that horrible word again!"

THE END

