
I
VERY early morning. The sun was not yet risen, and the whole of Crescent Bay was hidden under a white sea-mist. The big bush-covered hills at the back were smothered. You could not see where they ended and the paddocks and bungalows began. The sandy road was gone and the paddocks and bungalows the other side of it; there were no white dunes covered with reddish grass beyond them; there was nothing to mark which was beach and where was the sea. A heavy dew had fallen. The grass was blue. Big drops hung on the bushes and just did not fall; the silvery, fluffy toi-toi was limp on its long stalks, and all the marigolds and the pinks in the bungalow gardens were bowed to the earth with wetness. Drenched were the cold fuchsias, round pearls of dew lay on the flat nasturtium leaves. It looked as though the sea had beaten up softly in the darkness, as though one immense wave had come rippling, rippling­how far? Perhaps if you had waked up in the middle of the night you might have seen a big fish flicking in at the window and gone again. . . .
Ah-Aah! sounded the sleepy sea. And from the bush there came the sound of little streams flowing, quickly, lightly, slipping between the smooth stones, gushing into ferny basins and out again; and there was the splashing of big drops on large leaves, and something else­what was it?­a faint stirring and shaking, the snapping of a twig and then such silence that it seemed some one was listening.

Round the corner of Crescent Bay, between the piled-up masses of broken rock, a flock of sheep came pattering. They were huddled together, a small, tossing, woolly mass, and their thin, stick-like legs trotted along quickly as if the cold and the quiet had frightened them. Behind them an old sheep-dog, his soaking paws covered with sand, ran along with his nose to the ground, but carelessly, as if thinking of something else. And then in the rocky gateway the shepherd himself appeared. He was a lean, upright old man, in a frieze coat that was covered with a web of tiny drops, velvet trousers tied under the knee, and a wide-awake with a folded blue handkerchief round the brim. One hand was crammed into his belt, the other grasped a beautifully smooth yellow stick. And as he walked, taking his time, he kept up a very soft light whistling, an airy, far-away fluting that sounded mournful and tender. The old dog cut an ancient caper or two and then drew up sharp, ashamed of his levity, and walked a few dignified paces by his master's side. The sheep ran forward in little pattering rushes; they began to bleat, and ghostly flocks and herds answered them from under the sea. "Baa! Baaa!" For a time they seemed to be always on the same piece of ground. There ahead was stretched the sandy road with shallow puddles; the same soaking bushes showed on either side and the same shadowy palings. Then something immense came into view; an enormous shock-haired giant with his arms stretched out. It was the big gum-tree outside Mrs. Stubbs' shop, and as they passed by there was a strong whiff of eucalyptus. And now big spots of light gleamed in the mist. The shepherd stopped whistling; he rubbed his red nose and wet beard on his wet sleeve and, screwing up his eyes, glanced in the direction of the sea. The sun was rising. It was marvellous how quickly the mist thinned, sped away, dissolved from the shallow plain, rolled up from the bush and was gone as if in a hurry to escape; big twists and curls jostled and shouldered each other as the silvery beams broadened. The far-away sky­a bright, pure blue-was reflected in the puddles, and the drops, swimming along the telegraph poles, flashed into points of light. Now the leaping, glittering sea was so bright it made one's eyes ache to look at it. The shepherd drew a pipe, the bowl as small as an acorn, out of his breast pocket, fumbled for a chunk of speckled tobacco, pared off a few shavings and stuffed the bowl. He was a grave, fine-looking old man. As he lit up and the blue smoke wreathed his head, the dog, watching, looked proud of him.

"Baa! Baaa!" The sheep spread out into a fan. They were just clear of the summer colony before the first sleeper turned over and lifted a drowsy head; their cry sounded in the dreams of little children . . . who lifted their arms to drag down, to cuddle the darling little woolly lambs of sleep. Then the first inhabitant appeared; it was the Burnells' cat Florrie, sitting on the gatepost, far too early as usual, looking for their milk-girl. When she saw the old sheep-dog she sprang up quickly, arched her back, drew in her tabby head, and seemed to give a little fastidious shiver. "Ugh! What a coarse, revolting creature!" said Florrie. But the old sheep-dog, not looking up, waggled past, flinging out his legs from side to side. Only one of his ears twitched to prove that he saw, and thought her a silly young female.

The breeze of morning lifted in the bush and the smell of leaves and wet black earth mingled with the sharp smell of the sea. Myriads of birds were singing. A goldfinch flew over the shepherd's head and, perching on the tiptop of a spray, it turned to the sun, ruffling its small breast feathers. And now they had passed the fisherman's hut, passed the charred-looking little whare where Leila the milk-girl lived with her old Gran. The sheep strayed over a yellow swamp and Wag, the sheep- dog, padded after, rounded them up and headed them for the steeper, narrower rocky pass that led out of Crescent Bay and towards Daylight Cove. "Baa! Baaa!" Faint the cry came as they rocked along the fast-drying road. The shepherd put away his pipe, dropping it into his breast-pocket so that the little bowl hung over. And straightway the soft airy whistling began again. Wag ran out along a ledge of rock after something that smelled, and ran back again disgusted. Then pushing, nudging, hurrying, the sheep rounded the bend and the shepherd followed after out of sight.

II
A few moments later the back door of one of the bungalows opened, and a figure in a broad-striped bathing suit flung down the paddock, cleared the stile, rushed through the tussock grass into the hollow, staggered up the sandy hillock, and raced for dear life over the big porous stones, over the cold, wet pebbles, on to the hard sand that gleamed like oil. Splish-Splosh! Splish-Splosh! The water bubbled round his legs as Stanley Burnell waded out exulting. First man in as usual! He'd beaten them all again. And he swooped down to souse his head and neck.

"Hail, brother! All hail, Thou Mighty One!" A velvety bass voice came booming over the water.

Great Scott! Damnation take it! Stanley lifted up to see a dark head bobbing far out and an arm lifted. It was Jonathan Trout­there before him! "Glorious morning!" sang the voice.

"Yes, very fine!" said Stanley briefly. Why the dickens didn't the fellow stick to his part of the sea? Why should he come barging over to this exact spot? Stanley gave a kick, a lunge and struck out, swimming overarm. But Jonathan was a match for him. Up he came, his black hair sleek on his forehead, his short beard sleek.

"I had an extraordinary dream last night!" he shouted.

What was the matter with the man? This mania for conversation irritated Stanley beyond words. And it was always the same­always some piffle about a dream he'd had, or some cranky idea he'd got hold of, or some rot he'd been reading. Stanley turned over on his back and kicked with his legs till he was a living waterspout. But even then . . . "I dreamed I was hanging over a terrifically high cliff, shouting to someone below." You would be! thought Stanley. He could stick no more of it. He stopped splashing. "Look here, Trout," he said, "I'm in rather a hurry this morning."

"You're WHAT?" Jonathan was so surprised­or pretended to be­that he sank under the water, then reappeared again blowing.

"All I mean is," said Stanley, "I've no time to­to­to fool about. I want to get this over. I'm in a hurry. I've work to do this morning­see?"

Jonathan was gone before Stanley had finished. "Pass, friend!" said the bass voice gently, and he slid away through the water with scarcely a ripple . . . But curse the fellow! He'd ruined Stanley's bathe. What an unpractical idiot the man was! Stanley struck out to sea again, and then as quickly swam in again, and away he rushed up the beach. He felt cheated.

Jonathan stayed a little longer in the water. He floated, gently moving his hands like fins, and letting the sea rock his long, skinny body. It was curious, but in spite of everything he was fond of Stanley Burnell. True, he had a fiendish desire to tease him sometimes, to poke fun at him, but at bottom he was sorry for the fellow. There was something pathetic in his determination to make a job of everything. You couldn't help feeling he'd be caught out one day, and then what an almighty cropper he'd come! At that moment an immense wave lifted Jonathan, rode past him, and broke along the beach with a joyful sound. What a beauty! And now there came another. That was the way to live­carelessly, recklessly, spending oneself. He got on to his feet and began to wade towards the shore, pressing his toes into the firm, wrinkled sand. To take things easy, not to fight against the ebb and flow of life, but to give way to it­that was what was needed. It was this tension that was all wrong. To live­to live! And the perfect morning, so fresh and fair, basking in the light, as though laughing at its own beauty, seemed to whisper, "Why not?"

But now he was out of the water Jonathan turned blue with cold. He ached all over; it was as though someone was wringing the blood out of him. And stalking up the beach, shivering, all his muscles tight, he too felt his bathe was spoilt. He'd stayed in too long.

III
Beryl was alone in the living-room when Stanley appeared, wearing a blue serge suit, a stiff collar and a spotted tie. He looked almost uncannily clean and brushed; he was going to town for the day. Dropping into his chair, he pulled out his watch and put it beside his plate.

"I've just got twenty-five minutes," he said. "You might go and see if the porridge is ready, Beryl?"

"Mother's just gone for it," said Beryl. She sat down at the table and poured out his tea.

"Thanks!" Stanley took a sip. "Hallo!" he said in an astonished voice, "you've forgotten the sugar."

"Oh, sorry!" But even then Beryl didn't help him; she pushed the basin across. What did this mean? As Stanley helped himself his blue eyes widened; they seemed to quiver. He shot a quick glance at his sister-in-law and leaned back.

"Nothing wrong, is there?" he asked carelessly, fingering his collar.

Beryl's head was bent; she turned her plate in her fingers.

"Nothing," said her light voice. Then she too looked up, and smiled at Stanley. "Why should there be?"

"O-oh! No reason at all as far as I know. I thought you seemed rather­"

At that moment the door opened and the three little girls appeared, each carrying a porridge plate. They were dressed alike in blue jerseys and knickers; their brown legs were bare, and each had her hair plaited and pinned up in what was called a horse's tail. Behind them came Mrs. Fairfield with the tray.

"Carefully, children," she warned. But they were taking the very greatest care. They loved being allowed to carry things. "Have you said good morning to your father?"

"Yes, grandma." They settled themselves on the bench opposite Stanley and Beryl.

"Good morning, Stanley!" Old Mrs. Fairfield gave him his plate.

"Morning, mother! How's the boy?"

"Splendid! He only woke up once last night. What a perfect morning!" The old woman paused, her hand on the loaf of bread, to gaze out of the open door into the garden. The sea sounded. Through the wide-open window streamed the sun on to the yellow varnished walls and bare floor. Everything on the table flashed and glittered. In the middle there was an old salad bowl filled with yellow and red nasturtiums. She smiled, and a look of deep content shone in her eyes.

"You might cut me a slice of that bread, mother," said Stanley. "I've only twelve and a half minutes before the coach passes. Has anyone given my shoes to the servant girl?"

"Yes, they're ready for you." Mrs. Fairfield was quite unruffled.

"Oh, Kezia! Why are you such a messy child!" cried Beryl despairingly.

"Me, Aunt Beryl?" Kezia stared at her. What had she done now? She had only dug a river down the middle of her porridge, filled it, and was eating the banks away. But she did that every single morning, and no one had said a word up till now.

"Why can't you eat your food properly like Isabel and Lottie?" How unfair grown-ups are!

"But Lottie always makes a floating island, don't you, Lottie?"

"I don't," said Isabel smartly. "I just sprinkle mine with sugar and put on the milk and finish it. Only babies play with their food."

Stanley pushed back his chair and got up.

"Would you get me those shoes, mother? And, Beryl, if you've finished, I wish you'd cut down to the gate and stop the coach. Run in to your mother, Isabel, and ask her where my bowler hat's been put. Wait a minute­have you children been playing with my stick?"

"No, father!"

"But I put it here," Stanley began to bluster. "I remember distinctly putting it in this corner. Now, who's had it? There's no time to lose. Look sharp! The stick's got to be found."

Even Alice, the servant-girl, was drawn into the chase. "You haven't been using it to poke the kitchen fire with by any chance?"

Stanley dashed into the bedroom where Linda was lying. "Most extraordinary thing. I can't keep a single possession to myself. They've made away with my stick, now!"

"Stick, dear? What stick?" Linda's vagueness on these occasions could not be real, Stanley decided. Would nobody sympathize with him?

"Coach! Coach, Stanley!" Beryl's voice cried from the gate.

Stanley waved his arm to Linda. "No time to say good-bye!" he cried. And he meant that as a punishment to her.

He snatched his bowler hat, dashed out of the house, and swung down the garden path. Yes, the coach was there waiting, and Beryl, leaning over the open gate, was laughing up at somebody or other just as if nothing had happened. The heartlessness of women! The way they took it for granted it was your job to slave away for them while they didn't even take the trouble to see that your walking-stick wasn't lost. Kelly trailed his whip across the horses.

"Good-bye, Stanley," called Beryl, sweetly and gaily. It was easy enough to say good-bye! And there she stood, idle, shading her eyes with her hand. The worst of it was Stanley had to shout good-bye too, for the sake of appearances. Then he saw her turn, give a little skip and run back to the house. She was glad to be rid of him!

Yes, she was thankful. Into the living-room she ran and called "He's gone!" Linda cried from her room: "Beryl! Has Stanley gone?" Old Mrs. Fairfield appeared, carrying the boy in his little flannel coatee.

"Gone?"

"Gone!"

Oh, the relief, the difference it made to have the man out of the house. Their very voices were changed as they called to one another; they sounded warm and loving and as if they shared a secret. Beryl went over to the table. "Have another cup of tea, mother. It's still hot." She wanted, somehow, to celebrate the fact that they could do what they liked now. There was no man to disturb them; the whole perfect day was theirs.

"No, thank you, child," said old Mrs. Fairfield, but the way at that moment she tossed the boy up and said "a-goos-a-goos-a-ga!" to him meant that she felt the same. The little girls ran into the paddock like chickens let out of a coop.

Even Alice, the servant-girl, washing up the dishes in the kitchen, caught the infection and used the precious tank water in a perfectly reckless fashion.

"Oh, these men!" said she, and she plunged the teapot into the bowl and held it under the water even after it had stopped bubbling, as if it too was a man and drowning was too good for them.

IV
"Wait for me, Isa-bel! Kezia, wait for me!"

There was poor little Lottie, left behind again, because she found it so fearfully hard to get over the stile by herself. When she stood on the first step her knees began to wobble; she grasped the post. Then you had to put one leg over. But which leg? She never could decide. And when she did finally put one leg over with a sort of stamp of despair­then the feeling was awful. She was half in the paddock still and half in the tussock grass. She clutched the post desperately and lifted up her voice. "Wait for me!"

"No, don't you wait for her, Kezia!" said Isabel. "She's such a little silly. She's always making a fuss. Come on!" And she tugged Kezia's jersey. "You can use my bucket if you come with me," she said kindly. "It's bigger than yours." But Kezia couldn't leave Lottie all by herself. She ran back to her. By this time Lottie was very red in the face and breathing heavily.

"Here, put your other foot over," said Kezia.

"Where?"

Lottie looked down at Kezia as if from a mountain height.

"Here where my hand is." Kezia patted the place.

"Oh, there do you mean!" Lottie gave a deep sigh and put the second foot over.

"Now­sort of turn round and sit down and slide," said Kezia.

"But there's nothing to sit down on, Kezia," said Lottie.

She managed it at last, and once it was over she shook herself and began to beam.

"I'm getting better at climbing over stiles, aren't I, Kezia?"

Lottie's was a very hopeful nature.

The pink and the blue sunbonnet followed Isabel's bright red sunbonnet up that sliding, slipping hill. At the top they paused to decide where to go and to have a good stare at who was there already. Seen from behind, standing against the skyline, gesticulating largely with their spades, they looked like minute puzzled explorers.

The whole family of Samuel Josephs was there already with their lady-help, who sat on a camp-stool and kept order with a whistle that she wore tied round her neck, and a small cane with which she directed operations. The Samuel Josephs never played by themselves or managed their own game. If they did, it ended in the boys pouring water down the girls' necks or the girls trying to put little black crabs into the boys' pockets. So Mrs. S. J. and the poor lady-help drew up what she called a "brogramme" every morning to keep them "abused and out of bischief." It was all competitions or races or round games. Everything began with a piercing blast of the lady-help's whistle and ended with another. There were even prizes­large, rather dirty paper parcels which the lady-help with a sour little smile drew out of a bulging string kit. The Samuel Josephs fought fearfully for the prizes and cheated and pinched one another's arms­they were all expert pinchers. The only time the Burnell children ever played with them Kezia had got a prize, and when she undid three bits of paper she found a very small rusty button-hook. She couldn't understand why they made such a fuss. . . .

But they never played with the Samuel Josephs now or even went to their parties. The Samuel Josephs were always giving children's parties at the Bay and there was always the same food. A big washhand basin of very brown fruit-salad, buns cut into four and a washhand jug full of something the lady-help called "Limonadear." And you went away in the evening with half the frill torn off your frock or something spilled all down the front of your open-work pinafore, leaving the Samuel Josephs leaping like savages on their lawn. No! They were too awful.

On the other side of the beach, close down to the water, two little boys, their knickers rolled up, twinkled like spiders. One was digging, the other pattered in and out of the water, filling a small bucket. They were the Trout boys, Pip and Rags. But Pip was so busy digging and Rags was so busy helping that they didn't see their little cousins until they were quite close.

"Look!" said Pip. "Look what I've discovered." And he showed them an old wet, squashed-looking boot. The three little girls stared.

"Whatever are you going to do with it?" asked Kezia.

"Keep it, of course!" Pip was very scornful. "It's a find­see?"

Yes, Kezia saw that. All the same. . .

"There's lots of things buried in the sand," explained Pip. "They get chucked up from wrecks. Treasure. Why­you might find­"

"But why does Rags have to keep on pouring water in?" asked Lottie.

"Oh, that's to moisten it," said Pip, "to make the work a bit easier. Keep it up, Rags."

And good little Rags ran up and down, pouring in the water that turned brown like cocoa.

"Here, shall I show you what I found yesterday?" said Pip mysteriously, and he stuck his spade into the sand. "Promise not to tell."

They promised.

"Say, cross my heart straight dinkum."

The little girls said it.

Pip took something out of his pocket, rubbed it a long time on the front of his jersey, then breathed on it and rubbed it again.

"Now turn round!" he ordered.

They turned round.

"All look the same way! Keep still! Now!"

And his hand opened; he held up to the light something that flashed, that winked, that was a most lovely green.

"It's a nemeral," said Pip solemnly.

"Is it really, Pip?" Even Isabel was impressed.

The lovely green thing seemed to dance in Pip's fingers. Aunt Beryl had a nemeral in a ring, but it was a very small one. This one was as big as a star and far more beautiful.

V
As the morning lengthened whole parties appeared over the sand-hills and came down on the beach to bathe. It was understood that at eleven o'clock the women and children of the summer colony had the sea to themselves. First the women undressed, pulled on their bathing dresses and covered their heads in hideous caps like sponge bags; then the children were unbuttoned. The beach was strewn with little heaps of clothes and shoes; the big summer hats, with stones on them to keep them from blowing away, looked like immense shells. It was strange that even the sea seemed to sound differently when all those leaping, laughing figures ran into the waves. Old Mrs. Fairfield, in a lilac cotton dress and a black hat tied under the chin, gathered her little brood and got them ready. The little Trout boys whipped their shirts over their heads, and away the five sped, while their grandma sat with one hand in her knitting-bag ready to draw out the ball of wool when she was satisfied they were safely in.

The firm compact little girls were not half so brave as the tender, delicate-looking boys. Pip and Rags, shivering, crouching down, slapping the water, never hesitated. But Isabel, who could swim twelve strokes, and Kezia, who could nearly swim eight, only followed on the strict understanding they were not to be splashed. As for Lottie, she didn't follow at all. She liked to be left to go in her own way, please. And that way was to sit down at the edge of the water, her legs straight, her knees pressed together, and to make vague motions with her arms as if she expected to be wafted out to sea. But when a bigger wave than usual, an old whiskery one, came lolloping along in her direction, she scrambled to her feet with a face of horror and flew up the beach again.

"Here, mother, keep those for me, will you?"

Two rings and a thin gold chain were dropped into Mrs Fairfield's lap.

"Yes, dear. But aren't you going to bathe here?"

"No-o," Beryl drawled. She sounded vague. "I'm undressing farther along. I'm going to bathe with Mrs. Harry Kember."

"Very well." But Mrs. Fairfield's lips set. She disapproved of Mrs Harry Kember. Beryl knew it.

Poor old mother, she smiled, as she skimmed over the stones. Poor old mother! Old! Oh, what joy, what bliss it was to be young. . . .

"You look very pleased," said Mrs. Harry Kember. She sat hunched up on the stones, her arms round her knees, smoking.

"It's such a lovely day," said Beryl, smiling down at her.

"Oh my dear! " Mrs. Harry Kember's voice sounded as though she knew better than that. But then her voice always sounded as though she knew something more about you than you did yourself. She was a long, strange-looking woman with narrow hands and feet. Her face, too, was long and narrow and exhausted-looking; even her fair curled fringe looked burnt out and withered. She was the only woman at the Bay who smoked, and she smoked incessantly, keeping the cigarette between her lips while she talked, and only taking it out when the ash was so long you could not understand why it did not fall. When she was not playing bridge­she played bridge every day of her life­she spent her time lying in the full glare of the sun. She could stand any amount of it; she never had enough. All the same, it did not seem to warm her. Parched, withered, cold, she stretched on the stones like a piece of tossed-up driftwood. The women at the Bay thought she was very, very fast. Her lack of vanity, her slang, the way she treated men as though she was one of them, and the fact that she didn't care twopence about her house and called the servant Gladys "Glad-eyes," was disgraceful. Standing on the veranda steps Mrs. Kember would call in her indifferent, tired voice, "I say, Glad-eyes, you might heave me a handkerchief if I've got one, will you?" And Glad-eyes, a red bow in her hair instead of a cap, and white shoes, came running with an impudent smile. It was an absolute scandal! True, she had no children, and her husband. . . . Here the voices were always raised; they became fervent. How can he have married her? How can he, how can he? It must have been money, of course, but even then!

Mrs. Kember's husband was at least ten years younger than she was, and so incredibly handsome that he looked like a mask or a most perfect illustration in an American novel rather than a man. Black hair, dark blue eyes, red lips, a slow sleepy smile, a fine tennis player, a perfect dancer, and with it all a mystery. Harry Kember was like a man walking in his sleep. Men couldn't stand him, they couldn't get a word out of the chap; he ignored his wife just as she ignored him. How did he live? Of course there were stories, but such stories! They simply couldn't be told. The women he's been seen with, the places he'd been seen in . . . but nothing was ever certain, nothing definite. Some of the women at the Bay privately thought he'd commit a murder one day. Yes, even while they talked to Mrs. Kember and took in the awful concoction she was wearing, they saw her, stretched as she lay on the beach; but cold, bloody, and still with a cigarette stuck in the corner of her mouth.

Mrs. Kember rose, yawned, unsnapped her belt buckle, and tugged at the tape of her blouse. And Beryl stepped out of her skirt and shed her jersey, and stood up in her short white petticoat, and her camisole with ribbon bows on the shoulders.

"Mercy on us," said Mrs. Harry Kember, "what a little beauty you are!"

"Don't!" said Beryl softly; but, drawing off one stocking and then the other, she felt a little beauty.

"My dear­why not?" said Mrs. Harry Kember, stamping on her own petticoat. Really­her underclothes! A pair of blue cotton knickers and a linen bodice that reminded one somehow of a pillow-case. . . . "And you don't wear stays, do you?" She touched Beryl's waist, and Beryl sprang away with a small affected cry. Then "Never!" she said firmly.

"Lucky little creature," sighed Mrs. Kember, unfastening her own.

Beryl turned her back and began the complicated movements of someone who is trying to take off her clothes and to pull on her bathing-dress all at one and the same time.

"Oh, my dear­don't mind me," said Mrs. Harry Kember. "Why be shy? I shan't eat you. I shan't be shocked like those other ninnies." And she gave her strange neighing laugh and grimaced at the other women.

But Beryl was shy. She never undressed in front of anybody. Was that silly? Mrs. Harry Kember made her feel it was silly, even something to be ashamed of. Why be shy indeed! She glanced quickly at her friend standing so boldly in her torn chemise and lighting a fresh cigarette; and a quick, bold, evil feeling started up in her breast. Laughing recklessly, she drew on the limp, sandy-feeling bathing-dress that was not quite dry and fastened the twisted buttons.

"That's better," said Mrs. Harry Kember. They began to go down the beach together. "Really, it's a sin for you to wear clothes, my dear. Somebody's got to tell you some day."

The water was quite warm. It was that marvellous transparent blue, flecked with silver, but the sand at the bottom looked gold; when you kicked with your toes there rose a little puff of gold-dust. Now the waves just reached her breast. Beryl stood, her arms outstretched, gazing out, and as each wave came she gave the slightest little jump, so that it seemed it was the wave which lifted her so gently.

"I believe in pretty girls having a good time," said Mrs. Harry Kember. "Why not? Don't you make a mistake, my dear. Enjoy yourself." And suddenly she turned turtle, disappeared, and swam away quickly, quickly, like a rat. Then she flicked round and began swimming back. She was going to say something else. Beryl felt that she was being poisoned by this cold woman, but she longed to hear. But oh, how strange, how horrible! As Mrs. Harry Kember came up close she looked, in her black waterproof bathing-cap, with her sleepy face lifted above the water, just her chin touching, like a horrible caricature of her husband.

VI
In a steamer chair, under a manuka tree that grew in the middle of the front grass patch, Linda Burnell dreamed the morning away. She did nothing. She looked up at the dark, close, dry leaves of the manuka, at the chinks of blue between, and now and again a tiny yellowish flower dropped on her. Pretty­yes, if you held one of those flowers on the palm of your hand and looked at it closely, it was an exquisite small thing. Each pale yellow petal shone as if each was the careful work of a loving hand. The tiny tongue in the centre gave it the shape of a bell. And when you turned it over the outside was a deep bronze colour. But as soon as they flowered, they fell and were scattered. You brushed them off your frock as you talked; the horrid little things got caught in one's hair. Why, then, flower at all? Who takes the trouble­or the joy­to make all these things that are wasted, wasted. . . . It was uncanny.

On the grass beside her, lying between two pillows, was the boy. Sound asleep he lay, his head turned away from his mother. His fine dark hair looked more like a shadow than like real hair, but his ear was a bright, deep coral. Linda clasped her hands above her head and crossed her feet. It was very pleasant to know that all these bungalows were empty, that everybody was down on the beach, out of sight, out of hearing. She had the garden to herself; she was alone.

Dazzling white the picotees shone; the golden-eyed marigold glittered; the nasturtiums wreathed the veranda poles in green and gold flame. If only one had time to look at these flowers long enough, time to get over the sense of novelty and strangeness, time to know them! But as soon as one paused to part the petals, to discover the under-side of the leaf, along came Life and one was swept away. And, lying in her cane chair, Linda felt so light; she felt like a leaf. Along came Life like a wind and she was seized and shaken; she had to go. Oh dear, would it always be so? Was there no escape?

. . . Now she sat on the veranda of their Tasmanian home, leaning against her father's knee. And he promised, "As soon as you and I are old enough, Linny, we'll cut off somewhere, we'll escape. Two boys together. I have a fancy I'd like to sail up a river in China." Linda saw that river, very wide, covered with little rafts and boats. She saw the yellow hats of the boatmen and she heard their high, thin voices as they called . . .

"Yes, papa."

But just then a very broad young man with bright ginger hair walked slowly past their house, and slowly, solemnly even, uncovered. Linda's father pulled her ear teasingly, in the way he had.

"Linny's beau," he whispered.

"Oh, papa, fancy being married to Stanley Burnell!"

Well, she was married to him. And what was more she loved him. Not the Stanley whom everyone saw, not the everyday one; but a timid, sensitive, innocent Stanley who knelt down every night to say his prayers, and who longed to be good. Stanley was simple. If he believed in people­as he believed in her, for instance­it was with his whole heart. He could not be disloyal; he could not tell a lie. And how terribly he suffered if he thought anyone­she­was not being dead straight, dead sincere with him! "This is too subtle for me!" He flung out the words, but his open quivering, distraught look was like the look of a trapped beast.

But the trouble was­here Linda felt almost inclined to laugh, though Heaven knows it was no laughing matter­she saw her Stanley so seldom. There were glimpses, moments, breathing spaces of calm, but all the rest of the time it was like living in a house that couldn't be cured of the habit of catching on fire, on a ship that got wrecked every day. And it was always Stanley who was in the thick of the danger. Her whole time was spent in rescuing him, and restoring him, and calming him down, and listening to his story. And what was left of her time was spent in the dread of having children.

Linda frowned; she sat up quickly in her steamer chair and clasped her ankles. Yes, that was her real grudge against life; that was what she could not understand. That was the question she asked and asked, and listened in vain for the answer. It was all very well to say it was the common lot of women to bear children. It wasn't true. She, for one, could prove that wrong. She was broken, made weak, her courage was gone, through child-bearing. And what made it doubly hard to bear was, she did not love her children. It was useless pretending. Even if she had had the strength she never would have nursed and played with the little girls. No, it was as though a cold breath had chilled her through and through on each of those awful jour- neys; she had no warmth left to give them. As to the boy­well, thank Heaven, mother had taken him; he was mother's, or Beryl's, or anybody's who wanted him. She had hardly held him in her arms. She was so indifferent about him that as he lay there . . . Linda glanced down.

The boy had turned over. He lay facing her, and he was no longer asleep. His dark-blue, baby eyes were open; he looked as though he was peeping at his mother. And suddenly his face dimpled; it broke into a wide, toothless smile, a perfect beam, no less.

"I'm here!" that happy smile seemed to say. "Why don't you like me?"

There was something so quaint, so unexpected about that smile that Linda smiled herself. But she checked herself and said to the boy coldly, "I don't like babies."

"Don't like babies?" The boy couldn't believe her. "Don't like me? " He waved his arms foolishly at his mother.

Linda dropped off her chair on to the grass.

"Why do you keep on smiling?" she said severely. "If you knew what I was thinking about, you wouldn't."

But he only squeezed up his eyes, slyly, and rolled his head on the pillow. He didn't believe a word she said.

"We know all about that!" smiled the boy.

Linda was so astonished at the confidence of this little creature. . . . Ah no, be sincere. That was not what she felt; it was something far different, it was something so new, so . . . The tears danced in her eyes; she breathed in a small whisper to the boy, "Hallo, my funny!"

But by now the boy had forgotten his mother. He was serious again. Something pink, something soft waved in front of him. He made a grab at it and it immediately disappeared. But when he lay back, another, like the first, appeared. This time he determined to catch it. He made a tremendous effort and rolled right over.

VII
The tide was out; the beach was deserted; lazily flopped the warm sea. The sun beat down, beat down hot and fiery on the fine sand, baking the grey and blue and black and white-veined pebbles. It sucked up the little drop of water that lay in the hollow of the curved shells; it bleached the pink convolvulus that threaded through and through the sand-hills. Nothing seemed to move but the small sand-hoppers. Pit-pit-pit! They were never still.

Over there on the weed-hung rocks that looked at low tide like shaggy beasts come down to the water to drink, the sunlight seemed to spin like a silver coin dropped into each of the small rock pools. They danced, they quivered, and minute ripples laved the porous shores. Looking down, bending over, each pool was like a lake with pink and blue houses clustered on the shores; and oh! the vast mountainous country behind those houses­the ravines, the passes, the dangerous creeks and fearful tracks that led to the water's edge. Underneath waved the sea-forest­pink thread-like trees, velvet anemones, and orange berry-spotted weeds. Now a stone on the bottom moved, rocked, and there was a glimpse of a black feeler; now a thread-like creature wavered by and was lost. Something was happening to the pink, waving trees; they were changing to a cold moonlight blue. And now there sounded the faintest "plop." Who made that sound? What was going on down there? And how strong, how damp the seaweed smelt in the hot sun. . . .

The green blinds were drawn in the bungalows of the summer colony. Over the verandas, prone on the paddock, flung over the fences, there were exhausted-looking bathing-dresses and rough striped towels. Each back window seemed to have a pair of sand-shoes on the sill and some lumps of rock or a bucket or a collection of pawa shells. The bush quivered in a haze of heat; the sandy road was empty except for the Trouts' dog Snooker, who lay stretched in the very middle of it. His blue eye was turned up, his legs stuck out stiffly, and he gave an occasional desperate-sounding puff, as much as to say he had decided to make an end of it and was only waiting for some kind cart to come along.

"What are you looking at, my grandma? Why do you keep stopping and sort of staring at the wall?"

Kezia and her grandmother were taking their siesta together. The little girl, wearing only her short drawers and her under-bodice, her arms and legs bare, lay on one of the puffed-up pillows of her grandma's bed, and the old woman, in a white ruffled dressing-gown sat in a rocker at the window, with a long piece of pink knitting in her lap. This room that they shared, like the other rooms of her bungalow, was of light varnished wood and the floor was bare. The furniture was of the shabbiest, the simplest. The dressing-table, for instance, was a packing-case in a sprigged muslin petticoat, and the mirror above was very strange; it was as though a little piece of forked lightning was imprisoned in it. On the table there stood a jar of sea-pinks, pressed so tightly together they looked more like a velvet pincushion, and a special shell which Kezia had given her grandma for a pin-tray, and another even more special which she had thought would make a very nice place for a watch to curl up in.

"Tell me, grandma," said Kezia.

The old woman sighed, whipped the wool twice round her thumb, and drew the bone needle through. She was casting on.

"I was thinking of your Uncle William, darling," she said quietly.

"My Australian Uncle William?" said Kezia. She had another.

"Yes, of course."

"The one I never saw?"

"That was the one."

"Well, what happened to him?" Kezia knew perfectly well, but she wanted to be told again.

"He went to the mines, and he got a sunstroke there and died," said old Mrs. Fairfield.

Kezia blinked and considered the picture again . . . a little man fallen over like a tin soldier by the side of the big black hole.

"Does it make you sad to think about him, grandma?" She hated her grandma to be sad.

It was the old woman's turn to consider. Did it make her sad? To look back, back. To stare down the years, as Kezia had seen her doing. To look after them as a woman does, long after they were out of sight. Did it make her sad? No, life was like that.

"No, Kezia."

"But why?" asked Kezia. She lifted one bare arm and began to draw things in the air. "Why did Uncle William have to die? He wasn't old."

Mrs. Fairfield began counting the stitches in threes. "It just happened," she said in an absorbed voice.

"Does everybody have to die?" asked Kezia.

"Everybody!"

"Me? " Kezia sounded fearfully incredulous.

"Some day, my darling."

"But, grandma." Kezia waved her left leg and waggled the toes. They felt sandy. "What if I just won't?"

The old woman sighed again and drew a long thread from the ball.

"We're not asked, Kezia," she said sadly. "It happens to all of us sooner or later."

Kezia lay still thinking this over. She didn't want to die. It meant she would have to leave here, leave everywhere, for ever, leave­leave her grandma. She rolled over quickly.

"Grandma," she said in a startled voice.

"What, my pet!"

"You're not to die." Kezia was very decided.

"Ah, Kezia"­her grandma looked up and smiled and shook her head­"don't let's talk about it."

"But you're not to. You couldn't leave me. You couldn't not be there." This was awful. "Promise me you won't ever do it, grandma," pleaded Kezia.

The old woman went on knitting.

"Promise me! Say never!"

But still her grandma was silent.

Kezia rolled off her bed; she couldn't bear it any longer, and lightly she leapt on to her grandma's knees, clasped her hand round the old woman's throat and began kissing her, under the chin, behind the ear, and blowing down her neck.

"Say never . . . say never . . . say never­" She gasped between the kisses. And then she began, very softly and lightly, to tickle her grandma.

"Kezia!" The old woman dropped her knitting. She swung back in the rocker. She began to tickle Kezia. "Say never, say never, say never," gurgled Kezia, while they lay there laughing in each other's arms. "Come, that's enough, my squirrel! That's enough, my wild pony!" said old Mrs. Fairfield, setting her cap straight. "Pick up my knitting."

Both of them had forgotten what the "never" was about.

VIII
The sun was still full on the garden when the back door of the Burnells' shut with a bang, and a very gay figure walked down the path to the gate. It was Alice, the servant-girl, dressed for her afternoon out. She wore a white cotton dress with such large red spots on it and so many that they made you shudder, white shoes and a leghorn turned up under the brim with poppies. Of course she wore gloves, white ones, stained at the fastenings with iron-mould, and in one hand she carried a very dashed-looking sunshade which she referred to as her perishall.

Beryl, sitting in the window, fanning her freshly-washed hair, thought she had never seen such a guy. If Alice had only blacked her face with a piece of cork before she started out, the picture would have been complete. And where did a girl like that go to in a place like this? The heart-shaped Fijian fan beat scornfully at that lovely bright mane. She supposed Alice had picked up some horrible common larrikin and they'd go off into the bush together. Pity to have made herself so conspicuous; they'd have hard work to hide with Alice in that rig-out.

But no, Beryl was unfair. Alice was going to tea with Mrs Stubbs, who'd sent her an "invite" by the little boy who called for orders. She had taken ever such a liking to Mrs. Stubbs ever since the first time she went to the shop to get something for her mosquitoes.

"Dear heart!" Mrs. Stubbs had clapped her hand to her side. "I never seen anyone so eaten. You might have been attacked by canningbals."

Alice did wish there'd been a bit of life on the road though. Made her feel so queer, having nobody behind her. Made her feel all weak in the spine. She couldn't believe that someone wasn't watching her. And yet it was silly to turn round; it gave you away. She pulled up her gloves, hummed to herself and said to the distant gum-tree, "Shan't be long now." But that was hardly company.

Mrs. Stubbs's shop was perched on a little hillock just off the road. It had two big windows for eyes, a broad veranda for a hat, and the sign on the roof, scrawled MRS. STUBBS'S, was like a little card stuck rakishly in the hat crown.

On the veranda there hung a long string of bathing-dresses, clinging together as though they'd just been rescued from the sea rather than waiting to go in, and beside them there hung a cluster of sand-shoes so extraordinarily mixed that to get at one pair you had to tear apart and forcibly separate at least fifty. Even then it was the rarest thing to find the left that belonged to the right. So many people had lost patience and gone off with one shoe that fitted and one that was a little too big. . . . Mrs. Stubbs prided herself on keeping something of everything. The two windows, arranged in the form of precarious pyramids, were crammed so tight, piled so high, that it seemed only a conjurer could prevent them from toppling over. In the left-hand corner of one window, glued to the pane by four gelatine lozenges, there was­and there had been from time immemorial­a notice.

LOST! HANSOME GOLE BROOCH
SOLID GOLD
ON OR NEAR BEACH
REWARD OFFERED

Alice pressed open the door. The bell jangled, the red serge curtains parted, and Mrs. Stubbs appeared. With her broad smile and the long bacon knife in her hand, she looked like a friendly brigand. Alice was welcomed so warmly that she found it quite difficult to keep up her "manners." They consisted of persistent little coughs and hems, pulls at her gloves, tweaks at her skirt, and a curious difficulty in seeing what was set before her or understanding what was said.

Tea was laid on the parlour table­ham, sardines, a whole pound of butter, and such a large johnny cake that it looked like an advertisement for somebody's baking-powder. But the Primus stove roared so loudly that it was useless to try to talk above it. Alice sat down on the edge of a basket-chair while Mrs. Stubbs pumped the stove still higher. Suddenly Mrs. Stubbs whipped the cushion off a chair and disclosed a large brown-paper parcel.

"I've just had some new photers taken, my dear," she shouted cheerfully to Alice. "Tell me what you think of them."

In a very dainty, refined way Alice wet her finger and put the tissue back from the first one. Life! How many there were! There were three dozzing at least. And she held it up to the light.

Mrs. Stubbs sat in an arm-chair, leaning very much to one side. There was a look of mild astonishment on her large face. and well there might be. For though the arm-chair stood on a carpet, to the left of it, miraculously skirting the carpet-border, there was a dashing water-fall. On her right stood a Grecian pillar with a giant fern-tree on either side of it, and in the background towered a gaunt mountain, pale with snow.

"It is a nice style, isn't it?" shouted Mrs. Stubbs; and Alice had just screamed "Sweetly" when the roaring of the Primus stove died down, fizzled out, ceased, and she said "Pretty" in a silence that was frightening.

"Draw up your chair, my dear," said Mrs. Stubbs, beginning to pour out. "Yes," she said thoughtfully, as she handed the tea, "but I don't care about the size. I'm having an enlargemint. All very well for Christmas cards, but I never was the one for small photers myself. You get no comfort out of them. To say the truth, I find them dis'eartening."

Alice quite saw what she meant.

"Size," said Mrs. Stubbs. "Give me size. That was what my poor dear husband was always saying. He couldn't stand anything small. Gave him the creeps. And, strange as it may seem my dear"­here Mrs. Stubbs creaked and seemed to expand herself at the memory­"it was dropsy that carried him off at the larst. Many's the time they drawn one and a half pints from 'im at the 'ospital . . . It seemed like a judgemint."

Alice burned to know exactly what it was that was drawn from him. She ventured, "I suppose it was water."

But Mrs. Stubbs fixed Alice with her eyes and replied meaningly, "It was liquid, my dear."

Liquid! Alice jumped away from the word like a cat and came back to it, nosing and wary.

"That's 'im!" said Mrs. Stubbs, and she pointed dramatically to the life-size head and shoulders of a burly man with a dead white rose in the button-hole of his coat that made you think of a curl of cold mutting fat. Just below, in silver letters on a red cardboard ground, were the words, "Be not afraid, it is I."

"It's ever such a fine face," said Alice faintly.

The pale-blue bow on the top of Mrs. Stubbs's fair frizzy hair quivered. She arched her plump neck. What a neck she had! It was bright pink where it began and then it changed to warm apricot, and that faded to the colour of a brown egg and then to a deep creamy.

"All the same, my dear," she said surprisingly, "freedom's best!" Her soft, fat chuckle sounded like a purr. "Freedom's best," said Mrs. Stubbs again.

Freedom! Alice gave a loud, silly little titter. She felt awkward. Her mind flew back to her own kitching. Ever so queer! She wanted to be back in it again.

IX
A strange company assembled in the Burnells' washhouse after tea. Round the table there sat a bull, a rooster, a donkey that kept forgetting it was a donkey, a sheep and a bee. The washhouse was the perfect place for such a meeting because they could make as much noise as they liked, and nobody ever interrupted. It was a small tin shed standing apart from the bungalow. Against the wall there was a deep trough and in the corner a copper with a basket of clothes-pegs on top of it. The little window, spun over with cobwebs, had a piece of candle and a mouse-trap on the dusty sill. There were clothes-lines criss-crossed overhead and, hanging from a peg on the wall, a very big, a huge, rusty horseshoe. The table was in the middle with a form at either side.

"You can't be a bee, Kezia. A bee's not an animal. It's a ninseck."

"Oh, but I do want to be a bee frightfully," wailed Kezia. . . . A tiny bee, all yellow-furry, with striped legs. She drew her legs up under her and leaned over the table. She felt she was a bee.

"A ninseck must be an animal," she said stoutly. "It makes a noise. It's not like a fish."

"I'm a bull, I'm a bull!" cried Pip. And he gave such a tremendous bellow­how did he make that noise?­that Lottie looked quite alarmed.

"I'll be a sheep," said little Rags. "A whole lot of sheep went past this morning."

"How do you know?"

"Dad heard them. Baa!" He sounded like the little lamb that trots behind and seems to wait to be carried.

"Cock-a-doodle-do!" shrilled Isabel. With her red cheeks and bright eyes she looked like a rooster.

"What'll I be?" Lottie asked everybody, and she sat there smiling, waiting for them to decide for her. It had to be an easy one.

"Be a donkey, Lottie." It was Kezia's suggestion. "Hee-haw! You can't forget that."

"Hee-haw!" said Lottie solemnly. "When do I have to say it?"

"I'll explain, I'll explain," said the bull. It was he who had the cards. He waved them round his head. "All be quiet! All listen!" And he waited for them. "Look here, Lottie." He turned up a card. "It's got two spots on it­see? Now, if you put that card in the middle and somebody else has one with two spots as well, you say 'Hee-haw,' and the card's yours."

"Mine?" Lottie was round-eyed. "To keep?"

"No, silly. Just for the game, see? Just while we're playing." The bull was very cross with her.

"Oh, Lottie, you are a little silly," said the proud rooster.

Lottie looked at both of them. Then she hung her head; her lip quivered. "I don't want to play," she whispered. The others glanced at one another like conspirators. All of them knew what that meant. She would go away and be discovered somewhere standing with her pinny thrown over her head, in a corner, or against a wall, or even behind a chair.

"Yes, you do, Lottie. It's quite easy," said Kezia.

And Isabel, repentant, said exactly like a grown-up, "Watch me , Lottie, and you'll soon learn."

"Cheer up, Lot," said Pip. "There, I know what I'll do. I'll give you the first one. It's mine, really, but I'll give it to you. Here you are." And he slammed the card down in front of Lottie.

Lottie revived at that. But now she was in another difficulty. "I haven't got a hanky," she said; "I want one badly, too."

"Here, Lottie, you can use mine." Rags dipped into his sailor blouse and brought up a very wet-looking one, knotted together. "Be very careful," he warned her. "Only use that corner. Don't undo it. I've got a little starfish inside I'm going to try and tame."

"Oh, come on, you girls," said the bull. "And mind­you're not to look at your cards. You've got to keep your hands under the table till I say 'Go.'"

Smack went the cards round the table. They tried with all their might to see, but Pip was too quick for them. It was very exciting, sitting there in the washhouse; it was all they could do not to burst into a little chorus of animals before Pip had finished dealing.

"Now, Lottie, you begin."

Timidly Lottie stretched out a hand, took the top card off her pack, had a good look at it­it was plain she was counting the spots­and put it down.

"No, Lottie, you can't do that. You mustn't look first. You must turn it the other way over."

"But then everybody will see it the same time as me," said Lottie. The game proceeded. Mooe-ooo-er! The bull was terrible. He charged over the table and seemed to eat the cards up.

Bss-ss! said the bee.

Cock-a-doodle-do! Isabel stood up in her excitement and moved her elbows like wings.

Baa! Little Rags put down the King of Diamonds and Lottie put down the one they called the King of Spain. She had hardly any cards left.

"Why don't you call out, Lottie?"

"I've forgotten what I am," said the donkey woefully.

"Well, change! Be a dog instead! Bow-wow!"

"Oh yes. That's much easier." Lottie smiled again. But when she and Kezia both had a one Kezia waited on purpose. The others made signs to Lottie and pointed. Lottie turned very red; she looked bewildered, and at last she said, "Hee-haw! Ke-zia."

"Ss! Wait a minute!" They were in the very thick of it when the bull stopped them, holding up his hand. "What's that? What's that noise?"

"What noise? What do you mean?" asked the rooster.

"Ss! Shut up! Listen!" They were mouse- still. "I thought I heard a­a sort of knocking," said the bull.

"What was it like?" asked the sheep faintly.

No answer.

The bee gave a shudder. "Whatever did we shut the door for?" she said softly. Oh, why, why had they shut the door?

While they were playing, the day had faded; the gorgeous sunset had blazed and died. And now the quick dark came racing over the sea, over the sand-hills, up the paddock. You were frightened to look in the corners of the washhouse, and yet you had to look with all your might. And somewhere, far away, grandma was lighting a lamp. The blinds were being pulled down; the kitchen fire leapt in the tins on the mantelpiece.

"It would be awful now," said the bull, "if a spider was to fall from the ceiling on to the table, wouldn't it?"

"Spiders don't fall from ceilings."

"Yes, they do. Our Min told us she'd seen a spider as big as a saucer, with long hairs on it like a gooseberry."

Quickly all the little heads were jerked up; all the little bodies drew together, pressed together.

"Why doesn't somebody come and call us?" cried the rooster.

Oh, those grown-ups, laughing and snug, sitting in the lamp-light, drinking out of cups! They'd forgotten about them. No, not really forgotten. That was what their smile meant. They had decided to leave them there all by themselves.

Suddenly Lottie gave such a piercing scream that all of them jumped off the forms, all of them screamed too. "A face­a face looking!" shrieked Lottie.

It was true, it was real. Pressed against the window was a pale face, black eyes, a black beard.

"Grandma! Mother! Somebody!"

But they had not got to the door, tumbling over one another, before it opened for Uncle Jonathan. He had come to take the little boys home.

X
He had meant to be there before, but in the front garden he had come upon Linda walking up and down the grass, stopping to pick off a dead pink or give a top-heavy carnation something to lean against, or to take a deep breath of something, and then walking on again, with her little air of remoteness. Over her white frock she wore a yellow, pink-fringed shawl from the Chinaman's shop.

"Hallo, Jonathan!" called Linda. And Jonathan whipped off his shabby panama, pressed it against his breast, dropped on one knee, and kissed Linda's hand.

"Greeting, my Fair One! Greeting, my Celestial Peach Blossom!" boomed the bass voice gently. "Where are the other noble dames?"

"Beryl's out playing bridge and mother's giving the boy his bath. . . . Have you come to borrow something?"

The Trouts were for ever running out of things and sending across to the Burnells' at the last moment.

But Jonathan only answered, "A little love, a little kindness;" and he walked by his sister-in-law's side.

Linda dropped into Beryl's hammock under the manuka tree, and Jonathan stretched himself on the grass beside her, pulled a long stalk and began chewing it. They knew each other well. The voices of children cried from the other gardens. A fisherman's light cart shook along the sandy road, and from far away they heard a dog barking; it was muffled as though the dog had its head in a sack. If you listened you could just hear the soft swish of the sea at full tide sweeping the pebbles. The sun was sinking.

"And so you go back to the office on Monday, do you, Jonathan?" asked Linda.

"On Monday the cage door opens and clangs to upon the victim for another eleven months and a week," answered Jonathan.

Linda swung a little. "It must be awful," she said slowly.

"Would ye have me laugh, my fair sister? Would ye have me weep?"

Linda was so accustomed to Jonathan's way of talking that she paid no attention to it.

"I suppose," she said vaguely, "one gets used to it. One gets used to anything."

"Does one? Hum!" the "Hum" was so deep it seemed to boom from underneath the ground. "I wonder how it's done," brooded Jonathan; "I've never managed it."

Looking at him as he lay there, Linda thought again how attractive he was. It was strange to think that he was only an ordinary clerk, that Stanley earned twice as much money as he. What was the matter with Jonathan? He had no ambition; she supposed that was it. And yet one felt he was gifted, exceptional. He was passionately fond of music; every spare penny he had went on books. He was always full of new ideas, schemes, plans. But nothing came of it all. The new fire blazed in Jonathan; you almost heard it roaring softly as he explained, described and dilated on the new thing; but a moment later it had fallen in and there was nothing but ashes, and Jonathan went about with a look like hunger in his black eyes. At these times he exaggerated his absurd manner of speaking, and he sang in church­he was the leader of the choir­with such fearful dramatic intensity that the meanest hymn put on an unholy splendour.

"It seems to me just as imbecile, just as infernal, to have to go to the office on Monday," said Jonathan, "as it always has done and always will do. To spend all the best years of one's life sitting on a stool from nine to five, scratching in somebody's ledger! It's a queer use to make of one's . . . one and only life, isn't it? Or do I fondly dream?" He rolled over on the grass and looked up at Linda. "Tell me, what is the difference between my life and that of an ordinary prisoner? The only difference I can see is that I put myself in jail and nobody's ever going to let me out. That's a more intolerable situation than the other. For if I'd been­pushed in, against my will­kicking, even­once the door was locked, or at any rate in five years or so, I might have accepted the fact and begun to take an interest in the flight of flies or counting the warder's steps along the passage with particular attention to variations of tread and so on. But as it is, I'm like an insect that's flown into a room of its own accord. I dash against the walls, dash against the windows, flop against the ceiling, do everything on God's earth, in fact, except fly out again. And all the while I'm thinking, like that moth, or that butterfly, or whatever it is, 'The shortness of life! The shortness of life!' I've only one night or one day, and there's this vast dangerous garden, waiting out there, undiscovered, unexplored."

"But, if you feel like that, why­" began Linda quickly.

"Ah! " cried Jonathan. And that "ah!" was somehow almost exultant. "There you have me. Why? Why indeed? There's the maddening, mysterious question. Why don't I fly out again? There's the window or the door or whatever it was I came in by. It's not hopelessly shut­is it? Why don't I find it and be off? Answer me that, little sister." But he gave her no time to answer.

"I'm exactly like that insect again. For some reason"­Jonathan paused between the words­"it's not allowed, it's forbidden, it's against the insect law, to stop banging and flopping and crawling up the pane even for an instant. Why don't I leave the office? Why don't I seriously consider, this moment, for instance, what it is that prevents me leaving? It's not as though I'm tremendously tied. I've two boys to provide for, but, after all, they're boys. I could cut off to sea, or get a job up-country, or­" Suddenly he smiled at Linda and said in a changed voice, as if he were confiding a secret, "Weak . . . weak. No stamina. No anchor. No guiding principle, let us call it." But then the dark velvety voice rolled out:"

Would ye hear the story
How it unfolds itself . . .
and they were silent.
The sun had set. In the western sky there were great masses of crushed-up rose-coloured clouds. Broad beams of light shone through the clouds and beyond them as if they would cover the whole sky. Overhead the blue faded; it turned a pale gold, and the bush outlined against it gleamed dark and brilliant like metal. Sometimes when those beams of light show in the sky they are very awful. They remind you that up there sits Jehovah, the jealous God, the Almighty, Whose eye is upon you, ever watchful, never weary. You remember that at His coming the whole earth will shake into one ruined graveyard; the cold, bright angels will drive you this way and that, and there will be no time to explain what could be explained so simply. . . . But tonight it seemed to Linda there was something infinitely joyful and loving in those silver beams. And now no sound came from the sea. It breathed softly as if it would draw that tender, joyful beauty into its own bosom.

"It's all wrong, it's all wrong," came the shadowy voice of Jonathan. "It's not the scene, it's not the setting for . . . three stools, three desks, three ink pots and a wire blind."

Linda knew that he would never change, but she said, "Is it too late, even now?"

"I'm old­I'm old," intoned Jonathan. He bent towards her, he passed his hand over his head. "Look!" His black hair was speckled all over with silver, like the breast plumage of a black fowl.

Linda was surprised. She had no idea that he was grey. And yet, as he stood up beside her and sighed and stretched, she saw him, for the first time, not resolute, not gallant, not careless, but touched already with age. He looked very tall on the darkening grass, and the thought crossed her mind, "He is like a weed."

Jonathan stooped again and kissed her fingers.

"Heaven reward thy sweet patience, lady mine," he murmured. "I must go seek those heirs to my fame and fortune. . . ." He was gone.

XI
Light shone in the windows of the bungalow. Two square patches of gold fell upon the pinks and the peaked marigolds. Florrie, the cat, came out on to the veranda, and sat on the top step, her white paws close together, her tail curled round. She looked content, as though she had been waiting for this moment all day.

"Thank goodness, it's getting late," said Florrie. "Thank goodness, the long day is over." Her greengage eyes opened.

Presently there sounded the rumble of the coach, the crack of Kelly's whip. It came near enough for one to hear the voices of the men from town, talking loudly together. It stopped at the Burnells' gate.

Stanley was half-way up the path before he saw Linda. "Is that you, darling?"

"Yes, Stanley."

He leapt across the flower-bed and seized her in his arms. She was enfolded in that familiar, eager, strong embrace.

"Forgive me, darling, forgive me," stammered Stanley, and he put his hand under her chin and lifted her face to him.

"Forgive you?" smiled Linda. "But whatever for?"

"Good God! You can't have forgotten," cried Stanley Burnell. "I've thought of nothing else all day. I've had the hell of a day. I made up my mind to dash out and telegraph, and then I thought the wire mightn't reach you before I did. I've been in tortures, Linda."

"But, Stanley," said Linda, "what must I forgive you for?"

"Linda!"­Stanley was very hurt­"didn't you realize­you must have realized­I went away without saying good-bye to you this morning? I can't imagine how I can have done such a thing. My confounded temper, of course. But­well"­and he sighed and took her in his arms again­"I've suffered for it enough today."

"What's that you've got in your hand?" asked Linda. "New gloves? Let me see."

"Oh, just a cheap pair of wash-leather ones," said Stanley humbly. "I noticed Bell was wearing some in the coach this morning, so, as I was passing the shop, I dashed in and got myself a pair. What are you smiling at? You don't think it was wrong of me, do you?"

"On the con -trary, darling," said Linda, "I think it was most sensible."

She pulled one of the large, pale gloves on her own fingers and looked at her hand, turning it this way and that. She was still smiling.

Stanley wanted to say, "I was thinking of you the whole time I bought them." It was true, but for some reason he couldn't say it. "Let's go in," said he.

XII
Why does one feel so different at night? Why is it so exciting to be awake when everybody else is asleep? Late­it is very late! And yet every moment you feel more and more wakeful, as though you were slowly, almost with every breath, waking up into a new, wonderful, far more thrilling and exciting world than the daylight one. And what is this queer sensation that you're a conspirator? Lightly, stealthily you move about your room. You take something off the dressing-table and put it down again without a sound. And everything, even the bed-post, knows you, responds, shares your secret. . . .

You're not very fond of your room by day. You never think about it. You're in and out, the door opens and slams, the cupboard creaks. You sit down on the side of your bed, change your shoes and dash out again. A dive down to the glass, two pins in your hair, powder your nose and off again. But now­it's suddenly dear to you. It's a darling little funny room. It's yours. Oh, what a joy it is to own things! Mine­my own!

"My very own for ever?"

"Yes." Their lips met.

No, of course, that had nothing to do with it. That was all nonsense and rubbish. But, in spite of herself, Beryl saw so plainly two people standing in the middle of her room. Her arms were round his neck; he held her. And now he whispered, "My beauty, my little beauty!" She jumped off her bed, ran over to the window and kneeled on the window-seat, with her elbows on the sill. But the beautiful night, the garden, every bush, every leaf, even the white palings, even the stars, were conspirators too. So bright was the moon that the flowers were bright as by day; the shadow of the nasturtiums, exquisite lily-like leaves and wide-open flowers, lay across the silvery veranda. The manuka-tree, bent by the southerly winds, was like a bird on one leg stretching out a wing.

But when Beryl looked at the bush, it seemed to her the bush was sad.

"We are dumb trees, reaching up in the night, imploring we know not what," said the sorrowful bush.

It is true when you are by yourself and you think about life, it is always sad. All that excitement and so on has a way of suddenly leaving you, and it's as though, in the silence, somebody called your name, and you heard your name for the first time. "Beryl!"

"Yes, I'm here. I'm Beryl. Who wants me?"

"Beryl!"

"Let me come."

It is lonely living by oneself. Of course, there are relations, friends, heaps of them; but that's not what she means. She wants someone who will find the Beryl they none of them know, who will expect her to be that Beryl always. She wants a lover.

"Take me away from all these other people, my love. Let us go far away. Let us live our life, all new, all ours, from the very beginning. Let us make our fire. Let us sit down to eat together. Let us have long talks at night."

And the thought was almost, "Save me, my love. Save me!"

. . . "Oh, go on! Don't be a prude, my dear. You enjoy yourself while you're young. That's my advice." And a high rush of silly laughter joined Mrs. Harry Kember's loud, indifferent neigh.

You see, it's so frightfully difficult when you've nobody. You're so at the mercy of things. You can't just be rude. And you've always this horror of seeming inexperienced and stuffy like the other ninnies at the Bay. And­and it's fascinating to know you've power over people. Yes, that is fascinating. . . .

Oh why, oh why doesn't "he" come soon?

If I go on living here, thought Beryl, anything may happen to me.

"But how do you know he is coming at all?" mocked a small voice within her.

But Beryl dismissed it. She couldn't be left. Other people, perhaps, but not she. It wasn't possible to think that Beryl Fairfield never married, that lovely fascinating girl.

"Do you remember Beryl Fairfield?"

"Remember her! As if I could forget her! It was one summer at the Bay that I saw her. She was standing on the beach in a blue"­no, pink­"muslin frock, holding on a big cream"­no, black­"straw hat. But it's years ago now."

"She's as lovely as ever, more so if anything."

Beryl smiled, bit her lip, and gazed over the garden. As she gazed, she saw somebody, a man, leave the road, step along the paddock beside their palings as if he was coming straight towards her. Her heart beat. Who was it? Who could it be? It couldn't be a burglar, certainly not a burglar, for he was smoking and he strolled lightly. Beryl's heart leapt; it seemed to turn right over, and then to stop. She recognized him.

"Good evening, Miss Beryl," said the voice softly.

"Good evening."

"Won't you come for a little walk?" it drawled.

Come for a walk­at that time of night! "I couldn't. Everybody's in bed. Everybody's asleep."

"Oh," said the voice lightly, and a whiff of sweet smoke reached her. "What does everybody matter? Do come! It's such a fine night. There's not a soul about."

Beryl shook her head. But already something stirred in her, something reared its head.

The voice said, "Frightened?" It mocked, "Poor little girl!"

"Not in the least," said she. As she spoke that weak thing within her seemed to uncoil, to grow suddenly tremendously strong; she longed to go!

And just as if this was quite understood by the other, the voice said, gently and softly, but finally, "Come along!"

Beryl stepped over her low window, crossed the veranda, ran down the grass to the gate. He was there before her.

"That's right," breathed the voice, and it teased, "You're not frightened, are you? You're not frightened?"

She was; now she was here she was terrified, and it seemed to her everything was different. The moonlight stared and glittered; the shadows were like bars of iron. Her hand was taken.

"Not in the least," she said lightly. "Why should I be?"

Her hand was pulled gently, tugged. She held back.

"No, I'm not coming any farther," said Beryl.

"Oh, rot!" Harry Kember didn't believe her. "Come along! We'll just go as far as that fuchsia bush. Come along!"

The fuchsia bush was tall. It fell over the fence in a shower. There was a little pit of darkness beneath.

"No, really, I don't want to," said Beryl.

For a moment Harry Kember didn't answer. Then he came close to her, turned to her, smiled and said quickly, "Don't be silly! Don't be silly!"

His smile was something she'd never seen before. Was he drunk? That bright, blind, terrifying smile froze her with horror. What was she doing? How had she got here? the stern garden asked her as the gate pushed open, and quick as a cat Harry Kember came through and snatched her to him.

"Cold little devil! Cold little devil!" said the hateful voice.

But Beryl was strong. She slipped, ducked, wrenched free.

"You are vile, vile," said she.

"Then why in God's name did you come?" stammered Harry Kember.

Nobody answered him.

XIII
A cloud, small, serene, floated across the moon. In that moment of darkness the sea sounded deep, troubled. Then the cloud sailed away, and the sound of the sea was a vague murmur, as though it waked out of a dark dream. All was still.

THE END


	
A stout man with a pink face wears dingy white flannel trousers, a blue coat with a pink handkerchief showing, and a straw hat much too small for him, perched at the back of his head. He plays the guitar. A little chap in white canvas shoes, his face hidden under a felt hat like a broken wing, breathes into a flute; and a tall thin fellow, with bursting over-ripe button boots, draws ribbons—long, twisted, streaming ribbons—of tune out of a fiddle. They stand, unsmiling, but not serious, in the broad sunlight opposite the fruit-shop; the pink spider of a hand beats the guitar, the little squat hand, with a brass-and-turquoise ring, forces the reluctant flute, and the fiddler's arm tries to saw the fiddle in two.

A crowd collects, eating oranges and bananas, tearing off the skins, dividing, sharing. One young girl has even a basket of strawberries, but she does not eat them. "Aren't they dear! " She stares at the tiny pointed fruits as if she were afraid of them. The Australian soldier laughs. "Here, go on, there's not more than a mouthful." But he doesn't want her to eat them, either. He likes to watch her little frightened face, and her puzzled eyes lifted to his: "Aren't they a price! " He pushes out his ï¿½ chest and grins. Old fat women in velvet bodices—old dusty pin-cushions—lean old hags like worn umbrellas with a quivering bonnet on top; young women, in muslins, with hats that might have grown on hedges, and high pointed shoes; men in khaki, sailors, shabby clerks, young Jews in fine cloth suits with padded shoulders and wide trousers, "hospital boys" in blue—the sun discovers them—the loud, bold music holds them together in one big knot for a moment. The young ones are larking, pushing each other on and off the pavement, dodging, nudging; the old ones are talking: "So I said to 'im, if you wants the doctor to yourself, fetch 'im, says I."

"An' by the time they was cooked there wasnít so much as you could put in the palm of me 'and!"

The only ones who are quiet are the ragged children. They stand, as close up to the musicians as they can get, their hands behind their backs, their eyes big. Occasionally a leg hops, an arm wags. A tiny staggerer, overcome, turns round twice, sits down solemn, and then gets up again.

"Ain't it lovely?" whispers a small girl behind her hand.

And the music breaks into bright pieces, and joins together again, and again breaks, and is dissolved, and the crowd scatters, moving slowly up the hill.

At the corner of the road the stalls begin.

"Ticklers! Tuppence a tickler! 'Ool 'ave a tickler? Tickle 'em up, boys." Little soft brooms ï¿½ on wire handles. They are eagerly bought by the soldiers.

"Buy a golliwog! Tuppence a golliwog!"

"Buy a jumping donkey! All alive-oh!"

"Su-perior chewing gum. Buy something to do, boys."

"Buy a rose. Give 'er a rose, boy. Roses, lady?"

"Fevvers! Fevvers!" They are hard to resist. Lovely, streaming feathers, emerald green, scarlet, bright blue, canary yellow. Even the babies wear feathers threaded through their bonnets.

And an old woman in a three-cornered paper hat cries as if it were her final parting advice, the only way of saving yourself or of bringing him to his senses: "Buy a three-cornered 'at, my dear, an' put it on!"

It is a flying day, half sun, half wind. When the sun goes in a shadow flies over; when it comes out again it is fiery. The men and women feel it burning their backs, their breasts and their arms; they feel their bodies expanding, coming alive . . . so that they make large embracing gestures, lift up their arms, for nothing, swoop down on a girl, blurt into laughter.

Lemonade! A whole tank of it stands on a table covered with a cloth; and lemons like blunted fishes blob in the yellow water. It looks solid, like a jelly, in the thick glasses. Why can't they drink it without spilling it? Everybody spills it, and before ï¿½ the glass is handed back the last drops are thrown in a ring.

Round the ice-cream cart, with its striped awning and bright brass cover, the children cluster. Little tongues lick, lick round the cream trumpets, round the squares. The cover is lifted, the wooden spoon plunges in; one shuts one's eyes to feel it, silently scrunching.

"Let these little birds tell you your future!" She stands beside the cage, a shrivelled ageless Italian, clasping and unclasping her dark claws. Her face, a treasure of delicate carving, is tied in a green-and-gold scarf. And inside their prison the love-birds flutter towards the papers in the seed-tray.

"You have great strength of character. You will marry a red-haired man and have three children. Beware of a blonde woman." Look out! Look out! A motor-car driven by a fat chauffeur comes rushing down the hill. Inside there a blonde woman, pouting, leaning forward—rushing through your life—beware! beware!

"Ladies and gentlemen, I am an auctioneer by profession, and if what I tell you is not the truth I am liable to have my licence taken away from me and a heavy imprisonment." He holds the licence across his chest; the sweat pours down his face into his paper collar; his eyes look glazed. When he takes off his hat there is a deep pucker of angry flesh on his forehead. Nobody buys a watch.

Look out again! A huge barouche comes swing- ï¿½ ing down the hill with two old, old babies inside. She holds up a lace parasol; he sucks the knob of his cane, and the fat old bodies roll together as the cradle rocks, and the steaming horse leaves a trail of manure as it ambles down the hill.

Under a tree, Professor Leonard, in cap and gown, stands beside his banner. He is here "for one day," from the London, Paris and Brussels Exhibition, to tell your fortune from your face. And he stands, smiling encouragement, like a clumsy dentist. When the big men, romping and swearing a moment before, hand across their sixpence, and stand before him, they are suddenly serious, dumb, timid, almost blushing as the Professor's quick hand notches the printed card. They are like little children caught playing in a forbidden garden by the owner, stepping from behind a tree.

The top of the hill is reached. How hot it is! How fine it is! The public-house is open, and the crowd presses in. The mother sits on the pavement edge with her baby, and the father brings her out a glass of dark, brownish stuff, and then savagely elbows his way in again. A reek of beer floats from the public-house, and a loud clatter and rattle of voices.

The wind has dropped, and the sun burns more fiercely than ever. Outside the two swing-doors there is a thick mass of children like flies at the mouth of a sweet-jar.

And up, up the hill come the people, with ticklers ï¿½ and golliwogs, and roses and feathers. Up, up they thrust into the light and heat, shouting, laughing, squealing, as though they were being pushed by something, far below, and by the sun, far ahead of them—drawn up into the full, bright, dazzling radiance to . . . what?

THE END



*

"..._but I tell you, my lord fool, out of this nettle danger, we
pluck this flower, safety._"

*

TO
JOHN MIDDLETON MURRY

*

CONTENTS

PRELUDE
JE NE PARLE PAS FRANÇAIS
BLISS
THE WIND BLOWS
PSYCHOLOGY
PICTURES
THE MAN WITHOUT A TEMPERAMENT
MR. REGINALD PEACOCK'S DAY
SUN AND MOON
FEUILLE D'ALBUM
A DILL PICKLE
THE LITTLE GOVERNESS
REVELATIONS
THE ESCAPE

*

PRELUDE

1

THERE was not an inch of room for Lottie and Kezia in the buggy. When
Pat swung them on top of the luggage they wobbled; the grandmother's
lap was full and Linda Burnell could not possibly have held a lump of
a child on hers for any distance. Isabel, very superior, was perched
beside the new handy-man on the driver's seat. Hold-alls, bags and
boxes were piled upon the floor. "These are absolute necessities that
I will not let out of my sight for one instant," said Linda Burnell,
her voice trembling with fatigue and excitement.

Lottie and Kezia stood on the patch of lawn just inside the gate all
ready for the fray in their coats with brass anchor buttons and little
round caps with battleship ribbons. Hand in hand, they stared with
round solemn eyes first at the absolute necessities and then at their
mother.

"We shall simply have to leave them. That is all. We shall simply have
to cast them off," said Linda Burnell. A strange little laugh flew
from her lips; she leaned back against the buttoned leather cushions
and shut her eyes, her lips trembling with laughter. Happily at that
moment Mrs. Samuel Josephs, who had been watching the scene from
behind her drawing-room blind, waddled down the garden path.

"Why nod leave the chudren with be for the afterdoon, Brs. Burnell?
They could go on the dray with the storeban when he comes in the
eveding. Those thigs on the path have to go, dod't they?"

"Yes, everything outside the house is supposed to go," said Linda
Burnell, and she waved a white hand at the tables and chairs standing
on their heads on the front lawn. How absurd they looked! Either they
ought to be the other way up, or Lottie and Kezia ought to stand on
their heads, too. And she longed to say: "Stand on your heads,
children, and wait for the store-man." It seemed to her that would be
so exquisitely funny that she could not attend to Mrs. Samuel Josephs.

The fat creaking body leaned across the gate, and the big jelly of a
face smiled. "Dod't you worry, Brs. Burnell. Loddie and Kezia can have
tea with by chudren in the dursery, and I'll see theb on the dray
afterwards."

The grandmother considered. "Yes, it really is quite the best plan. We
are very obliged to you, Mrs. Samuel Josephs. Children, say 'thank
you' to Mrs. Samuel Josephs."

Two subdued chirrups: "Thank you, Mrs. Samuel Josephs."

"And be good little girls, and--come closer--" they advanced, "don't
forget to tell Mrs. Samuel Josephs when you want to..."

"No, granma."

"Dod't worry, Brs. Burnell."

At the last moment Kezia let go Lottie's hand and darted towards the
buggy.

"I want to kiss my granma good-bye again."

But she was too late. The buggy rolled off up the road, Isabel
bursting with pride, her nose turned up at all the world, Linda
Burnell prostrated, and the grandmother rummaging among the very
curious oddments she had had put in her black silk reticule at the
last moment, for something to give her daughter. The buggy twinkled
away in the sunlight and fine golden dust up the hill and over. Kezia
bit her lip, but Lottie, carefully finding her handkerchief first, set
up a wail.

"Mother! Granma!"

Mrs. Samuel Josephs, like a huge warm black silk tea cosy, enveloped
her.

"It's all right, by dear. Be a brave child. You come and blay in the
dursery!"

She put her arm round weeping Lottie and led her away. Kezia followed,
making a face at Mrs. Samuel Josephs' placket, which was undone as
usual, with two long pink corset laces hanging out of it...

Lottie's weeping died down as she mounted the stairs, but the sight of
her at the nursery door with swollen eyes and a blob of a nose gave
great satisfaction to the S. J.'s, who sat on two benches before a
long table covered with American cloth and set out with immense plates
of bread and dripping and two brown jugs that faintly steamed.

"Hullo! You've been crying!"

"Ooh! Your eyes have gone right in."

"Doesn't her nose look funny."

"You're all red-and-patchy."

Lottie was quite a success. She felt it and swelled, smiling timidly.

"Go and sit by Zaidee, ducky," said Mrs. Samuel Josephs, "and Kezia,
you sid ad the end by Boses."

Moses grinned and gave her a nip as she sat down; but she pretended
not to notice. She did hate boys.

"Which will you have?" asked Stanley, leaning across the table very
politely, and smiling at her. "Which will you have to begin
with--strawberries and cream or bread and dripping?"

"Strawberries and cream, please," said she.

"Ah-h-h-h." How they all laughed and beat the table with their
teaspoons. Wasn't that a take in! Wasn't it now! Didn't he fox her!
Good old Stan!

"Ma! She thought it was real."

Even Mrs. Samuel Josephs, pouring out the milk and water, could not
help smiling. "You bustn't tease theb on their last day," she wheezed.

But Kezia bit a big piece out of her bread and dripping, and then
stood the piece up on her plate. With the bite out it made a dear
little sort of a gate. Pooh! She didn't care! A tear rolled down her
cheek, but she wasn't crying. She couldn't have cried in front of
those awful Samuel Josephs. She sat with her head bent, and as the
tear dripped slowly down, she caught it with a neat little whisk of
her tongue and ate it before any of them had seen.



2

After tea Kezia wandered back to their own house. Slowly she walked up
the back steps, and through the scullery into the kitchen. Nothing was
left in it but a lump of gritty yellow soap in one corner of the
kitchen window sill and a piece of flannel stained with a blue bag in
another. The fireplace was choked up with rubbish. She poked among it
but found nothing except a hair-tidy with a heart painted on it that
had belonged to the servant girl. Even that she left lying, and she
trailed through the narrow passage into the drawing-room. The Venetian
blind was pulled down but not drawn close. Long pencil rays of
sunlight shone through and the wavy shadow of a bush outside danced on
the gold lines. Now it was still, now it began to flutter again, and
now it came almost as far as her feet. Zoom! Zoom! a blue-bottle
knocked against the ceiling; the carpet-tacks had little bits of red
fluff sticking to them.

The dining-room window had a square of coloured glass at each corner.
One was blue and one was yellow. Kezia bent down to have one more look
at a blue lawn with blue arum lilies growing at the gate, and then at
a yellow lawn with yellow lilies and a yellow fence. As she looked a
little Chinese Lottie came out on to the lawn and began to dust the
tables and chairs with a corner of her pinafore. Was that really
Lottie? Kezia was not quite sure until she had looked through the
ordinary window.

Upstairs in her father's and mother's room she found a pill box black
and shiny outside and red in, holding a blob of cotton wool.

"I could keep a bird's egg in that," she decided.

In the servant girl's room there was a stay-button stuck in a crack of
the floor, and in another crack some beads and a long needle. She knew
there was nothing in her grandmother's room; she had watched her pack.
She went over to the window and leaned against it, pressing her hands
against the pane.

Kezia liked to stand so before the window. She liked the feeling of
the cold shining glass against her hot palms, and she liked to watch
the funny white tops that came on her fingers when she pressed them
hard against the pane. As she stood there, the day flickered out and
dark came. With the dark crept the wind snuffling and howling. The
windows of the empty house shook, a creaking came from the walls and
floors, a piece of loose iron on the roof banged forlornly. Kezia was
suddenly quite, quite still, with wide open eyes and knees pressed
together. She was frightened. She wanted to call Lottie and to go on
calling all the while she ran downstairs and out of the house. But IT
was just behind her, waiting at the door, at the head of the stairs,
at the bottom of the stairs, hiding in the passage, ready to dart out
at the back door. But Lottie was at the back door, too.

"Kezia!" she called cheerfully. "The storeman's here. Everything is on
the dray and three horses, Kezia. Mrs. Samuel Josephs has given us a
big shawl to wear round us, and she says to button up your coat. She
won't come out because of asthma."

Lottie was very important.

"Now then, you kids," called the storeman. He hooked his big thumbs
under their arms and up they swung. Lottie arranged the shawl "most
beautifully" and the storeman tucked up their feet in a piece of old
blanket.

"Lift up. Easy does it."

They might have been a couple of young ponies. The storeman felt over
the cords holding his load, unhooked the brakechain from the wheel,
and whistling, he swung up beside them.

"Keep close to me," said Lottie, "because otherwise you pull the shawl
away from my side, Kezia."

But Kezia edged up to the storeman. He towered beside her big as a
giant and he smelled of nuts and new wooden boxes.



3

It was the first time that Lottie and Kezia had ever been out so late.
Everything looked different--the painted wooden houses far smaller
than they did by day, the gardens far bigger and wilder. Bright stars
speckled the sky and the moon hung over the harbour dabbling the waves
with gold. They could see the lighthouse shining on Quarantine Island,
and the green lights on the old coal hulks.

"There comes the Picton boat," said the storeman, pointing to a little
steamer all hung with bright beads.

But when they reached the top of the hill and began to go down the
other side the harbour disappeared, and although they were still in
the town they were quite lost. Other carts rattled past. Everybody
knew the storeman.

"Night, Fred."

"Night O," he shouted.

Kezia liked very much to hear him. Whenever a cart appeared in the
distance she looked up and waited for his voice. He was an old friend;
and she and her grandmother had often been to his place to buy grapes.
The storeman lived alone in a cottage that had a glasshouse against
one wall built by himself. All the glasshouse was spanned and arched
over with one beautiful vine. He took her brown basket from her, lined
it with three large leaves, and then he felt in his belt for a little
horn knife, reached up and snapped off a big blue cluster and laid it
on the leaves so tenderly that Kezia held her breath to watch. He was
a very big man. He wore brown velvet trousers, and he had a long brown
beard. But he never wore a collar, not even on Sunday. The back of his
neck was burnt bright red.

"Where are we now?" Every few minutes one of the children asked him
the question.

"Why, this is Hawk Street, or Charlotte Crescent."

"Of course it is," Lottie pricked up her ears at the last name; she
always felt that Charlotte Crescent belonged specially to her. Very
few people had streets with the same name as theirs.

"Look, Kezia, there is Charlotte Crescent. Doesn't it look different?"
Now everything familiar was left behind. Now the big dray rattled into
unknown country, along new roads with high clay banks on either side,
up steep, steep hills, down into bushy valleys, through wide shallow
rivers. Further and further. Lottie's head wagged; she drooped, she
slipped half into Kezia's lap and lay there. But Kezia could not open
her eyes wide enough. The wind blew and she shivered; but her cheeks
and ears burned.

"Do stars ever blow about?" she asked.

"Not to notice," said the storeman.

"We've got a nuncle and a naunt living near our new house," said
Kezia. "They have got two children, Pip, the eldest is called, and the
youngest's name is Rags. He's got a ram. He has to feed it with a
nenamuel teapot and a glove top over the spout. He's going to show us.
What is the difference between a ram and a sheep?"

"Well, a ram has horns and runs for you."

Kezia considered. "I don't want to see it frightfully," she said. "I
hate rushing animals like dogs and parrots. I often dream that animals
rush at me--even camels--and while they are rushing, their heads swell
e-enormous."

The storeman said nothing. Kezia peered up at him, screwing up her
eyes. Then she put her finger out and stroked his sleeve; it felt
hairy. "Are we near?" she asked.

"Not far off, now," answered the storeman. "Getting tired?"

"Well, I'm not an atom bit sleepy," said Kezia. "But my eyes keep
curling up in such a funny sort of way." She gave a long sigh, and to
stop her eyes from curling she shut them...When she opened them
again they were clanking through a drive that cut through the garden
like a whip lash, looping suddenly an island of green, and behind the
island, but out of sight until you came upon it, was the house. It was
long and low built, with a pillared verandah and balcony all the way
round. The soft white bulk of it lay stretched upon the green garden
like a sleeping beast. And now one and now another of the windows
leaped into light. Someone was walking through the empty rooms
carrying a lamp. From a window downstairs the light of a fire
flickered. A strange beautiful excitement seemed to stream from the
house in quivering ripples.

"Where are we?" said Lottie, sitting up. Her reefer cap was all on one
side and on her cheek there was the print of an anchor button she had
pressed against while sleeping. Tenderly the storeman lifted her, set
her cap straight, and pulled down her crumpled clothes. She stood
blinking on the lowest verandah step watching Kezia who seemed to come
flying through the air to her feet.

"Ooh!" cried Kezia, flinging up her arms. The grandmother came out of
the dark hall carrying a little lamp. She was smiling.

"You found your way in the dark?" said she.

"Perfectly well."

But Lottie staggered on the lowest verandah step like a bird fallen
out of the nest. If she stood still for a moment she fell asleep, if
she leaned against anything her eyes closed. She could not walk
another step.

"Kezia," said the grandmother, "can I trust you to carry the lamp?"

"Yes, my granma."

The old woman bent down and gave the bright breathing thing into her
hands and then she caught up drunken Lottie. "This way."

Through a square hall filled with bales and hundreds of parrots (but
the parrots were only on the wall-paper) down a narrow passage where
the parrots persisted in flying past Kezia with her lamp.

"Be very quiet," warned the grandmother, putting down Lottie and
opening the dining-room door. "Poor little mother has got such a
headache."

Linda Burnell, in a long cane chair, with her feet on a hassock, and a
plaid over her knees, lay before a crackling fire. Burnell and Beryl
sat at the table in the middle of the room eating a dish of fried
chops and drinking tea out of a brown china teapot. Over the back of
her mother's chair leaned Isabel. She had a comb in her fingers and in
a gentle absorbed fashion she was combing the curls from her mother's
forehead. Outside the pool of lamp and firelight the room stretched
dark and bare to the hollow windows.

"Are those the children?" But Linda did not really care; she did not
even open her eyes to see.

"Put down the lamp, Kezia," said Aunt Beryl, "or we shall have the
house on fire before we are out of the packing cases. More tea,
Stanley?"

"Well, you might just give me five-eighths of a cup," said Burnell,
leaning across the table. "Have another chop, Beryl. Tip-top meat,
isn't it? Not too lean and not too fat." He turned to his wife.
"You're sure you won't change your mind, Linda darling?"

"The very thought of it is enough." She raised one eyebrow in the way
she had. The grandmother brought the children bread and milk and they
sat up to table, flushed and sleepy behind the wavy steam.

"I had meat for my supper," said Isabel, still combing gently.

"I had a whole chop for my supper, the bone and all and Worcester
sauce. Didn't I, father?"

"Oh, don't boast, Isabel," said Aunt Beryl.

Isabel looked astounded. "I wasn't boasting, was I, Mummy? I never
thought of boasting. I thought they would like to know. I only meant
to tell them."

"Very well. That's enough," said Burnell. He pushed back his plate,
took a tooth-pick out of his pocket and began picking his strong white
teeth.

"You might see that Fred has a bite of something in the kitchen before
he goes, will you, mother?"

"Yes, Stanley." The old woman turned to go.

"Oh, hold on half a jiffy. I suppose nobody knows where my slippers
were put? I suppose I shall not be able to get at them for a month or
two--what?"

"Yes," came from Linda. "In the top of the canvas hold-all marked
'urgent necessities.'"

"Well you might get them for me will you, mother?"

"Yes, Stanley."

Burnell got up, stretched himself, and going over to the fire he
turned his back to it and lifted up his coat tails.

"By Jove, this is a pretty pickle. Eh, Beryl?"

Beryl, sipping tea, her elbows on the table, smiled over the cup at
him. She wore an unfamiliar pink pinafore; the sleeves of her blouse
were rolled up to her shoulders showing her lovely freckled arms, and
she had let her hair fall down her back in a long pig-tail.

"How long do you think it will take to get straight--couple of
weeks--eh?" he chaffed.

"Good heavens, no," said Beryl airily. "The worst is over already. The
servant girl and I have simply slaved all day, and ever since mother
came she has worked like a horse, too. We have never sat down for a
moment. We have had a day."

Stanley scented a rebuke.

"Well, I suppose you did not expect me to rush away from the office
and nail carpets--did you?"

"Certainly not," laughed Beryl. She put down her cup and ran out of
the dining-room.

"What the hell does she expect us to do?" asked Stanley. "Sit down and
fan herself with a palm leaf fan while I have a gang of professionals
to do the job? By Jove, if she can't do a hand's turn occasionally
without shouting about it in return for..."

And he gloomed as the chops began to fight the tea in his sensitive
stomach. But Linda put up a hand and dragged him down to the side of
her long chair.

"This is a wretched time for you, old boy," she said. Her cheeks were
very white but she smiled and curled her fingers into the big red hand
she held. Burnell became quiet. Suddenly he began to whistle "Pure as
a lily, joyous and free"--a good sign.

"Think you're going to like it?" he asked.

"I don't want to tell you, but I think I ought to, mother," said
Isabel. "Kezia is drinking tea out of Aunt Beryl's cup."



4

They were taken off to bed by the grandmother. She went first with a
candle; the stairs rang to their climbing feet. Isabel and Lottie lay
in a room to themselves, Kezia curled in her grandmother's soft bed.

"Aren't there going to be any sheets, my granma?"

"No, not to-night."

"It's tickly," said Kezia, "but it's like Indians." She dragged her
grandmother down to her and kissed her under the chin. "Come to bed
soon and be my Indian brave."

"What a silly you are," said the old woman, tucking her in as she
loved to be tucked.

"Aren't you going to leave me a candle?"

"No. Sh--h. Go to sleep."

"Well, can I have the door left open?"

She rolled herself up into a round but she did not go to sleep. From
all over the house came the sound of steps. The house itself creaked
and popped. Loud whispering voices came from downstairs. Once she
heard Aunt Beryl's rush of high laughter, and once she heard a loud
trumpeting from Burnell blowing his nose. Outside the window hundreds
of black cats with yellow eyes sat in the sky watching her--but she
was not frightened. Lottie was saying to Isabel:

"I'm going to say my prayers in bed to-night."

"No you can't, Lottie." Isabel was very firm. "God only excuses you
saying your prayers in bed if you've got a temperature." So Lottie
yielded:

  Gentle Jesus meek anmile,
  Look pon a little chile.
  Pity me, simple Lizzie
  Suffer me to come to thee.

And then they lay down back to back, their little behinds just
touching, and fell asleep.



Standing in a pool of moonlight Beryl Fairfield undressed herself. She
was tired, but she pretended to be more tired than she really
was--letting her clothes fall, pushing back with a languid gesture her
warm, heavy hair.

"Oh, how tired I am--very tired."

She shut her eyes a moment, but her lips smiled. Her breath rose and
fell in her breast like two fanning wings. The window was wide open;
it was warm, and somewhere out there in the garden a young man, dark
and slender, with mocking eyes, tip-toed among the bushes, and
gathered the flowers into a big bouquet, and shipped under her window
and held it up to her. She saw herself bending forward. He thrust his
head among the bright waxy flowers, sly and laughing. "No, no," said
Beryl. She turned from the window and dropped her nightgown over her
head.

"How frightfully unreasonable Stanley is sometimes," she thought,
buttoning. And then, as she lay down, there came the old thought, the
cruel thought--ah, if only she had money of her own.

A young man, immensely rich, has just arrived from England. He meets
her quite by chance...The new governor is unmarried...There
is a ball at Government house...Who is that exquisite creature in
_eau de nil_ satin? Beryl Fairfield...



"The thing that pleases me," said Stanley, leaning against the side of
the bed and giving himself a good scratch on his shoulders and back
before turning in, "is that I've got the place dirt cheap, Linda. I
was talking about it to little Wally Bell to-day and he said he simply
could not understand why they had accepted my figure. You see land
about here is bound to become more and more valuable...in about
ten years' time...of course we shall have to go very slow and cut
down expenses as fine as possible. Not asleep--are you?"

"No, dear, I've heard every word," said Linda.

He sprang into bed, leaned over her and blew out the candle.

"Good night, Mr. Business Man," said she, and she took hold of his
head by the ears and gave him a quick kiss. Her faint far-away voice
seemed to come from a deep well.

"Good night, darling." He slipped his arm under her neck and drew her
to him.

"Yes, clasp me," said the faint voice from the deep well.



Pat the handy man sprawled in his little room behind the kitchen. His
sponge-bag coat and trousers hung from the door-peg like a hanged man.
From the edge of the blanket his twisted toes protruded, and on the
floor beside him there was an empty cane bird-cage. He looked like a
comic picture.

"Honk, honk," came from the servant girl. She had adenoids.

Last to go to bed was the grandmother.

"What. Not asleep yet?"

"No, I'm waiting for you," said Kezia. The old woman sighed and lay
down beside her. Kezia thrust her head under the grandmother's arm and
gave a little squeak. But the old woman only pressed her faintly, and
sighed again, took out her teeth, and put them in a glass of water
beside her on the floor.

In the garden some tiny owls, perched on the branches of a lace-bark
tree, called: "More pork; more pork." And far away in the bush there
sounded a harsh rapid chatter: "Ha-ha-ha...Ha-ha-ha."



5

Dawn came sharp and chill with red clouds on a faint green sky and
drops of water on every leaf and blade. A breeze blew over the garden,
dropping dew and dropping petals, shivered over the drenched paddocks,
and was lost in the sombre bush. In the sky some tiny stars floated
for a moment and then they were gone--they were dissolved like
bubbles. And plain to be heard in the early quiet was the sound of the
creek in the paddock running over the brown stones, running in and out
of the sandy hollows, hiding under clumps of dark berry bushes,
spilling into a swamp of yellow water flowers and cresses.

And then at the first beam of sun the birds began. Big cheeky birds,
starlings and mynahs, whistled on the lawns, the little birds, the
goldfinches and linnets and fan-tails flicked from bough to bough. A
lovely kingfisher perched on the paddock fence preening his rich
beauty, and a _tui_ sang his three notes and laughed and sang them
again.

"How loud the birds are," said Linda in her dream. She was walking
with her father through a green paddock sprinkled with daisies.
Suddenly he bent down and parted the grasses and showed her a tiny
ball of fluff just at her feet. "Oh, Papa, the darling." She made a
cup of her hands and caught the tiny bird and stroked its head with
her finger. It was quite tame. But a funny thing happened. As she
stroked it began to swell, it ruffled and pouched, it grew bigger and
bigger and its round eyes seemed to smile knowingly at her. Now her
arms were hardly wide enough to hold it and she dropped it into her
apron. It had become a baby with a big naked head and a gaping
bird-mouth, opening and shutting. Her father broke into a loud
clattering laugh and she woke to see Burnell standing by the windows
rattling the Venetian blind up to the very top.

"Hullo," he said. "Didn't wake you, did I? Nothing much wrong with the
weather this morning."

He was enormously pleased. Weather like this set a final seal on his
bargain. He felt, somehow, that he had bought the lovely day, too--got
it chucked in dirt cheap with the house and ground. He dashed off to
his bath and Linda turned over and raised herself on one elbow to see
the room by daylight. All the furniture had found a place--all the old
paraphernalia--as she expressed it. Even the photographs were on the
mantelpiece and the medicine bottles on the shelf above the
wash-stand. Her clothes lay across a chair--her outdoor things, a
purple cape and a round hat with a plume in it. Looking at them she
wished that she was going away from this house, too. And she saw
herself driving away from them all in a little buggy, driving away
from everybody and not even waving.

Back came Stanley girt with a towel, glowing and slapping his thighs.
He pitched the wet towel on top of her hat and cape, and standing firm
in the exact centre of a square of sunlight he began to do his
exercises. Deep breathing, bending and squatting like a frog and
shooting out his legs. He was so delighted with his firm, obedient
body that he hit himself on the chest and gave a loud "Ah." But this
amazing vigour seemed to set him worlds away from Linda. She lay on
the white tumbled bed and watched him as if from the clouds.

"Oh, damn! Oh, blast!" said Stanley, who had butted into a crisp white
shirt only to find that some idiot had fastened the neck-band and he
was caught. He stalked over to Linda waving his arms.

"You look like a big fat turkey," said she.

"Fat. I like that," said Stanley. "I haven't a square inch of fat on
me. Feel that."

"It's rock--it's iron," mocked she.

"You'd be surprised," said Stanley, as though this were intensely
interesting, "at the number of chaps at the club who have got a
corporation. Young chaps, you know--men of my age." He began parting
his bushy ginger hair, his blue eyes fixed and round in the glass, his
knees bent, because the dressing table was always--confound it--a bit
too low for him. "Little Wally Bell, for instance," and he
straightened, describing upon himself an enormous curve with the
hairbrush. "I must say I've a perfect horror..."

"My dear, don't worry. You'll never be fat. You are far too
energetic."

"Yes, yes, I suppose that's true," said he, comforted for the
hundredth time, and taking a pearl pen-knife out of his pocket he
began to pare his nails.

"Breakfast, Stanley." Beryl was at the door. "Oh, Linda, mother says
you are not to get up yet." She popped her head in at the door. She
had a big piece of syringa stuck through her hair.

"Everything we left on the verandah last night is simply sopping this
morning. You should see poor dear mother wringing out the tables and
the chairs. However, there is no harm done----" this with the faintest
glance at Stanley.

"Have you told Pat to have the buggy round in time? It's a good six
and a half miles to the office."

"I can imagine what this early start for the office will be like,"
thought Linda. "It will be very high pressure indeed."

"Pat, Pat." She heard the servant girl calling. But Pat was evidently
hard to find; the silly voice went baa--baaing through the garden.

Linda did not rest again until the final slam of the front door told
her that Stanley was really gone.

Later she heard her children playing in the garden. Lottie's stolid,
compact little voice cried: "Ke--zia. Isa--bel." She was always
getting lost or losing people only to find them again, to her great
surprise, round the next tree or the next corner. "Oh, there you are
after all." They had been turned out after breakfast and told not to
come back to the house until they were called. Isabel wheeled a neat
pramload of prim dolls and Lottie was allowed for a great treat to
walk beside her holding the doll's parasol over the face of the wax
one.

"Where are you going to, Kezia?" asked Isabel, who longed to find some
light and menial duty that Kezia might perform and so be roped in
under her government.

"Oh, just away," said Kezia...

Then she did not hear them any more. What a glare there was in the
room. She hated blinds pulled up to the top at any time, but in the
morning it was intolerable. She turned over to the wall and idly, with
one finger, she traced a poppy on the wall-paper with a leaf and a
stem and a fat bursting bud. In the quiet, and under her tracing
finger, the poppy seemed to come alive. She could feel the sticky,
silky petals, the stem, hairy like a gooseberry skin, the rough leaf
and the tight glazed bud. Things had a habit of coming alive like
that. Not only large substantial things like furniture, but curtains
and the patterns of stuffs and the fringes of quilts and cushions. How
often she had seen the tassel fringe of her quilt change into a funny
procession of dancers with priests attending...For there were
some tassels that did not dance at all but walked stately, bent
forward as if praying or chanting. How often the medicine bottles had
turned into a row of little men with brown top-hats on; and the
washstand jug had a way of sitting in the basin like a fat bird in a
round nest.

"I dreamed about birds last night," thought Linda. What was it? She
had forgotten. But the strangest part of this coming alive of things
was what they did. They listened, they seemed to swell out with some
mysterious important content, and when they were full she felt that
they smiled. But it was not for her, only, their sly secret smile;
they were members of a secret society and they smiled among
themselves. Sometimes, when she had fallen asleep in the daytime, she
woke and could not lift a finger, could not even turn her eyes to left
or right because THEY were there; sometimes when she went out of a
room and left it empty, she knew as she clicked the door to that THEY
were filling it. And there were times in the evenings when she was
upstairs, perhaps, and everybody else was down, when she could hardly
escape from them. Then she could not hurry, she could not hum a tune;
if she tried to say ever so carelessly--"Bother that old
thimble"--THEY were not deceived. THEY knew how frightened she was;
THEY saw how she turned her head away as she passed the mirror. What
Linda always felt was that THEY wanted something of her, and she knew
that if she gave herself up and was quiet, more than quiet, silent,
motionless, something would really happen.

"It's very quiet now," she thought. She opened her eyes wide, and she
heard the silence spinning its soft endless web. How lightly she
breathed; she scarcely had to breathe at all.

Yes, everything had come alive down to the minutest, tiniest particle,
and she did not feel her bed, she floated, held up in the air. Only
she seemed to be listening with her wide open watchful eyes, waiting
for someone to come who just did not come, watching for something to
happen that just did not happen.



6

In the kitchen at the long deal table under the two windows old Mrs.
Fairfield was washing the breakfast dishes. The kitchen window looked
out on to a big grass patch that led down to the vegetable garden and
the rhubarb beds. On one side the grass patch was bordered by the
scullery and wash-house and over this whitewashed lean-to there grew a
knotted vine. She had noticed yesterday that a few tiny corkscrew
tendrils had come right through some cracks in the scullery ceiling
and all the windows of the lean-to had a thick frill of ruffled green.

"I am very fond of a grape vine," declared Mrs. Fairfield, "but I do
not think that the grapes will ripen here. It takes Australian sun."
And she remembered how Beryl when she was a baby had been picking some
white grapes from the vine on the back verandah of their Tasmanian
house and she had been stung on the leg by a huge red ant. She saw
Beryl in a little plaid dress with red ribbon tie-ups on the shoulders
screaming so dreadfully that half the street rushed in. And how the
child's leg had swelled! "T--t--t--t!" Mrs. Fairfield caught her
breath remembering. "Poor child, how terrifying it was." And she set
her lips tight and went over to the stove for some more hot water. The
water frothed up in the big soapy bowl with pink and blue bubbles on
top of the foam. Old Mrs. Fairfield's arms were bare to the elbow and
stained a bright pink. She wore a grey foulard dress patterned with
large purple pansies, a white linen apron and a high cap shaped like a
jelly mould of white muslin. At her throat there was a silver crescent
moon with five little owls seated on it, and round her neck she wore a
watch guard made of black beads.

It was hard to believe that she had not been in that kitchen for
years; she was so much a part of it. She put the crocks away with a
sure, precise touch, moving leisurely and ample from the stove to the
dresser, looking into the pantry and the larder as though there were
not an unfamiliar comer. When she had finished, everything in the
kitchen had become part of a series of patterns. She stood in the
middle of the room wiping her hands on a check cloth; a smile beamed
on her lips; she thought it looked very nice, very satisfactory.

"Mother! Mother! Are you there?" called Beryl.

"Yes, dear. Do you want me?"

"No. I'm coming," and Beryl rushed in, very flushed, dragging with her
two big pictures.

"Mother, whatever can I do with these awful hideous Chinese paintings
that Chung Wah gave Stanley when he went bankrupt? It's absurd to say
that they are valuable, because they were hanging in Chung Wah's fruit
shop for months before. I can't make out why Stanley wants them kept.
I'm sure he thinks them just as hideous as we do, but it's because of
the frames," she said spitefully. "I suppose he thinks the frames
might fetch something some day or other."

"Why don't you hang them in the passage?" suggested Mrs. Fairfield;
"they would not be much seen there."

"I can't. There is no room. I've hung all the photographs of his
office there before and after building, and the signed photos of his
business friends, and that awful enlargement of Isabel lying on the
mat in her singlet." Her angry glance swept the placid kitchen. "I
know what I'll do. I'll hang them here. I will tell Stanley they got a
little damp in the moving so I have put them in here for the time
being."

She dragged a chair forward, jumped on it, took a hammer and a big
nail out of her pinafore pocket and banged away.

"There! That is enough! Hand me the picture, mother."

"One moment, child." Her mother was wiping over the carved ebony
frame.

"Oh, mother, really you need not dust them. It would take years to
dust all those little holes." And she frowned at the top of her
mother's head and bit her lip with impatience. Mother's deliberate way
of doing things was simply maddening. It was old age, she supposed,
loftily.

At last the two pictures were hung side by side. She jumped off the
chair, stowing away the little hammer.

"They don't look so bad there, do they?" said she. "And at any rate
nobody need gaze at them except Pat and the servant girl--have I got a
spider's web on my face, mother? I've been poking into that cupboard
under the stairs and now something keeps tickling my nose."

But before Mrs. Fairfield had time to look Beryl had turned away.
Someone tapped on the window: Linda was there, nodding and smiling.
They heard the latch of the scullery door lift and she came in. She
had no hat on; her hair stood up on her head in curling rings and she
was wrapped up in an old cashmere shawl.

"I'm so hungry," said Linda: "where can I get something to eat,
mother? This is the first time I've been in the kitchen. It says
'mother' all over; everything is in pairs."

"I will make you some tea," said Mrs. Fairfield, spreading a clean
napkin over a corner of the table, "and Beryl can have a cup with
you."

"Beryl, do you want half my gingerbread?" Linda waved the knife at
her. "Beryl, do you like the house now that we are here?"

"Oh yes, I like the house immensely and the garden is beautiful, but
it feels very far away from everything to me. I can't imagine people
coming out from town to see us in that dreadful jolting bus, and I am
sure there is not anyone here to come and call. Of course it does not
matter to you because----"

"But there's the buggy," said Linda. "Pat can drive you into town
whenever you like."

That was a consolation, certainly, but there was something at the back
of Beryl's mind, something she did not even put into words for
herself.

"Oh, well, at any rate it won't kill us," she said dryly, putting down
her empty cup and standing up and stretching. "I am going to hang
curtains." And she ran away singing:

  How many thousand birds I see
  That sing aloud from every tree...

"...birds I see That sing aloud from every tree..." But when
she reached the dining-room she stopped singing, her face changed; it
became gloomy and sullen.

"One may as well rot here as anywhere else," she muttered savagely,
digging the stiff brass safety-pins into the red serge curtains.

The two left in the kitchen were quiet for a little. Linda leaned her
cheek on her fingers and watched her mother. She thought her mother
looked wonderfully beautiful with her back to the leafy window. There
was something comforting in the sight of her that Linda felt she could
never do without. She needed the sweet smell of her flesh, and the
soft feel of her cheeks and her arms and shoulders still softer. She
loved the way her hair curled, silver at her forehead, lighter at her
neck, and bright brown still in the big coil under the muslin cap.
Exquisite were her mother's hands, and the two rings she wore seemed
to melt into her creamy skin. And she was always so fresh, so
delicious. The old woman could bear nothing but linen next to her body
and she bathed in cold water winter and summer.

"Isn't there anything for me to do?" asked Linda.

"No, darling. I wish you would go into the garden and give an eye to
your children; but that I know you will not do."

"Of course I will, but you know Isabel is much more grown up than any
of us."

"Yes, but Kezia is not," said Mrs. Fairfield.

"Oh, Kezia has been tossed by a bull hours ago," said Linda, winding
herself up in her shawl again.

But no, Kezia had seen a bull through a hole in a knot of wood in the
paling that separated the tennis lawn from the paddock. But she had
not liked the bull frightfully, so she had walked away back through
the orchard, up the grassy slope, along the path by the lace bark tree
and so into the spread tangled garden. She did not believe that she
would ever not get lost in this garden. Twice she had found her way
back to the big iron gates they had driven through the night before,
and then had turned to walk up the drive that led to the house, but
there were so many little paths on either side. On one side they all
led into a tangle of tall dark trees and strange bushes with flat
velvet leaves and feathery cream flowers that buzzed with flies when
you shook them--this was the frightening side, and no garden at all.
The little paths here were wet and clayey with tree roots spanned
across them like the marks of big fowls' feet.

But on the other side of the drive there was a high box border and the
paths had box edges and all of them led into a deeper and deeper
tangle of flowers. The camellias were in bloom, white and crimson and
pink and white striped with flashing leaves. You could not see a leaf
on the syringa bushes for the white clusters. The roses were in
flower--gentlemen's button-hole roses, little white ones, but far too
full of insects to hold under anyone's nose, pink monthly roses with a
ring of fallen petals round the bushes, cabbage roses on thick stalks,
moss roses, always in bud, pink smooth beauties opening curl on curl,
red ones so dark they seemed to turn black as they fell, and a certain
exquisite cream kind with a slender red stem and bright scarlet
leaves.

There were clumps of fairy bells, and all kinds of geraniums, and
there were little trees of verbena and bluish lavender bushes and a
bed of pelagoniums with velvet eyes and leaves like moths' wings.
There was a bed of nothing but mignonette and another of nothing but
pansies--borders of double and single daisies and all kinds of little
tufty plants she had never seen before.

The red-hot pokers were taller than she; the Japanese sunflowers grew
in a tiny jungle. She sat down on one of the box borders. By pressing
hard at first it made a nice seat. But how dusty it was inside! Kezia
bent down to look and sneezed and rubbed her nose.

And then she found herself at the top of the rolling grassy slope that
led down to the orchard...She looked down at the slope a moment;
then she lay down on her back, gave a squeak and rolled over and over
into the thick flowery orchard grass. As she lay waiting for things to
stop spinning, she decided to go up to the house and ask the servant
girl for an empty match-box. She wanted to make a surprise for the
grandmother...First she would put a leaf inside with a big violet
lying on it, then she would put a very small white picotee, perhaps,
on each side of the violet, and then she would sprinkle some lavender
on the top, but not to cover their heads.

She often made these surprises for the grandmother, and they were
always most successful.

"Do you want a match, my granny?"

"Why, yes, child, I believe a match is just what I'm looking for."

The grandmother slowly opened the box and came upon the picture
inside.

"Good gracious, child! How you astonished me!"

"I can make her one every day here," she thought, scrambling up the
grass on her slippery shoes.

But on her way back to the house she came to that island that lay in
the middle of the drive, dividing the drive into two arms that met in
front of the house. The island was made of grass banked up high.
Nothing grew on the top except one huge plant with thick, grey-green,
thorny leaves, and out of the middle there sprang up a tall stout
stem. Some of the leaves of the plant were so old that they curled up
in the air no longer; they turned back, they were split and broken;
some of them lay flat and withered on the ground.

Whatever could it be? She had never seen anything like it before. She
stood and stared. And then she saw her mother coming down the path.

"Mother, what is it?" asked Kezia.

Linda looked up at the fat swelling plant with its cruel leaves and
fleshy stem. High above them, as though becalmed in the air, and yet
holding so fast to the earth it grew from, it might have had claws
instead of roots. The curving leaves seemed to be hiding something;
the blind stem cut into the air as if no wind could ever shake it.

"That is an aloe, Kezia," said her mother.

"Does it ever have any flowers?"

"Yes, Kezia," and Linda smiled down at her, and half shut her eyes.
"Once every hundred years."



7

On his way home from the office Stanley Burnell stopped the buggy at
the Bodega, got out and bought a large bottle of oysters. At the
Chinaman's shop next door he bought a pineapple in the pink of
condition, and noticing a basket of fresh black cherries he told John
to put him a pound of those as well. The oysters and the pine he
stowed away in the box under the front seat, but the cherries he kept
in his hand.

Pat, the handy-man, leapt off the box and tucked him up again in the
brown rug.

"Lift yer feet, Mr. Burnell, while I give yer a fold under," said he.

"Right! Right! First-rate!" said Stanley. "You can make straight for
home now."

Pat gave the grey mare a touch and the buggy sprang forward.

"I believe this man is a first-rate chap," thought Stanley. He liked
the look of him sitting up there in his neat brown coat and brown
bowler. He liked the way Pat had tucked him in, and he liked his eyes.
There was nothing servile about him--and if there was one thing he
hated more than another it was servility. And he looked as if he was
pleased with his job--happy and contented already.

The grey mare went very well; Burnell was impatient to be out of the
town. He wanted to be home. Ah, it was splendid to live in the
country--to get right out of that hole of a town once the office was
closed; and this drive in the fresh warm air, knowing all the while
that his own house was at the other end, with its garden and paddocks,
its three tip-top cows and enough fowls and ducks to keep them in
poultry, was splendid too.

As they left the town finally and bowled away up the deserted road his
heart beat hard for joy. He rooted in the bag and began to eat the
cherries, three or four at a time, chucking the stones over the side
of the buggy. They were delicious, so plump and cold, without a spot
or a bruise on them.

Look at those two, now--black one side and white the other--perfect! A
perfect little pair of Siamese twins. And he stuck them in his
button-hole...By Jove, he wouldn't mind giving that chap up there
a handful--but no, better not. Better wait until he had been with him
a bit longer.

He began to plan what he would do with his Saturday afternoons and his
Sundays. He wouldn't go to the club for lunch on Saturday. No, cut
away from the office as soon as possible and get them to give him a
couple of slices of cold meat and half a lettuce when he got home. And
then he'd get a few chaps out from town to play tennis in the
afternoon. Not too many--three at most. Beryl was a good player,
too....He stretched out his right arm and slowly bent it, feeling the
muscle...A bath, a good rub-down, a cigar on the verandah after
dinner...

On Sunday morning they would go to church--children and all. Which
reminded him that he must hire a pew, in the sun if possible and well
forward so as to be out of the draught from the door. In fancy he
heard himself intoning extremely well: "When thou did overcome the
_Sharp_ness of Death Thou didst open the _King_dom of Heaven to _all_
Believers." And he saw the neat brass-edged card on the corner of the
pew--Mr. Stanley Burnell and family...The rest of the day he'd
loaf about with Linda...Now they were walking about the garden;
she was on his arm, and he was explaining to her at length what he
intended doing at the office the week following. He heard her saying:
"My dear, I think that is most wise."...Talking things over with
Linda was a wonderful help even though they were apt to drift away
from the point.

Hang it all! They weren't getting along very fast. Pat had put the
brake on again. Ugh! What a brute of a thing it was. He could feel it
in the pit of his stomach.

A sort of panic overtook Burnell whenever he approached near home.
Before he was well inside the gate he would shout to anyone within
sight: "Is everything all right?" And then he did not believe it was
until he heard Linda say: "Hullo! Are you home again?" That was the
worst of living in the country--it took the deuce of a long time to
get back...But now they weren't far off. They were on the top of
the last hill; it was a gentle slope all the way now and not more than
half a mile.

Pat trailed the whip over the mare's back and he coaxed her: "Goop
now. Goop now."

It wanted a few minutes to sunset. Everything stood motionless bathed
in bright, metallic light and from the paddocks on either side there
streamed the milky scent of ripe grass. The iron gates were open. They
dashed through and up the drive and round the island, stopping at the
exact middle of the verandah.

"Did she satisfy yer, Sir?" said Pat, getting off the box and grinning
at his master.

"Very well indeed, Pat," said Stanley.

Linda came out of the glass door; her voice rang in the shadowy quiet.
"Hullo! Are you home again?"

At the sound of her his heart beat so hard that he could hardly stop
himself dashing up the steps and catching her in his arms.

"Yes, I'm home again. Is everything all right?"

Pat began to lead the buggy round to the side gate that opened into
the courtyard.

"Here, half a moment," said Burnell. "Hand me those two parcels." And
he said to Linda, "I've brought you back a bottle of oysters and a
pineapple," as though he had brought her back all the harvest of the
earth.

They went into the hall; Linda carried the oysters in one hand and the
pineapple in the other. Burnell shut the glass door, threw his hat
down, put his arms round her and strained her to him, kissing the top
of her head, her ears, her lips, her eyes.

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" said she. "Wait a moment. Let me put down these
silly things," and she put the bottle of oysters and the pine on a
little carved chair. "What have you got in your button-hole--cherries?"
She took them out and hung them over his ear.

"Don't do that, darling. They are for you."

So she took them off his ear again. "You don't mind if I save them.
They'd spoil my appetite for dinner. Come and see your children. They
are having tea."

The lamp was lighted on the nursery table. Mrs. Fairfield was cutting
and spreading bread and butter. The three little girls sat up to table
wearing large bibs embroidered with their names. They wiped their
mouths as their father came in ready to be kissed. The windows were
open; a jar of wild flowers stood on the mantelpiece, and the lamp
made a big soft bubble of light on the ceiling.

"You seem pretty snug, mother," said Burnell, blinking at the light.
Isabel and Lottie sat one on either side of the table, Kezia at the
bottom--the place at the top was empty.

"That's where my boy ought to sit," thought Stanley. He tightened his
arm round Linda's shoulder. By God, he was a perfect fool to feel as
happy as this!

"We are, Stanley. We are very snug," said Mrs. Fairfield, cutting
Kezia's bread into fingers.

"Like it better than town--eh, children?" asked Burnell.

"Oh, yes," said the three little girls, and Isabel added as an
after-thought: "Thank you very much indeed, father dear."

"Come upstairs," said Linda. "I'll bring your slippers."

But the stairs were too narrow for them to go up arm in arm. It was
quite dark in the room. He heard her ring tapping on the marble
mantelpiece as she felt for the matches.

"I've got some, darling. I'll light the candles."

But instead he came up behind her and again he put his arms round her
and pressed her head into his shoulder.

"I'm so confoundedly happy," he said.

"Are you?" She turned and put her hands on his breast and looked up at
him.

"I don't know what has come over me," he protested.

It was quite dark outside now and heavy dew was falling. When Linda
shut the window the cold dew touched her finger tips. Far away a dog
barked. "I believe there is going to be a moon," she said.

At the words, and with the cold wet dew on her fingers, she felt as
though the moon had risen--that she was being strangely discovered in
a flood of cold light. She shivered; she came away from the window and
sat down upon the box ottoman beside Stanley.

* * * * *

In the dining-room, by the flicker of a wood fire, Beryl sat on a
hassock playing the guitar. She had bathed and changed all her
clothes. Now she wore a white muslin dress with black spots on it and
in her hair she had pinned a black silk rose.

  Nature has gone to her rest, love,
     See, we are alone.
  Give me your hand to press, love,
     Lightly within my own.

She played and sang half to herself, for she was watching herself
playing and singing. The firelight gleamed on her shoes, on the ruddy
belly of the guitar, and on her white fingers...

"If I were outside the window and looked in and saw myself I really
would be rather struck," thought she. Still more softly she played the
accompaniment--not singing now but listening.

..."The first time that I ever saw you, little girl--oh, you had no
idea that you were not alone--you were sitting with your little feet
upon a hassock, playing the guitar. God, I can never forget..."
Beryl flung up her head and began to sing again:

  Even the moon is aweary...

But there came a loud bang at the door. The servant girl's crimson
face popped through.

"Please, Miss Beryl, I've got to come and lay."

"Certainly, Alice," said Beryl, in a voice of ice. She put the guitar
in a corner. Alice lunged in with a heavy black iron tray.

"Well, I have had a job with that oving," said she. "I can't get
nothing to brown."

"Really!" said Beryl.

But no, she could not stand that fool of a girl. She ran into the dark
drawing-room and began walking up and down...Oh, she was
restless, restless. There was a mirror over the mantel. She leaned her
arms along and looked at her pale shadow in it. How beautiful she
looked, but there was nobody to see, nobody.

"Why must you suffer so?" said the face in the mirror. "You were not
made for suffering...Smile!"

Beryl smiled, and really her smile was so adorable that she smiled
again--but this time because she could not help it.



8

"Good morning, Mrs. Jones."

"Oh, good morning, Mrs. Smith. I'm so glad to see you. Have you
brought your children?"

"Yes, I've brought both my twins. I have had another baby since I saw
you last, but she came so suddenly that I haven't had time to make her
any clothes, yet. So I left her...How is your husband?"

"Oh, he is very well, thank you. At least he had a nawful cold but
Queen Victoria--she's my godmother, you know--sent him a case of
pineapples and that cured it im--mediately. Is that your new servant?"

"Yes, her name's Gwen. I've only had her two days. Oh, Gwen, this is
my friend, Mrs. Smith."

"Good morning, Mrs. Smith. Dinner won't be ready for about ten
minutes."

"I don't think you ought to introduce me to the servant. I think I
ought to just begin talking to her."

"Well, she's more of a lady-help than a servant and you do introduce
lady-helps, I know, because Mrs. Samuel Josephs had one."

"Oh, well, it doesn't matter," said the servant, carelessly, beating
up a chocolate custard with half a broken clothes peg. The dinner was
baking beautifully on a concrete step. She began to lay the cloth on a
pink garden seat. In front of each person she put two geranium leaf
plates, a pine needle fork and a twig knife. There were three daisy
heads on a laurel leaf for poached eggs, some slices of fuchsia petal
cold beef, some lovely little rissoles made of earth and water and
dandelion seeds, and the chocolate custard which she had decided to
serve in the pawa shell she had cooked it in.

"You needn't trouble about my children," said Mrs. Smith graciously.
"If you'll just take this bottle and fill it at the tap--I mean at the
dairy."

"Oh, all right," said Gwen, and she whispered to Mrs. Jones: "Shall I
go and ask Alice for a little bit of real milk?"

But someone called from the front of the house and the luncheon party
melted away, leaving the charming table, leaving the rissoles and the
poached eggs to the ants and to an old snail who pushed his quivering
horns over the edge of the garden seat and began to nibble a geranium
plate.

"Come round to the front, children. Pip and Rags have come."

The Trout boys were the cousins Kezia had mentioned to the storeman.
They lived about a mile away in a house called Monkey Tree Cottage.
Pip was tall for his age, with lank black hair and a white face, but
Rags was very small and so thin that when he was undressed his
shoulder blades stuck out like two little wings. They had a mongrel
dog with pale blue eyes and a long tail turned up at the end who
followed them everywhere; he was called Snooker. They spent half their
time combing and brushing Snooker and dosing him with various awful
mixtures concocted by Pip, and kept secretly by him in a broken jug
covered with an old kettle lid. Even faithful little Rags was not
allowed to know the full secret of these mixtures...Take some
carbolic tooth powder and a pinch of sulphur powdered up fine, and
perhaps a bit of starch to stiffen up Snooker's coat...But that
was not all; Rags privately thought that the rest was gun-powder...And
he never was allowed to help with the mixing because of the
danger..."Why if a spot of this flew in your eye, you would be
blinded for life," Pip would say, stirring the mixture with an iron
spoon. "And there's always the chance--just the chance, mind you--of
it exploding if you whack it hard enough...Two spoons of this in
a kerosene tin will be enough to kill thousands of fleas." But Snooker
spent all his spare time biting and snuffling, and he stank
abominably.

"It's because he is such a grand fighting dog," Pip would say. "All
fighting dogs smell."

The Trout boys had often spent the day with the Burnells in town, but
now that they lived in this fine house and boncer garden they were
inclined to be very friendly. Besides, both of them liked playing with
girls--Pip, because he could fox them so, and because Lottie was so
easily frightened, and Rags for a shameful reason. He adored dolls.
How he would look at a doll as it lay asleep, speaking in a whisper
and smiling timidly, and what a treat it was to him to be allowed to
hold one...

"Curve your arms round her. Don't keep them stiff like that. You'll
drop her," Isabel would say sternly.

Now they were standing on the verandah and holding back Snooker who
wanted to go into the house but wasn't allowed to because Aunt Linda
hated decent dogs.

"We came over in the bus with Mum," they said, "and we're going to
spend the afternoon with you. We brought over a batch of our
gingerbread for Aunt Linda. Our Minnie made it. It's all over nuts."

"I skinned the almonds," said Pip. "I just stuck my hand into a
saucepan of boiling water and grabbed them out and gave them a kind of
pinch and the nuts flew out of the skins, some of them as high as the
ceiling. Didn't they, Rags?"

Rags nodded. "When they make cakes at our place," said Pip, "we always
stay in the kitchen, Rags and me, and I get the bowl and he gets the
spoon and the egg beater. Sponge cake's best. It's all frothy stuff,
then."

He ran down the verandah steps to the lawn, planted his hands on the
grass, bent forward, and just did not stand on his head.

"That lawn's all bumpy," he said. "You have to have a flat place for
standing on your head. I can walk round the monkey tree on my head at
our place. Can't I, Rags?"

"Nearly," said Rags faintly.

"Stand on your head on the verandah. That's quite flat," said Kezia.

"No, smarty," said Pip. "You have to do it on something soft. Because
if you give a jerk and fall over, something in your neck goes click,
and it breaks off. Dad told me."

"Oh, do let's play something," said Kezia.

"Very well," said Isabel quickly, "we'll play hospitals. I will be the
nurse and Pip can be the doctor and you and Lottie and Rags can be the
sick people."

Lottie didn't want to play that, because last time Pip had squeezed
something down her throat and it hurt awfully.

"Pooh," scoffed Pip. "It was only the juice out of a bit of mandarin
peel."

"Well, let's play ladies," said Isabel. "Pip can be the father and you
can be all our dear little children."

"I hate playing ladies," said Kezia. "You always make us go to church
hand in hand and come home and go to bed."

Suddenly Pip took a filthy handkerchief out of his pocket. "Snooker!
Here, sir," he called. But Snooker, as usual, tried to sneak away, his
tail between his legs. Pip leapt on top of him, and pressed him
between his knees.

"Keep his head firm, Rags," he said, and he tied the handkerchief
round Snooker's head with a funny knot sticking up at the top.

"Whatever is that for?" asked Lottie.

"It's to train his ears to grow more close to his head--see?" said
Pip. "All fighting dogs have ears that lie back. But Snooker's ears
are a bit too soft."

"I know," said Kezia. "They are always turning inside out. I hate
that."

Snooker lay down, made one feeble effort with his paw to get the
handkerchief off, but finding he could not, trailed after the
children, shivering with misery.



9

Pat came swinging along; in his hand he held a little tomahawk that
winked in the sun.

"Come with me," he said to the children, "and I'll show you how the
kings of Ireland chop the head off a duck."

They drew back--they didn't believe him, and besides, the Trout boys
had never seen Pat before.

"Come on now," he coaxed, smiling and holding out his hand to Kezia.

"Is it a real duck's head? One from the paddock?"

"It is," said Pat. She put her hand in his hard dry one, and he stuck
the tomahawk in his belt and held out the other to Rags. He loved
little children.

"I'd better keep hold of Snooker's head if there's going to be any
blood about," said Pip, "because the sight of blood makes him awfully
wild." He ran ahead dragging Snooker by the handkerchief.

"Do you think we ought to go?" whispered Isabel. "We haven't asked or
anything. Have we?"

At the bottom of the orchard a gate was set in the paling fence. On
the other side a steep bank led down to a bridge that spanned the
creek, and once up the bank on the other side you were on the fringe
of the paddocks. A little old stable in the first paddock had been
turned into a fowl house. The fowls had strayed far away across the
paddock down to a dumping ground in a hollow, but the ducks kept close
to that part of the creek that flowed under the bridge.

Tall bushes overhung the stream with red leaves and yellow flowers and
clusters of blackberries. At some places the stream was wide and
shallow, but at others it tumbled into deep little pools with foam at
the edges and quivering bubbles. It was in these pools that the big
white ducks had made themselves at home, swimming and guzzling along
the weedy banks.

Up and down they swam, preening their dazzling breasts, and other
ducks with the same dazzling breasts and yellow bills swam upside down
with them.

"There is the little Irish navy," said Pat, "and look at the old
admiral there with the green neck and the grand little flagstaff on
his tail."

He pulled a handful of grain from his pocket and began to walk towards
the fowl-house, lazy, his straw hat with the broken crown pulled over
his eyes.

"Lid. Lid--lid--lid--lid----" he called.

"Qua. Qua--qua--qua--qua----" answered the ducks, making for land, and
flapping and scrambling up the bank they streamed after him in a long
waddling line. He coaxed them, pretending to throw the grain, shaking
it in his hands and calling to them until they swept round him in a
white ring.

From far away the fowls heard the clamour and they too came running
across the paddock, their heads thrust forward, their wings spread,
turning in their feet in the silly way fowls run and scolding as they
came.

Then Pat scattered the grain and the greedy ducks began to gobble.
Quickly he stooped, seized two, one under each arm, and strode across
to the children. Their darting heads and round eyes frightened the
children--all except Pip.

"Come on, sillies," he cried, "they can't bite. They haven't any
teeth. They've only got those two little holes in their beaks for
breathing through."

"Will you hold one while I finish with the other?" asked Pat. Pip let
go of Snooker. "Won't I? Won't I? Give us one. I don't mind how much
he kicks."

He nearly sobbed with delight when Pat gave the white lump into his
arms.

There was an old stump beside the door of the fowl-house. Pat grabbed
the duck by the legs, laid it flat across the stump, and almost at the
same moment down came the little tomahawk and the duck's head flew off
the stump. Up the blood spurted over the white feathers and over his
hand.

When the children saw the blood they were frightened no longer. They
crowded round him and began to scream. Even Isabel leaped about
crying: "The blood! The blood!" Pip forgot all about his duck. He
simply threw it away from him and shouted, "I saw it. I saw it," and
jumped round the wood block.

Rags, with cheeks as white as paper, ran up to the little head, put
out a finger as if he wanted to touch it, shrank back again and then
again put out a finger. He was shivering all over.

Even Lottie, frightened little Lottie, began to laugh and pointed at
the duck and shrieked: "Look, Kezia, look."

"Watch it!" shouted Pat. He put down the body and it began to
waddle--with only a long spurt of blood where the head had been; it
began to pad away without a sound towards the steep bank that led to
the stream...That was the crowning wonder.

"Do you see that? Do you see that?" yelled Pip. He ran among the
little girls tugging at their pinafores.

"It's like a little engine. It's like a funny little railway engine,"
squealed Isabel.

But Kezia suddenly rushed at Pat and flung her arms round his legs and
butted her head as hard as she could against his knees.

"Put head back! Put head back!" she screamed.

When he stooped to move her she would not let go or take her head
away. She held on as hard as she could and sobbed: "Head back! Head
back!" until it sounded like a loud strange hiccup.

"It's stopped. It's tumbled over. It's dead," said Pip.

Pat dragged Kezia up into his arms. Her sun-bonnet had fallen back,
but she would not let him look at her face. No, she pressed her face
into a bone in his shoulder and clasped her arms round his neck.

The children stopped screaming as suddenly as they had begun. They
stood round the dead duck. Rags was not frightened of the head any
more. He knelt down and stroked it, now.

"I don't think the head is quite dead yet," he said. "Do you think it
would keep alive if I gave it something to drink?"

But Pip got very cross: "Bah! You baby." He whistled to Snooker and
went off.

When Isabel went up to Lottie, Lottie snatched away.

"What are you always touching me for, Isabel?"

"There now," said Pat to Kezia. "There's the grand little girl."

She put up her hands and touched his ears. She felt something. Slowly
she raised her quivering face and looked. Pat wore little round gold
ear-rings. She never knew that men wore ear-rings. She was very much
surprised.

"Do they come on and off?" she asked huskily.



10

Up in the house, in the warm tidy kitchen, Alice, the servant girl,
was getting the afternoon tea. She was "dressed." She had on a black
stuff dress that smelt under the arms, a white apron like a large
sheet of paper, and a lace bow pinned on to her hair with two jetty
pins. Also her comfortable carpet slippers were changed for a pair of
black leather ones that pinched her corn on her little toe something
dreadful...

It was warm in the kitchen. A blow-fly buzzed, a fan of whity steam
came out of the kettle, and the lid kept up a rattling jig as the
water bubbled. The clock ticked in the warm air, slow and deliberate,
like the click of an old woman's knitting needle, and sometimes--for
no reason at all, for there wasn't any breeze--the blind swung out and
back, tapping the window.

Alice was making water-cress sandwiches. She had a lump of butter on
the table, a barracouta loaf, and the cresses tumbled in a white
cloth.

But propped against the butter dish there was a dirty, greasy little
book, half unstitched, with curled edges, and while she mashed the
butter she read:

"To dream of black-beetles drawing a hearse is bad. Signifies death of
one you hold near or dear, either father, husband, brother, son, or
intended. If beetles crawl backwards as you watch them it means death
from fire or from great height such as flight of stairs, scaffolding,
etc.

"Spiders. To dream of spiders creeping over you is good. Signifies
large sum of money in near future. Should party be in family way an
easy confinement may be expected. But care should be taken in sixth
month to avoid eating of probable present of shell fish..."

  How many thousand birds I see.

Oh, life. There was Miss Beryl. Alice dropped the knife and slipped
the _Dream Book_ under the butter dish. But she hadn't time to hide it
quite, for Beryl ran into the kitchen and up to the table, and the
first thing her eye lighted on were those greasy edges. Alice saw Miss
Beryl's meaning little smile and the way she raised her eyebrows and
screwed up her eyes as though she were not quite sure what that could
be. She decided to answer if Miss Beryl should ask her: "Nothing as
belongs to you, Miss." But she knew Miss Beryl would not ask her.

Alice was a mild creature in reality, but she had the most marvellous
retorts ready for questions that she knew would never be put to her.
The composing of them and the turning of them over and over in her
mind comforted her just as much as if they'd been expressed. Really,
they kept her alive in places where she'd been that chivvied she'd
been afraid to go to bed at night with a box of matches on the chair
in case she bit the tops off in her sleep, as you might say.

"Oh, Alice," said Miss Beryl. "There's one extra to tea, so heat a
plate of yesterday's scones, please. And put on the Victoria sandwich
as well as the coffee cake. And don't forget to put little doyleys
under the plates--will you? You did yesterday, you know, and the tea
looked so ugly and common. And, Alice, don't put that dreadful old
pink and green cosy on the afternoon teapot again. That is only for
the mornings. Really, I think it ought to be kept for the
kitchen--it's so shabby, and quite smelly. Put on the Japanese one.
You quite understand, don't you?"

Miss Beryl had finished.

  That sing aloud from every tree...

she sang as she left the kitchen, very pleased with her firm handling
of Alice.

Oh, Alice was wild. She wasn't one to mind being told, but there was
something in the way Miss Beryl had of speaking to her that she
couldn't stand. Oh, that she couldn't. It made her curl up inside, as
you might say, and she fair trembled. But what Alice really hated Miss
Beryl for was that she made her feel low. She talked to Alice in a
special voice as though she wasn't quite all there; and she never lost
her temper with her--never. Even when Alice dropped anything or forgot
anything important Miss Beryl seemed to have expected it to happen.

"If you please, Mrs. Burnell," said an imaginary Alice, as she
buttered the scones, "I'd rather not take my orders from Miss Beryl. I
may be only a common servant girl as doesn't know how to play the
guitar, but..."

This last thrust pleased her so much that she quite recovered her
temper.

"The only thing to do," she heard, as she opened the dining-room door,
"is to cut the sleeves out entirely and just have a broad band of
black velvet over the shoulders instead..."



11

The white duck did not look as if it had ever had a head when Alice
placed it in front of Stanley Burnell that night. It lay, in
beautifully basted resignation, on a blue dish--its legs tied together
with a piece of string and a wreath of little balls of stuffing round
it.

It was hard to say which of the two, Alice or the duck, looked the
better basted; they were both such a rich colour and they both had the
same air of gloss and strain. But Alice was fiery red and the duck a
Spanish mahogany.

Burnell ran his eye along the edge of the carving knife. He prided
himself very much upon his carving, upon making a first-class job of
it. He hated seeing a woman carve; they were always too slow and they
never seemed to care what the meat looked like afterwards. Now he did;
he took a real pride in cutting delicate shaves of cold beef, little
wads of mutton, just the right thickness, and in dividing a chicken or
a duck with nice precision...

"Is this the first of the home products?" he asked, knowing perfectly
well that it was.

"Yes, the butcher did not come. We have found out that he only calls
twice a week."

But there was no need to apologise. It was a superb bird. It wasn't
meat at all, but a kind of very superior jelly. "My father would say,"
said Burnell, "this must have been one of those birds whose mother
played to it in infancy upon the German flute. And the sweet strains
of the dulcet instrument acted with such effect upon the infant
mind...Have some more, Beryl? You and I are the only ones in this house
with a real feeling for food. I'm perfectly willing to state, in a
court of law, if necessary, that I love good food."

Tea was served in the drawing-room, and Beryl, who for some reason had
been very charming to Stanley ever since he came home, suggested a
game of crib. They sat at a little table near one of the open windows.
Mrs. Fairfield disappeared, and Linda lay in a rocking-chair, her arms
above her head, rocking to and fro.

"You don't want the light--do you, Linda?" said Beryl. She moved the
tall lamp so that she sat under its soft light.

How remote they looked, those two, from where Linda sat and rocked.
The green table, the polished cards, Stanley's big hands and Beryl's
tiny ones, all seemed to be part of one mysterious movement. Stanley
himself, big and solid, in his dark suit, took his ease, and Beryl
tossed her bright head and pouted. Round her throat she wore an
unfamiliar velvet ribbon. It changed her, somehow--altered the shape
of her face--but it was charming, Linda decided. The room smelled of
lilies; there were two big jars of arums in the fire-place.

"Fifteen two--fifteen four--and a pair is six and a run of three is
nine," said Stanley, so deliberately, he might have been counting
sheep.

"I've nothing but two pairs," said Beryl, exaggerating her woe because
she knew how he loved winning.

The cribbage pegs were like two little people going up the road
together, turning round the sharp corner, and coming down the road
again. They were pursuing each other. They did not so much want to get
ahead as to keep near enough to talk--to keep near, perhaps that was
all.

But no, there was always one who was impatient and hopped away as the
other came up, and would not listen. Perhaps the white peg was
frightened of the red one, or perhaps he was cruel and would not give
the red one a chance to speak...

In the front of her dress Beryl wore a bunch of pansies, and once when
the little pegs were side by side, she bent over and the pansies
dropped out and covered them.

"What a shame," said she, picking up the pansies. "Just as they had a
chance to fly into each other's arms."

"Farewell, my girl," laughed Stanley, and away the red peg hopped.

The drawing-room was long and narrow with glass doors that gave on to
the verandah. It had a cream paper with a pattern of gilt roses, and
the furniture, which had belonged to old Mrs. Fairfield, was dark and
plain. A little piano stood against the wall with yellow pleated silk
let into the carved front. Above it hung an oil painting by Beryl of a
large cluster of surprised looking clematis. Each flower was the size
of a small saucer, with a centre like an astonished eye fringed in
black. But the room was not finished yet. Stanley had set his heart on
a Chesterfield and two decent chairs. Linda liked it best as it was...

Two big moths flew in through the window and round and round the
circle of lamplight.

"Fly away before it is too late. Fly out again."

Round and round they flew; they seemed to bring the silence and the
moonlight in with them on their silent wings...

"I've two kings," said Stanley. "Any good?"

"Quite good," said Beryl.

Linda stopped rocking and got up. Stanley looked across. "Anything the
matter, darling?"

"No, nothing. I'm going to find mother."

She went out of the room and standing at the foot of the stairs she
called, but her mother's voice answered her from the verandah.

The moon that Lottie and Kezia had seen from the storeman's wagon was
full, and the house, the garden, the old woman and Linda--all were
bathed in dazzling light.

"I have been looking at the aloe," said Mrs. Fairfield. "I believe it
is going to flower this year. Look at the top there. Are those buds,
or is it only an effect of light?"

As they stood on the steps, the high grassy bank on which the aloe
rested rose up like a wave, and the aloe seemed to ride upon it like a
ship with the oars lifted. Bright moonlight hung upon the lifted oars
like water, and on the green wave glittered the dew.

"Do you feel it, too," said Linda, and she spoke to her mother with
the special voice that women use at night to each other as though they
spoke in their sleep or from some hollow cave--"Don't you feel that it
is coming towards us?"

She dreamed that she was caught up out of the cold water into the ship
with the lifted oars and the budding mast. Now the oars fell striking
quickly, quickly. They rowed far away over the top of the garden
trees, the paddocks and the dark bush beyond. Ah, she heard herself
cry: "Faster! Faster!" to those who were rowing.

How much more real this dream was than that they should go back to the
house where the sleeping children lay and where Stanley and Beryl
played cribbage.

"I believe those are buds," said she. "Let us go down into the garden,
mother. I like that aloe. I like it more than anything here. And I am
sure I shall remember it long after I've forgotten all the other
things."

She put her hand on her mother's arm and they walked down the steps,
round the island and on to the main drive that led to the front gates.

Looking at it from below she could see the long sharp thorns that
edged the aloe leaves, and at the sight of them her heart grew
hard...She particularly liked the long sharp thorns...Nobody would
dare to come near the ship or to follow after.

"Not even my Newfoundland dog," thought she, "that I'm so fond of in
the daytime."

For she really was fond of him; she loved and admired and respected
him tremendously. Oh, better than anyone else in the world. She knew
him through and through. He was the soul of truth and decency, and for
all his practical experience he was awfully simple, easily pleased and
easily hurt...

If only he wouldn't jump at her so, and bark so loudly, and watch her
with such eager, loving eyes. He was too strong for her; she had
always hated things that rush at her, from a child. There were times
when he was frightening--really frightening. When she just had not
screamed at the top of her voice: "You are killing me." And at those
times she had longed to say the most coarse, hateful things...

"You know I'm very delicate. You know as well as I do that my heart is
affected, and the doctor has told you I may die any moment. I have had
three great lumps of children already..."

Yes, yes, it was true. Linda snatched her hand from mother's arm. For
all her love and respect and admiration she hated him. And how tender
he always was after times like those, how submissive, how thoughtful.
He would do anything for her; he longed to serve her...Linda
heard herself saying in a weak voice:

"Stanley, would you light a candle?"

And she heard his joyful voice answer: "Of course I will, my darling."
And he leapt out of bed as though he were going to leap at the moon
for her.

It had never been so plain to her as it was at this moment. There were
all her feelings for him, sharp and defined, one as true as the other.
And there was this other, this hatred, just as real as the rest. She
could have done her feelings up in little packets and given them to
Stanley. She longed to hand him that last one, for a surprise. She
could see his eyes as he opened that...

She hugged her folded arms and began to laugh silently. How absurd
life was--it was laughable, simply laughable. And why this mania of
hers to keep alive at all? For it really was a mania, she thought,
mocking and laughing.

"What am I guarding myself for so preciously? I shall go on having
children and Stanley will go on making money and the children and the
gardens will grow bigger and bigger, with whole fleets of aloes in
them for me to choose from."

She had been walking with her head bent, looking at nothing. Now she
looked up and about her. They were standing by the red and white
camellia trees. Beautiful were the rich dark leaves spangled with
light and the round flowers that perch among them like red and white
birds. Linda pulled a piece of verbena and crumpled it, and held her
hands to her mother.

"Delicious," said the old woman. "Are you cold, child? Are you
trembling? Yes, your hands are cold. We had better go back to the
house."

"What have you been thinking about?" said Linda. "Tell me."

"I haven't really been thinking of anything. I wondered as we passed
the orchard what the fruit trees were like and whether we should be
able to make much jam this autumn. There are splendid healthy currant
bushes in the vegetable garden. I noticed them to-day. I should like
to see those pantry shelves thoroughly well stocked with our own jam..."



12

"MY DARLING NAN,

Don't think me a piggy wig because I haven't written before. I haven't
had a moment, dear, and even now I feel so exhausted that I can hardly
hold a pen.

Well, the dreadful deed is done. We have actually left the giddy whirl
of town, and I can't see how we shall ever go back again, for my
brother-in-law has bought this house 'lock, stock and barrel,' to use
his own words.

In a way, of course, it is an awful relief, for he has been
threatening to take a place in the country ever since I've lived with
them--and I must say the house and garden are awfully nice--a million
times better than that awful cubby-hole in town.

But buried, my dear. Buried isn't the word.

We have got neighbours, but they are only farmers--big louts of boys
who seem to be milking all day, and two dreadful females with rabbit
teeth who brought us some scones when we were moving and said they
would be pleased to help. But my sister who lives a mile away doesn't
know a soul here, so I am sure we never shall. It's pretty certain
nobody will ever come out from town to see us, because though there is
a bus it's an awful old rattling thing with black leather sides that
any decent person would rather die than ride in for six miles.

Such is life. It's a sad ending for poor little B. I'll get to be a
most awful frump in a year or two and come and see you in a mackintosh
and a sailor hat tied on with a white china silk motor veil. So
pretty.

Stanley says that now we are settled--for after the most awful week of
my life we really are settled--he is going to bring out a couple of
men from the club on Saturday afternoons for tennis. In fact, two are
promised as a great treat to-day. But, my dear, if you could see
Stanley's men from the club...rather fattish, the type who look
frightfully indecent without waistcoats--always with toes that turn in
rather--so conspicuous when you are walking about a court in white
shoes. And they are pulling up their trousers every minute--don't you
know--and whacking at imaginary things with their rackets.

I used to play with them at the club last summer, and I am sure you
will know the type when I tell you that after I'd been there about
three times they all called me Miss Beryl. It's a weary world. Of
course mother simply loves the place, but then I suppose when I am
mother's age I shall be content to sit in the sun and shell peas into
a basin. But I'm not--not--not.

What Linda thinks about the whole affair, per usual, I haven't the
slightest idea. Mysterious as ever...

My dear, you know that white satin dress of mine. I have taken the
sleeves out entirely, put bands of black velvet across the shoulders
and two big red poppies off my dear sister's _chapeau._ It is a great
success, though when I shall wear it I do not know."


Beryl sat writing this letter at a little table in her room. In a way,
of course, it was all perfectly true, but in another way it was all
the greatest rubbish and she didn't believe a word of it. No, that
wasn't true. She felt all those things, but she didn't really feel
them like that.

It was her other self who had written that letter. It not only bored,
it rather disgusted her real self.

"Flippant and silly," said her real self. Yet she knew that she'd send
it and she'd always write that kind of twaddle to Nan Pym. In fact, it
was a very mild example of the kind of letter she generally wrote.

Beryl leaned her elbows on the table and read it through again. The
voice of the letter seemed to come up to her from the page. It was
faint already, like a voice heard over the telephone, high, gushing,
with something bitter in the sound. Oh, she detested it to-day.

"You've always got so much animation," said Nan Pym. "That's why men
are so keen on you." And she had added, rather mournfully, for men
were not at all keen on Nan, who was a solid kind of girl, with fat
hips and a high colour--"I can't understand how you can keep it up.
But it is your nature, I suppose."

What rot. What nonsense. It wasn't her nature at all. Good heavens, if
she had ever been her real self with Nan Pym, Nannie would have jumped
out of the window with surprise...My dear, you know that white
satin of mine...Beryl slammed the letter-case to.

She jumped up and half unconsciously, half consciously she drifted
over to the looking-glass.

There stood a slim girl in white--a white serge skirt, a white silk
blouse, and a leather belt drawn in very tightly at her tiny waist.

Her face was heart-shaped, wide at the brows and with a pointed
chin--but not too pointed. Her eyes, her eyes were perhaps her best
feature; they were such a strange uncommon colour--greeny blue with
little gold points in them.

She had fine black eyebrows and long lashes--so long, that when they
lay on her cheeks you positively caught the light in them, someone or
other had told her.

Her mouth was rather large. Too large? No, not really. Her underlip
protruded a little; she had a way of sucking it in that somebody else
had told her was awfully fascinating.

Her nose was her least satisfactory feature. Not that it was really
ugly. But it was not half as fine as Linda's. Linda really had a
perfect little nose. Hers spread rather--not badly. And in all
probability she exaggerated the spreadiness of it just because it was
her nose, and she was so awfully critical of herself. She pinched it
with a thumb and first finger and made a little face...

Lovely, lovely hair. And such a mass of it. It had the colour of fresh
fallen leaves, brown and red with a glint of yellow. When she did it
in a long plait she felt it on her backbone like a long snake. She
loved to feel the weight of it dragging her head back, and she loved
to feel it loose, covering her bare arms. "Yes, my dear, there is no
doubt about it, you really are a lovely little thing."

At the words her bosom lifted; she took a long breath of delight, half
closing her eyes.

But even as she looked the smile faded from her lips and eyes. Oh God,
there she was, back again, playing the same old game. False--false as
ever. False as when she'd written to Nan Pym. False even when she was
alone with herself, now.

What had that creature in the glass to do with her, and why was she
staring? She dropped down to one side of her bed and buried her face
in her arms.

"Oh," she cried, "I am so miserable--so frightfully miserable. I know
that I'm silly and spiteful and vain; I'm always acting a part. I'm
never my real self for a moment." And plainly, plainly, she saw her
false self running up and down the stairs, laughing a special trilling
laugh if they had visitors, standing under the lamp if a man came to
dinner, so that he should see the light on her hair, pouting and
pretending to be a little girl when she was asked to play the guitar.
Why? She even kept it up for Stanley's benefit. Only last night when
he was reading the paper her false self had stood beside him and
leaned against his shoulder on purpose. Hadn't she put her hand over
his, pointing out something so that he should see how white her hand
was beside his brown one.

How despicable! Despicable! Her heart was cold with rage. "It's
marvellous how you keep it up," said she to the false self. But then
it was only because she was so miserable--so miserable. If she had
been happy and leading her own life, her false life would cease to be.
She saw the real Beryl--a shadow...a shadow. Faint and
unsubstantial she shone. What was there of her except the radiance?
And for what tiny moments she was really she. Beryl could almost
remember every one of them. At those times she had felt: "Life is rich
and mysterious and good, and I am rich and mysterious and good, too."
Shall I ever be that Beryl for ever? Shall I? How can I? And was there
ever a time when I did not have a false self?...But just as she
had got that far she heard the sound of little steps running along the
passage; the door handle rattled. Kezia came in.

"Aunt Beryl, mother says will you please come down? Father is home
with a man and lunch is ready."

Botheration! How she had crumpled her skirt, kneeling in that idiotic
way.

"Very well, Kezia." She went over to the dressing table and powdered
her nose.

Kezia crossed too, and unscrewed a little pot of cream and sniffed it.
Under her arm she carried a very dirty calico cat.

When Aunt Beryl ran out of the room she sat the cat up on the dressing
table and stuck the top of the cream jar over its ear.

"Now look at yourself," said she sternly.

The calico cat was so overcome by the sight that it toppled over
backwards and bumped and bumped on to the floor. And the top of the
cream jar flew through the air and rolled like a penny in a round on
the linoleum--and did not break.

But for Kezia it had broken the moment it flew through the air, and
she picked it up, hot all over, and put it back on the dressing table.

Then she tip-toed away, far too quickly and airily...




JE NE PARLE PAS FRANÇAIS

I DO not know why I have such a fancy for this little café. It's dirty
and sad, sad. It's not as if it had anything to distinguish it from a
hundred others--it hasn't; or as if the same strange types came here
every day, whom one could watch from one's corner and recognise and
more or less (with a strong accent on the less) get the hang of.

But pray don't imagine that those brackets are a confession of my
humility before the mystery of the human soul. Not at all; I don't
believe in the human soul. I never have. I believe that people are
like portmanteaux--packed with certain things, started going, thrown
about, tossed away, dumped down, lost and found, half emptied
suddenly, or squeezed fatter than ever, until finally the Ultimate
Porter swings them on to the Ultimate Train and away they rattle...

Not but what these portmanteaux can be very fascinating. Oh, but very!
I see myself standing in front of them, don't you know, like a Customs
official.

"Have you anything to declare? Any wines, spirits, cigars, perfumes,
silks?"

And the moment of hesitation as to whether I am going to be fooled
just before I chalk that squiggle, and then the other moment of
hesitation just after, as to whether I have been, are perhaps the two
most thrilling instants in life. Yes, they are, to me.

But before I started that long and rather far-fetched and not
frightfully original digression, what I meant to say quite simply was
that there are no portmanteaux to be examined here because the
clientele of this café, ladies and gentlemen, does not sit down. No,
it stands at the counter, and it consists of a handful of workmen who
come up from the river, all powdered over with white flour, lime or
something, and a few soldiers, bringing with them thin, dark girls
with silver rings in their ears and market baskets on their arms.

Madame is thin and dark, too, with white cheeks and white hands. In
certain lights she looks quite transparent, shining out of her black
shawl with an extraordinary effect. When she is not serving she sits
on a stool with her face turned, always, to the window. Her
dark-ringed eyes search among and follow after the people passing, but
not as if she was looking for somebody. Perhaps, fifteen years ago,
she was; but now the pose has become a habit. You can tell from her
air of fatigue and hopelessness that she must have given them up for
the last ten years, at least...

And then there is the waiter. Not pathetic--decidedly not comic. Never
making one of those perfectly insignificant remarks which amaze you so
coming from a waiter, (as though the poor wretch were a sort of cross
between a coffee-pot and a wine bottle and not expected to hold so
much as a drop of anything else). He is grey, flat-footed and
withered, with long, brittle nails that set your nerves on edge while
he scrapes up your two sous. When he is not smearing over the table or
flicking at a dead fly or two, he stands with one hand on the back of
a chair, in his far too long apron, and over his other arm the
three-cornered dip of dirty napkin, waiting to be photographed in
connection with some wretched murder. "Interior of Café where Body was
Found." You've seen him hundreds of times.

Do you believe that every place has its hour of the day when it really
does come alive? That's not exactly what I mean. It's more like this.
There does seem to be a moment when you realize that, quite by
accident, you happen to have come on to the stage at exactly the
moment you were expected. Everything is arranged for you--waiting for
you. Ah, master of the situation! You fill with important breath. And
at the same time you smile, secretly, slyly, because Life seems to be
opposed to granting you these entrances, seems indeed to be engaged in
snatching them from you and making them impossible, keeping you in the
wings until it is too late, in fact...Just for once you've beaten
the old hag.

I enjoyed one of these moments the first time I ever came in here.
That's why I keep coming back, I suppose. Revisiting the scene of my
triumph, or the scene of the crime where I had the old bitch by the
throat for once and did what I pleased with her.

Query: Why am I so bitter against Life? And why do I see her as a
rag-picker on the American cinema, shuffling along wrapped in a filthy
shawl with her old claws crooked over a stick?

Answer: The direct result of the American cinema acting upon a weak
mind.

Anyhow, the "short winter afternoon was drawing to a close," as they
say, and I was drifting along, either going home or not going home,
when I found myself in here, walking over to this seat in the corner.

I hung up my English overcoat and grey felt hat on that same peg
behind me, and after I had allowed the waiter time for at least twenty
photographers to snap their fill of him, I ordered a coffee.

He poured me out a glass of the familiar, purplish stuff with a green
wandering light playing over it, and shuffled off, and I sat pressing
my hands against the glass because it was bitterly cold outside.

Suddenly I realized that quite apart from myself, I was smiling.
Slowly I raised my head and saw myself in the mirror opposite. Yes,
there I sat, leaning on the table, smiling my deep, sly smile, the
glass of coffee with its vague plume of steam before me and beside it
the ring of white saucer with two pieces of sugar.

I opened my eyes very wide. There I had been for all eternity, as it
were, and now at last I was coming to life...

It was very quiet in the café. Outside, one could just see through the
dusk that it had begun to snow. One could just see the shapes of
horses and carts and people, soft and white, moving through the
feathery air. The waiter disappeared and reappeared with an armful of
straw. He strewed it over the floor from the door to the counter and
round about the stove with humble, almost adoring gestures. One would
not have been surprised if the door had opened and the Virgin Mary had
come in, riding upon an ass, her meek hands folded over her big belly...

That's rather nice, don't you think, that bit about the Virgin? It
comes from the pen so gently; it has such a "dying fall." I thought so
at the time and decided to make a note of it. One never knows when a
little tag like that may come in useful to round off a paragraph. So,
taking care to move as little as possible because the "spell" was
still unbroken (you know that?), I reached over to the next table for
a writing pad.

No paper or envelopes, of course. Only a morsel of pink
blotting-paper, incredibly soft and limp and almost moist, like the
tongue of a little dead kitten, which I've never felt.

I sat--but always underneath, in this state of expectation, rolling
the little dead kitten's tongue round my finger and rolling the soft
phrase round my mind while my eyes took in the girls' names and dirty
jokes and drawings of bottles and cups that would not sit in the
saucers, scattered over the writing pad.

They are always the same, you know. The girls always have the same
names, the cups never sit in the saucers; all the hearts are stuck and
tied up with ribbons.

But then, quite suddenly, at the bottom of the page, written in green
ink, I fell on to that stupid, stale little phrase: _Je ne parle pas
français._

There! it had come--the moment--the _geste!_ And although I was so
ready, it caught me, it tumbled me over; I was simply overwhelmed. And
the physical feeling was so curious, so particular. It was as if all
of me, except my head and arms, all of me that was under the table,
had simply dissolved, melted, turned into water. Just my head remained
and two sticks of arms pressing on to the table. But, ah! the agony of
that moment! How can I describe it? I didn't think of anything. I
didn't even cry out to myself. Just for one moment I was not. I was
Agony, Agony, Agony.

Then it passed, and the very second after I was thinking: "Good God!
Am I capable of feeling as strongly as that? But I was absolutely
unconscious! I hadn't a phrase to meet it with! I was overcome! I was
swept off my feet! I didn't even try, in the dimmest way, to put it
down!"

And up I puffed and puffed, blowing off finally with: "After all I
must be first-rate. No second-rate mind could have experienced such an
intensity of feeling so...purely."



The waiter has touched a spill at the red stove and lighted a bubble
of gas under a spreading shade. It is no use looking out of the
window, Madame; it is quite dark now. Your white hands hover over your
dark shawl. They are like two birds that have come home to roost. They
are restless, restless...You tuck them, finally, under your warm
little armpits.

Now the waiter has taken a long pole and clashed the curtains
together. "All gone," as children say.

And besides, I've no patience with people who can't let go of things,
who will follow after and cry out. When a thing's gone, it's gone.
It's over and done with. Let it go then! Ignore it, and comfort
yourself, if you do want comforting, with the thought that you never
do recover the same thing that you lose. It's always a new thing. The
moment it leaves you it's changed. Why, that's even true of a hat you
chase after; and I don't mean superficially--I mean profoundly
speaking...I have made it a rule of my life never to regret and
never to look back. Regret is an appalling waste of energy, and no one
who intends to be a writer can afford to indulge in it. You can't get
it into shape; you can't build on it; it's only good for wallowing in.
Looking back, of course, is equally fatal to Art. It's keeping
yourself poor. Art can't and won't stand poverty.

_Je ne parle pas français. Je ne parle pas français._ All the while I
wrote that last page my other self has been chasing up and down out in
the dark there. It left me just when I began to analyse my grand
moment, dashed off distracted, like a lost dog who thinks at last, at
last, he hears the familiar step again.

"Mouse! Mouse! Where are you? Are you near? Is that you leaning from
the high window and stretching out your arms for the wings of the
shutters? Are you this soft bundle moving towards me through the
feathery snow? Are you this little girl pressing through the
swing-doors of the restaurant? Is that your dark shadow bending
forward in the cab? Where are you? Where are you? Which way must I
turn? Which way shall I run? And every moment I stand here hesitating
you are farther away again. Mouse! Mouse!"

Now the poor dog has come back into the café, his tail between his
legs, quite exhausted.

"It was a...false...alarm. She's nowhere...to...be
seen."

"Lie down then! Lie down! Lie down!"



My name is Raoul Duquette. I am twenty-six years old and a Parisian, a
true Parisian. About my family--it really doesn't matter. I have no
family; I don't want any. I never think about my childhood. I've
forgotten it.

In fact, there's only one memory that stands out at all. That is
rather interesting because it seems to me now so very significant as
regards myself from the literary point of view. It is this.

When I was about ten our laundress was an African woman, very big,
very dark, with a check handkerchief over her frizzy hair. When she
came to our house she always took particular notice of me, and after
the clothes had been taken out of the basket she would lift me up into
it and give me a rock while I held tight to the handles and screamed
for joy and fright. I was tiny for my age, and pale, with a lovely
little half-open mouth--I feel sure of that.

One day when I was standing at the door, watching her go, she turned
round and beckoned to me, nodding and smiling in a strange secret way.
I never thought of not following. She took me into a little outhouse
at the end of the passage, caught me up in her arms and began kissing
me. Ah, those kisses! Especially those kisses inside my ears that
nearly deafened me.

When she set me down she took from her pocket a little round fried
cake covered with sugar, and I reeled along the passage back to our
door.

As this performance was repeated once a week it is no wonder that I
remember it so vividly. Besides, from that very first afternoon, my
childhood was, to put it prettily, "kissed away." I became very
languid, very caressing, and greedy beyond measure. And so quickened,
so sharpened, I seemed to understand everybody and be able to do what
I liked with everybody.

I suppose I was in a state of more or less physical excitement, and
that was what appealed to them. For all Parisians are more than
half--oh, well, enough of that. And enough of my childhood, too. Bury
it under a laundry basket instead of a shower of roses and _passons
oultre._



I date myself from the moment that I became the tenant of a small
bachelor flat on the fifth floor of a tall, not too shabby house, in a
street that might or might not be discreet. Very useful, that...There
I emerged, came out into the light and put out my two horns with
a study and a bedroom and a kitchen on my back. And real furniture
planted in the rooms. In the bedroom a wardrobe with a long glass, a
big bed covered with a yellow puffed-up quilt, a bed table with a
marbled top and a toilet set sprinkled with tiny apples. In my
study--English writing table with drawers, writing chair with leather
cushions, books, arm-chair, side table with paper-knife and lamp on it
and some nude studies on the walls. I didn't use the kitchen except to
throw old papers into.

Ah, I can see myself that first evening, after the furniture men had
gone and I'd managed to get rid of my atrocious old concierge--walking
about on tip-toe, arranging and standing in front of the glass with my
hands in my pockets and saying to that radiant vision: "I am a young
man who has his own flat. I write for two newspapers. I am going in
for serious literature. I am starting a career. The book that I shall
bring out will simply stagger the critics. I am going to write about
things that have never been touched before. I am going to make a name
for myself as a writer about the submerged world. But not as others
have done before me. Oh, no! Very naively, with a sort of tender
humour and from the inside, as though it were all quite simple, quite
natural. I see my way quite perfectly. Nobody has ever done it as I
shall do it because none of the others have lived my experiences. I'm
rich--I'm rich."

All the same I had no more money than I have now. It's extraordinary
how one can live without money...I have quantities of good
clothes, silk underwear, two evening suits, four pairs of patent
leather boots with light uppers, all sorts of little things, like
gloves and powder boxes and a manicure set, perfumes, very good soap,
and nothing is paid for. If I find myself in need of right-down
cash--well, there's always an African laundress and an outhouse, and I
am very frank and _bon enfant_ about plenty of sugar on the little
fried cake afterwards...

And here I should like to put something on record. Not from any
strutting conceit, but rather with a mild sense of wonder. I've never
yet made the first advances to any woman. It isn't as though I've
known only one class of woman--not by any means. But from little
prostitutes and kept women and elderly widows and shop girls and wives
of respectable men, and even advanced modern literary ladies at the
most select dinners and soirées (I've been there), I've met invariably
with not only the same readiness, but with the same positive
invitation. It surprised me at first. I used to look across the table
and think "Is that very distinguished young lady, discussing _le
Kipling_ with the gentleman with the brown beard, really pressing my
foot?" And I was never really certain until I had pressed hers.

Curious, isn't it? I don't look at all like a maiden's dream...

I am little and light with an olive skin, black eyes with long lashes,
black silky hair cut short, tiny square teeth that show when I smile.
My hands are supple and small. A woman in a bread shop once said to
me: "You have the hands for making fine little pastries." I confess,
without any clothes I am rather charming. Plump, almost like a girl,
with smooth shoulders, and I wear a thin gold bracelet above my left
elbow.

But, wait! Isn't it strange I should have written all that about my
body and so on? It's the result of my bad life, my submerged life. I
am like a little woman in a café who has to introduce herself with a
handful of photographs. "Me in my chemise, coming out of an eggshell...Me
upside down in a swing, with a frilly behind like a
cauliflower..." You know the things.



If you think what I've written is merely superficial and impudent and
cheap you're wrong. I'll admit it does sound so, but then it is not
all. If it were, how could I have experienced what I did when I read
that stale little phrase written in green ink, in the writing-pad?
That proves there's more in me and that I really am important, doesn't
it? Anything a fraction less than that moment of anguish I might have
put on. But no! That was real.

"Waiter, a whisky."

I hate whisky. Every time I take it into my mouth my stomach rises
against it, and the stuff they keep here is sure to be particularly
vile. I only ordered it because I am going to write about an
Englishman. We French are incredibly old-fashioned and out of date
still in some ways. I wonder I didn't ask him at the same time for a
pair of tweed knickerbockers, a pipe, some long teeth and a set of
ginger whiskers.

"Thanks, _mon vieux._ You haven't got perhaps a set of ginger
whiskers?"

"No, monsieur," he answers sadly. "We don't sell American drinks."

And having smeared a corner of the table he goes back to have another
couple of dozen taken by artificial light.

Ugh! The smell of it! And the sickly sensation when one's throat
contracts.

"It's bad stuff to get drunk on," says Dick Harmon, turning his little
glass in his fingers and smiling his slow, dreaming smile. So he gets
drunk on it slowly and dreamily and at a certain moment begins to sing
very low, very low, about a man who walks up and down trying to find a
place where he can get some dinner.

Ah! how I loved that song, and how I loved the way he sang it, slowly,
slowly, in a dark, soft voice:

  There was a man
  Walked up and down
  To get a dinner in the town...

It seemed to hold, in its gravity and muffled measure, all those tall
grey buildings, those fogs, those endless streets, those sharp shadows
of policemen that mean England.

And then--the subject! The lean, starved creature walking up and down
with every house barred against him because he had no "home." How
extraordinarily English that is...I remember that it ended where
he did at last "find a place" and ordered a little cake of fish, but
when he asked for bread the waiter cried contemptuously, in a loud
voice: "We don't serve bread with one fish ball."

What more do you want? How profound those songs are! There is the
whole psychology of a people; and how un-French--how un-French!

"Once more, Deeck, once more!" I would plead, clasping my hands and
making a pretty mouth at him. He was perfectly content to sing it for
ever.



There again. Even with Dick. It was he who made the first advances.

I met him at an evening party given by the editor of a new review. It
was a very select, very fashionable affair. One or two of the older
men were there and the ladies were extremely _comme il faut._ They sat
on cubist sofas in full evening dress and allowed us to hand them
thimbles of cherry brandy and to talk to them about their poetry. For,
as far as I can remember, they were all poetesses.

It was impossible not to notice Dick. He was the only Englishman
present, and instead of circulating gracefully round the room as we
all did, he stayed in one place leaning against the wall, his hands in
his pockets, that dreamy half smile on his lips, and replying in
excellent French in his low, soft voice to anybody who spoke to him.

"Who is he?"

"An Englishman. From London. A writer. And he is making a special
study of modern French literature."

That was enough for me. My little book, _False Coins_ had just been
published. I was a young serious writer who was making a special study
of modern English literature.

But I really had not time to fling my line before he said, giving
himself a soft shake, coming right out of the water after the bait, as
it were: "Won't you come and see me at my hotel? Come about five
o'clock and we can have a talk before going out to dinner."

"Enchanted!"

I was so deeply, deeply flattered that I had to leave him then and
there to preen and preen myself before the cubist sofas. What a catch!
An Englishman, reserved, serious, making a special study of French
literature...

That same night a copy of _False Coins_ with a carefully cordial
inscription was posted off, and a day or two later we did dine
together and spent the evening talking.

Talking--but not only of literature. I discovered to my relief that it
wasn't necessary to keep to the tendency of the modern novel, the need
of a new form, or the reason why our young men appeared to be just
missing it. Now and again, as if by accident, I threw in a card that
seemed to have nothing to do with the game, just to see how he'd take
it. But each time he gathered it into his hands with his dreamy look
and smile unchanged. Perhaps he murmured: "That's very curious." But
not as if it were curious at all.

That calm acceptance went to my head at last. It fascinated me. It led
me on and on till I threw every card that I possessed at him and sat
back and watched him arrange them in his hand.

"Very curious and interesting..."

By that time we were both fairly drunk, and he began to sing his song
very soft, very low, about the man who walked up and down seeking his
dinner.

But I was quite breathless at the thought of what I had done. I had
shown somebody both sides of my life. Told him everything as sincerely
and truthfully as I could. Taken immense pains to explain things about
my submerged life that really were disgusting and never could possibly
see the light of literary day. On the whole I had made myself out far
worse than I was--more boastful, more cynical, more calculating.

And there sat the man I had confided in, singing to himself and
smiling...It moved me so that real tears came into my eyes. I saw
them glittering on my long silky lashes--so charming.



After that I took Dick about with me everywhere, and he came to my
flat, and sat in the arm-chair, very indolent, playing with the
paper-knife. I cannot think why his indolence and dreaminess always
gave me the impression he had been to sea. And all his leisurely slow
ways seemed to be allowing for the movement of the ship. This
impression was so strong that often when we were together and he got
up and left a little woman just when she did not expect him to get up
and leave her, but quite the contrary, I would explain: "He can't help
it, Baby. He has to go back to his ship." And I believed it far more
than she did.

All the while we were together Dick never went with a woman. I
sometimes wondered whether he wasn't completely innocent. Why didn't I
ask him? Because I never did ask him anything about himself. But late
one night he took out his pocket-book and a photograph dropped out of
it. I picked it up and glanced at it before I gave it to him. It was
of a woman. Not quite young. Dark, handsome, wild-looking, but so full
in every line of a kind of haggard pride that even if Dick had not
stretched out so quickly I wouldn't have looked longer.

"Out of my sight, you little perfumed fox-terrier of a Frenchman,"
said she.

(In my very worst moments my nose reminds me of a fox-terrier's.)

"That is my Mother," said Dick, putting up the pocket-book.

But if he had not been Dick I should have been tempted to cross
myself, just for fun.



This is how we parted. As we stood outside his hotel one night waiting
for the concierge to release the catch of the outer door, he said,
looking up at the sky: "I hope it will be fine to-morrow. I am leaving
for England in the morning."

"You're not serious."

"Perfectly. I have to get back. I've some work to do that I can't
manage here."

"But--but have you made all your preparations?"

"Preparations?" He almost grinned. "I've none to make."

"But--_enfin_, Dick, England is not the other side of the boulevard."

"It isn't much farther off," said he. "Only a few hours, you know."
The door cracked open.

"Ah, I wish I'd known at the beginning of the evening!"

I felt hurt. I felt as a woman must feel when a man takes out his
watch and remembers an appointment that cannot possibly concern her,
except that its claim is the stronger. "Why didn't you tell me?"

He put out his hand and stood, lightly swaying upon the step as though
the whole hotel were his ship, and the anchor weighed.

"I forgot. Truly I did. But you'll write, won't you? Good night, old
chap. I'll be over again one of these days."

And then I stood on the shore alone, more like a little fox-terrier
than ever...

"But after all it was you who whistled to me, you who asked me to
come! What a spectacle I've cut wagging my tail and leaping round you,
only to be left like this while the boat sails off in its slow, dreamy
way...Curse these English! No, this is too insolent altogether.
Who do you imagine I am? A little paid guide to the night pleasures of
Paris?...No, monsieur. I am a young writer, very serious, and
extremely interested in modern English literature. And I have been
insulted--insulted."



Two days after came a long, charming letter from him, written in
French that was a shade too French, but saying how he missed me and
counted on our friendship, on keeping in touch.

I read it standing in front of the (unpaid for) wardrobe mirror. It
was early morning. I wore a blue kimono embroidered with white birds
and my hair was still wet; it lay on my forehead, wet and gleaming.

"Portrait of Madame Butterfly," said I, "on hearing of the arrival of
_ce cher Pinkerton_."

According to the books I should have felt immensely relieved and
delighted. "...Going over to the window he drew apart the curtains
and looked out at the Paris trees, just breaking into buds and
green...Dick! Dick! My English friend!"

I didn't. I merely felt a little sick. Having been up for my first
ride in an aeroplane I didn't want to go up again, just now.



That passed, and months after, in the winter, Dick wrote that he was
coming back to Paris to stay indefinitely. Would I take rooms for him?
He was bringing a woman friend with him.

Of course I would. Away the little fox-terrier flew. It happened most
usefully, too; for I owed much money at the hotel where I took my
meals, and two English people requiring rooms for an indefinite time
was an excellent sum on account.

Perhaps I did rather wonder, as I stood in the larger of the two rooms
with Madame, saying "Admirable," what the woman friend would be like,
but only vaguely. Either she would be very severe, flat back and
front, or she would be tall, fair, dressed in mignonette green,
name--Daisy, and smelling of rather sweetish lavender water.

You see, by this time, according to my rule of not looking back, I had
almost forgotten Dick. I even got the tune of his song about the
unfortunate man a little bit wrong when I tried to hum it...



I very nearly did not turn up at the station after all. I had arranged
to, and had, in fact, dressed with particular care for the occasion.
For I intended to take a new line with Dick this time. No more
confidences and tears on eyelashes. No, thank you!

"Since you left Paris," said I, knotting my black silver-spotted tie
in the (also unpaid for) mirror over the mantelpiece, "I have been
very successful, you know. I have two more books in preparation, and
then I have written a serial story, _Wrong Doors_, which is just on
the point of publication and will bring me in a lot of money. And then
my little book of poems," I cried, seizing the clothes-brush and
brushing the velvet collar of my new indigo-blue overcoat, "my little
book--_Left Umbrellas_--really did create," and I laughed and waved
the brush, "an immense sensation!"

It was impossible not to believe this of the person who surveyed
himself finally, from top to toe, drawing on his soft grey gloves. He
was looking the part; he was the part.

That gave me an idea. I took out my notebook, and still in full view,
jotted down a note or two...How can one look the part and not be
the part? Or be the part and not look it? Isn't looking--being? Or
being--looking? At any rate who is to say that it is not?...

This seemed to me extraordinarily profound at the time, and quite new.
But I confess that something did whisper as, smiling, I put up the
notebook: "You--literary? you look as though you've taken down a bet
on a racecourse!" But I didn't listen. I went out, shutting the door
of the flat with a soft, quick pull so as not to warn the concierge of
my departure, and ran down the stairs quick as a rabbit for the same
reason.



But ah! the old spider. She was too quick for me. She let me run down
the last little ladder of the web and then she pounced. "One moment.
One little moment, Monsieur," she whispered, odiously confidential.
"Come in. Come in." And she beckoned with a dripping soup ladle. I
went to the door, but that was not good enough. Right inside and the
door shut before she would speak.

There are two ways of managing your concierge if you haven't any
money. One is--to take the high hand, make her your enemy, bluster,
refuse to discuss anything; the other is--to keep in with her, butter
her up to the two knots of the black rag tying up her jaws, pretend to
confide in her, and rely on her to arrange with the gas man and to put
off the landlord.

I had tried the second. But both are equally detestable and
unsuccessful. At any rate whichever you're trying is the worse, the
impossible one.

It was the landlord this time...Imitation of the landlord by the
concierge threatening to toss me out...Imitation of the concierge
by the concierge taming the wild bull...Imitation of the landlord
rampant again, breathing in the concierge's face. I was the concierge.
No, it was too nauseous. And all the while the black pot on the gas
ring bubbling away, stewing out the hearts and livers of every tenant
in the place.

"Ah!" I cried, staring at the clock on the mantelpiece, and then,
realizing that it didn't go, striking my forehead as though the idea
had nothing to do with it. "Madame, I have a very important
appointment with the director of my newspaper at nine-thirty. Perhaps
to-morrow I shall be able to give you..."

Out, out. And down the métro and squeezed into a full carriage. The
more the better. Everybody was one bolster the more between me and the
concierge. I was radiant.

"Ah! pardon, Monsieur!" said the tall charming creature in black with
a big full bosom and a great bunch of violets dropping from it. As the
train swayed it thrust the bouquet right into my eyes. "Ah! pardon,
Monsieur!"

But I looked up at her, smiling mischievously.

"There is nothing I love more, Madame, than flowers on a balcony."

At the very moment of speaking I caught sight of the huge man in a fur
coat against whom my charmer was leaning. He poked his head over her
shoulder and he went white to the nose; in fact his nose stood out a
sort of cheese green.

"What was that you said to my wife?"

Gare Saint Lazare saved me. But you'll own that even as the author of
_False Coins_, _Wrong Doors_, _Left Umbrellas_, and two in
preparation, it was not too easy to go on my triumphant way.



At length, after countless trains had steamed into my mind, and
countless Dick Harmons had come rolling towards me, the real train
came. The little knot of us waiting at the barrier moved up close,
craned forward, and broke into cries as though we were some kind of
many-headed monster, and Paris behind us nothing but a great trap we
had set to catch these sleepy innocents.

Into the trap they walked and were snatched and taken off to be
devoured. Where was my prey?

"Good God!" My smile and my lifted hand fell together. For one
terrible moment I thought this was the woman of the photograph, Dick's
mother, walking towards me in Dick's coat and hat. In the effort--and
you saw what an effort it was--to smile, his lips curled in just the
same way and he made for me, haggard and wild and proud.

What had happened? What could have changed him like this? Should I
mention it?

I waited for him and was even conscious of venturing a fox-terrier wag
or two to see if he could possibly respond, in the way I said: "Good
evening, Dick! How are you, old chap? All right?"

"All right. All right." He almost gasped. "You've got the rooms?"

Twenty times, good God! I saw it all. Light broke on the dark waters
and my sailor hadn't been drowned. I almost turned a somersault with
amusement.

It was nervousness, of course. It was embarrassment. It was the famous
English seriousness. What fun I was going to have! I could have hugged
him.

"Yes, I've got the rooms," I nearly shouted. "But where is Madame?"

"She's been looking after the luggage," he panted. "Here she comes,
now."

Not this baby walking beside the old porter as though he were her
nurse and had just lifted her out of her ugly perambulator while he
trundled the boxes on it.

"And she's not Madame," said Dick, drawling suddenly.

At that moment she caught sight of him and hailed him with her minute
muff. She broke away from her nurse and ran up and said something,
very quick, in English; but he replied in French: "Oh, very well. I'll
manage."

But before he turned to the porter he indicated me with a vague wave
and muttered something. We were introduced. She held out her hand in
that strange boyish way Englishwomen do, and standing very straight in
front of me with her chin raised and making--she too--the effort of
her life to control her preposterous excitement, she said, wringing my
hand (I'm sure she didn't know it was mine), _Je ne parle pas
Français._

"But I'm sure you do," I answered, so tender, so reassuring, I might
have been a dentist about to draw her first little milk tooth.

"Of course she does." Dick swerved back to us. "Here, can't we get a
cab or taxi or something? We don't want to stay in this cursed station
all night. Do we?"

This was so rude that it took me a moment to recover; and he must have
noticed, for he flung his arm round my shoulder in the old way,
saying: "Ah, forgive me, old chap. But we've had such a loathsome,
hideous journey. We've taken years to come. Haven't we?" To her. But
she did not answer. She bent her head and began stroking her grey
muff; she walked beside us stroking her grey muff all the way.

"Have I been wrong?" thought I. "Is this simply a case of frenzied
impatience on their part? Are they merely 'in need of a bed,' as we
say? Have they been suffering agonies on the journey? Sitting,
perhaps, very close and warm under the same travelling rug?" and so on
and so on while the driver strapped on the boxes. That done----

"Look here, Dick. I go home by métro. Here is the address of your
hotel. Everything is arranged. Come and see me as soon as you can."

Upon my life I thought he was going to faint. He went white to the
lips.

"But you're coming back with us," he cried. "I thought it was all
settled. Of course you're coming back. You're not going to leave us."
No, I gave it up. It was too difficult, too English for me.

"Certainly, certainly. Delighted. I only thought, perhaps..."

"You must come!" said Dick to the little fox-terrier. And again he
made that big awkward turn towards her.

"Get in, Mouse."

And Mouse got in the black hole and sat stroking Mouse II and not
saying a word.



Away we jolted and rattled like three little dice that life had
decided to have a fling with.

I had insisted on taking the flap seat facing them because I would not
have missed for anything those occasional flashing glimpses I had as
we broke through the white circles of lamplight.

They revealed Dick, sitting far back in his corner, his coat collar
turned up, his hands thrust in his pockets, and his broad dark hat
shading him as if it were a part of him--a sort of wing he hid under.
They showed her, sitting up very straight, her lovely little face more
like a drawing than a real face--every line was so full of meaning and
so sharp cut against the swimming dark.

For Mouse was beautiful. She was exquisite, but so fragile and fine
that each time I looked at her it was as if for the first time. She
came upon you with the same kind of shock that you feel when you have
been drinking tea out of a thin innocent cup and suddenly, at the
bottom, you see a tiny creature, half butterfly, half woman, bowing to
you with her hands in her sleeves.

As far as I could make out she had dark hair and blue or black eyes.
Her long lashes and the two little feathers traced above were most
important.

She wore a long dark cloak such as one sees in old-fashioned pictures
of Englishwomen abroad. Where her arms came out of it there was grey
fur--fur round her neck, too, and her close-fitting cap was furry.

"Carrying out the mouse idea," I decided.



Ah, but how intriguing it was--how intriguing! Their excitement came
nearer and nearer to me, while I ran out to meet it, bathed in it,
flung myself far out of my depth, until at last I was as hard put to
it to keep control as they.

But what I wanted to do was to behave in the most extraordinary
fashion--like a clown. To start singing, with large extravagant
gestures, to point out of the window and cry: "We are now passing,
ladies and gentlemen, one of the sights for which _notre Paris_ is
justly famous," to jump out of the taxi while it was going, climb over
the roof and dive in by another door; to hang out of the window and
look for the hotel through the wrong end of a broken telescope, which
was also a peculiarly ear-splitting trumpet.

I watched myself do all this, you understand, and even managed to
applaud in a private way by putting my gloved hands gently together,
while I said to Mouse: "And is this your first visit to Paris?"

"Yes, I've not been here before."

"Ah, then you have a great deal to see."

And I was just going to touch lightly upon the objects of interest and
the museums when we wrenched to a stop.



Do you know--it's very absurd--but as I pushed open the door for them
and followed up the stairs to the bureau on the landing I felt somehow
that this hotel was mine.

There was a vase of flowers on the window sill of the bureau and I
even went so far as to re-arrange a bud or two and to stand off and
note the effect while the manageress welcomed them. And when she
turned to me and handed me the keys (the _garçon_ was hauling up the
boxes) and said: "Monsieur Duquette will show you your rooms"--I had a
longing to tap Dick on the arm with a key and say, very
confidentially: "Look here, old chap. As a friend of mine I'll be only
too willing to make a slight reduction..."

Up and up we climbed. Round and round. Past an occasional pair of
boots (why is it one never sees an attractive pair of boots outside a
door?). Higher and higher.

"I'm afraid they're rather high up," I murmured idiotically. "But I
chose them because..."

They so obviously did not care why I chose them that I went no
further. They accepted everything. They did not expect anything to be
different. This was just part of what they were going through--that
was how I analysed it.

"Arrived at last." I ran from one side of the passage to the other,
turning on the lights, explaining.

"This one I thought for you, Dick. The other is larger and it has a
little dressing-room in the alcove."

My "proprietary" eye noted the clean towels and covers, and the bed
linen embroidered in red cotton. I thought them rather charming rooms,
sloping, full of angles, just the sort of rooms one would expect to
find if one had not been to Paris before.

Dick dashed his hat down on the bed.

"Oughtn't I to help that chap with the boxes?" he asked--nobody.

"Yes, you ought," replied Mouse, "they're dreadfully heavy."

And she turned to me with the first glimmer of a smile: "Books, you
know." Oh, he darted such a strange look at her before he rushed out.
And he not only helped, he must have torn the box off the _garçon's_
back, for he staggered back, carrying one, dumped it down and then
fetched in the other.

"That's yours, Dick," said she.

"Well, you don't mind it standing here for the present, do you?" he
asked, breathless, breathing hard (the box must have been tremendously
heavy). He pulled out a handful of money. "I suppose I ought to pay
this chap."

The _garçon_, standing by, seemed to think so too.

"And will you require anything further, Monsieur?"

"No! No!" said Dick impatiently.

But at that Mouse stepped forward. She said, too deliberately, not
looking at Dick, with her quaint clipped English accent: "Yes, I'd
like some tea. Tea for three."

And suddenly she raised her muff as though her hands were clasped
inside it, and she was telling the pale, sweaty _garçon_ by that
action that she was at the end of her resources, that she cried out to
him to save her with "Tea. Immediately!"



This seemed to me so amazingly in the picture, so exactly the gesture
and cry that one would expect (though I couldn't have imagined it) to
be wrung out of an Englishwoman faced with a great crisis, that I was
almost tempted to hold up my hand and protest.

"No! No! Enough. Enough. Let us leave off there. At the word--tea. For
really, really, you've filled your greediest subscriber so full that
he will burst if he has to swallow another word."

It even pulled Dick up. Like someone who has been unconscious for a
long long time he turned slowly to Mouse and slowly looked at her with
his tired, haggard eyes, and murmured with the echo of his dreamy
voice: "Yes. That's a good idea." And then: "You must be tired, Mouse.
Sit down."

She sat down in a chair with lace tabs on the arms; he leaned against
the bed, and I established myself on a straight-backed chair, crossed
my legs and brushed some imaginary dust off the knees of my trousers.
(The Parisian at his ease.)

There came a tiny pause. Then he said: "Won't you take off your coat.
Mouse?"

"No, thanks. Not just now."

Were they going to ask me? Or should I hold up my hand and call out in
a baby voice: "It's my turn to be asked."

No, I shouldn't. They didn't ask me.

The pause became a silence. A real silence.

"...Come, my Parisian fox-terrier! Amuse these sad English! It's no
wonder they are such a nation for dogs."

But, after all--why should I? It was not my "job," as they would say.
Nevertheless, I made a vivacious little bound at Mouse.

"What a pity it is that you did not arrive by daylight. There is such
a charming view from these two windows. You know, the hotel is on a
corner and each window looks down an immensely long, straight street."

"Yes," said she.

"Not that that sounds very charming," I laughed. "But there is so much
animation--so many absurd little boys on bicycles and people hanging
out of windows and--oh, well, you'll see for yourself in the
morning...Very amusing. Very animated."

"Oh, yes," said she.

If the pale, sweaty _garçon_ had not come in at that moment, carrying
the tea-tray high on one hand as if the cups were cannon-balls and he
a heavy weight lifter on the cinema...

He managed to lower it on to a round table.

"Bring the table over here," said Mouse. The waiter seemed to be the
only person she cared to speak to. She took her hands out of her muff,
drew off her gloves and flung back the old-fashioned cape.

"Do you take milk and sugar?"

"No milk, thank you, and no sugar."

I went over for mine like a little gentleman. She poured out another
cup.

"That's for Dick."

And the faithful fox-terrier carried it across to him and laid it at
his feet, as it were.

"Oh, thanks," said Dick.

And then I went back to my chair and she sank back in hers.

But Dick was off again. He stared wildly at the cup of tea for a
moment, glanced round him, put it down on the bed-table, caught up his
hat and stammered at full gallop: "Oh, by the way, do you mind posting
a letter for me? I want to get it off by to-night's post. I must. It's
very urgent..." Feeling her eyes on him, he flung: "It's to my
mother." To me: "I won't be long. I've got everything I want. But it
must go off to-night You don't mind? It...it won't take any time."

"Of course I'll post it. Delighted."

"Won't you drink your tea first?" suggested Mouse softly.

...Tea? Tea? Yes, of course. Tea...A cup of tea on the
bed-table...In his racing dream he flashed the brightest, most
charming smile at his little hostess.

"No, thanks. Not just now."

And still hoping it would not be any trouble to me he went out of the
room and closed the door, and we heard him cross the passage.



I scalded myself with mine in my hurry to take the cup back to the
table and to say as I stood there: "You must forgive me if I am
impertinent...if I am too frank. But Dick hasn't tried to disguise
it--has he? There is something the matter. Can I help?"

(Soft music. Mouse gets up, walks the stage for a moment or so before
she returns to her chair and pours him out, oh, such a brimming, such
a burning cup that the tears come into the friend's eyes while he
sips--while he drains it to the bitter dregs...)

I had time to do all this before she replied. First she looked in the
teapot, filled it with hot water, and stirred it with a spoon.

"Yes, there is something the matter. No, I'm afraid you can't help,
thank you." Again I got that glimmer of a smile. "I'm awfully sorry.
It must be horrid for you."

Horrid, indeed! Ah, why couldn't I tell her that it was months and
months since I had been so entertained?

"But you are suffering," I ventured softly, as though that was what I
could not bear to see.

She didn't deny it. She nodded and bit her under-lip and I thought I
saw her chin tremble.

"And there is really nothing I can do?" More softly still.

She shook her head, pushed back the table and jumped up.

"Oh, it will be all right soon," she breathed, walking over to the
dressing-table and standing with her back towards me. "It will be all
right. It can't go on like this."

"But of course it can't." I agreed, wondering whether it would look
heartless if I lit a cigarette; I had a sudden longing to smoke.

In some way she saw my hand move to my breast pocket, half draw out my
cigarette case and put it back again, for the next thing she said was:
"Matches...in...candlestick. I noticed them."

And I heard from her voice that she was crying.



"Ah! thank you. Yes. Yes. I've found them." I lighted my cigarette and
walked up and down, smoking.

It was so quiet it might have been two o'clock in the morning. It was
so quiet you heard the boards creak and pop as one does in a house in
the country. I smoked the whole cigarette and stabbed the end into my
saucer before Mouse turned round and came back to the table.

"Isn't Dick being rather a long time?"

"You are very tired. I expect you want to go to bed," I said kindly.
(And pray don't mind me if you do, said my mind.)

"But isn't he being a very long time?" she insisted.

I shrugged. "He is, rather."

Then I saw she looked at me strangely. She was listening.

"He's been gone ages," she said, and she went with little light steps
to the door, opened it, and crossed the passage into his room.

I waited. I listened too, now. I couldn't have borne to miss a word.
She had left the door open. I stole across the room and looked after
her. Dick's door was open, too. But--there wasn't a word to miss.

You know I had the mad idea that they were kissing in that quiet
room--a long comfortable kiss. One of those kisses that not only puts
one's grief to bed, but nurses it and warms it and tucks it up and
keeps it fast enfolded until it is sleeping sound. Ah! how good that
is.

It was over at last. I heard some one move and tip-toed away.

It was Mouse. She came back. She felt her way into the room carrying
the letter for me. But it wasn't in an envelope; it was just a sheet
of paper and she held it by the corner as though it was still wet.

Her head was bent so low--so tucked in her furry collar that I hadn't
a notion--until she let the paper fall and almost fell herself on to
the floor by the side of the bed, leaned her cheek against it, flung
out her hands as though the last of her poor little weapons was gone
and now she let herself be carried away, washed out into the deep
water.

Flash! went my mind. Dick has shot himself, and then a succession of
flashes while I rushed in, saw the body, head unharmed, small blue
hole over temple, roused hotel, arranged funeral, attended funeral,
closed cab, new morning coat...

I stooped down and picked up the paper and would you believe it--so
ingrained is my Parisian sense of _comme il faut_--I murmured "pardon"
before I read it.


"MOUSE, MY LITTLE MOUSE,

It's no good. It's impossible. I can't see it through. Oh, I do love
you. I do love you. Mouse, but I can't hurt her. People have been
hurting her all her life. I simply dare not give her this final blow.
You see, though she's stronger than both of us, she's so frail and
proud. It would kill her--kill her, Mouse. And, oh God, I can't kill
my mother! Not even for you. Not even for us. You do see that--don't
you.

It all seemed so possible when we talked and planned, but the very
moment the train started it was all over. I felt her drag me back to
her--calling. I can hear her now as I write. And she's alone and she
doesn't know. A man would have to be a devil to tell her and I'm not a
devil, Mouse. She mustn't know. Oh, Mouse, somewhere, somewhere in you
don't you agree? It's all so unspeakably awful that I don't know if I
want to go or not. Do I? Or is Mother just dragging me? I don't know.
My head is too tired. Mouse, Mouse--what will you do? But I can't
think of that, either. I dare not. I'd break down. And I must not
break down. All I've got to do is--just to tell you this and go. I
couldn't have gone off without telling you. You'd have been
frightened. And you must not be frightened. You won't--will you? I
can't bear--but no more of that. And don't write. I should not have
the courage to answer your letters and the sight of your spidery
handwriting----

Forgive me. Don't love me any more. Yes. Love me. Love me. Dick."


What do you think of that? Wasn't that a rare find? My relief at his
not having shot himself was mixed with a wonderful sense of elation. I
was even--more than even with my "that's very curious and interesting"
Englishman...

She wept so strangely. With her eyes shut, with her face quite calm
except for the quivering eyelids. The tears pearled down her cheeks
and she let them fall.

But feeling my glance upon her she opened her eyes and saw me holding
the letter.

"You've read it?"

Her voice was quite calm, but it was not her voice any more. It was
like the voice you might imagine coming out of a tiny, cold sea-shell
swept high and dry at last by the salt tide...

I nodded, quite overcome, you understand, and laid the letter down.

"It's incredible! incredible!" I whispered.

At that she got up from the floor, walked over to the wash-stand,
dipped her handkerchief into the jug and sponged her eyes, saying:
"Oh, no. It's not incredible at all." And still pressing the wet ball
to her eyes she came back to me, to her chair with the lace tabs, and
sank into it.

"I knew all along, of course," said the cold, salty little voice.
"From the very moment that we started. I felt it all through me, but I
still went on hoping--" and here she took the handkerchief down and
gave me a final glimmer--"as one so stupidly does, you know."

"As one does."

Silence.

"But what will you do? You'll go back? You'll see him?"

That made her sit right up and stare across at me.

"What an extraordinary idea!" she said, more coldly than ever. "Of
course I shall not dream of seeing him. As for going back--that is
quite out of the question. I can't go back."

"But..."

"It's impossible. For one thing all my friends think I am married."

I put out my hand--"Ah, my poor little friend."

But she shrank away. (False move.)

Of course there was one question that had been at the back of my mind
all this time. I hated it.

"Have you any money?"

"Yes, I have twenty pounds--here," and she put her hand on her breast.
I bowed. It was great deal more than I had expected.

"And what are your plans?"

Yes, I know. My question was the most clumsy, the most idiotic one I
could have put. She had been so tame, so confiding, letting me, at any
rate spiritually speaking, hold her tiny quivering body in one hand
and stroke her furry head--and now, I'd thrown her away. Oh, I could
have kicked myself.

She stood up. "I have no plans. But--it's very late. You must go now,
please."

How could I get her back? I wanted her back. I swear I was not acting
then.

"Do feel that I am your friend," I cried. "You will let me come
to-morrow, early? You will let me look after you a little--take care
of you a little? You'll use me just as you think fit?"

I succeeded. She came out of her hole...timid...but she came
out.

"Yes, you're very kind. Yes. Do come to-morrow. I shall be glad. It
makes things rather difficult because--" and again I clasped her
boyish hand--"_je ne parle pas français._"

Not until I was half-way down the boulevard did it come over me--the
full force of it.

Why, they were suffering...those two...really suffering. I
have seen two people suffer as I don't suppose I ever shall again...



Of course you know what to expect. You anticipate, fully, what I am
going to write. It wouldn't be me, otherwise.

I never went near the place again.

Yes, I still owe that considerable amount for lunches and dinners, but
that's beside the mark. It's vulgar to mention it in the same breath
with the fact that I never saw Mouse again.

Naturally, I intended to. Started out--got to the door--wrote and tore
up letters--did all those things. But I simply could not make the
final effort.

Even now I don't fully understand why. Of course I knew that I
couldn't have kept it up. That had a great deal to do with it. But you
would have thought, putting it at its lowest, curiosity couldn't have
kept my fox-terrier nose away...

_Je ne parle pas français._ That was her swan song for me.



But how she makes me break my rule. Oh, you've seen for yourself, but
I could give you countless examples.

...Evenings, when I sit in some gloomy café, and an automatic piano
starts playing a "mouse" tune (there are dozens of tunes that evoke
just her) I begin to dream things like...

A little house on the edge of the sea, somewhere far, far away. A girl
outside in a frock rather like Red Indian women wear, hailing a light,
barefoot boy who runs up from the beach.

"What have you got?"

"A fish." I smile and give it to her.

...The same girl, the same boy, different costumes--sitting at an
open window, eating fruit and leaning out and laughing.

"All the wild strawberries are for you, Mouse. I won't touch one."

...A wet night. They are going home together under an umbrella.
They stop on the door to press their wet cheeks together.



And so on and so on until some dirty old gallant comes up to my table
and sits opposite and begins to grimace and yap. Until I hear myself
saying: "But I've got the little girl for you, _mon vieux._ So
little...so tiny." I kiss the tips of my fingers and lay them upon my
heart. "I give you my word of honour as a gentleman, a writer,
serious, young, and extremely interested in modern English
literature."



I must go. I must go. I reach down my coat and hat. Madame knows me.
"You haven't dined yet?" she smiles.

"No, not yet, Madame."




BLISS

ALTHOUGH Bertha Young was thirty she still had moments like this when
she wanted to run instead of walk, to take dancing steps on and off
the pavement, to bowl a hoop, to throw something up in the air and
catch it again, or to stand still and laugh at--nothing--at nothing,
simply.

What can you do if you are thirty and, turning the corner of your own
street, you are overcome, suddenly, by a feeling of bliss--absolute
bliss!--as though you'd suddenly swallowed a bright piece of that late
afternoon sun and it burned in your bosom, sending out a little shower
of sparks into every particle, into every finger and toe?...

Oh, is there no way you can express it without being "drunk and
disorderly"? How idiotic civilization is! Why be given a body if you
have to keep it shut up in a case like a rare, rare fiddle?

"No, that about the fiddle is not quite what I mean," she thought,
running up the steps and feeling in her bag for the key--she'd
forgotten it, as usual--and rattling the letter-box. "It's not what I
mean, because---- Thank you, Mary"--she went into the hall. "Is nurse
back?"

"Yes, M'm."

"And has the fruit come?"

"Yes, M'm. Everything's come."

"Bring the fruit up to the dining-room, will you? I'll arrange it
before I go upstairs."

It was dusky in the dining-room and quite chilly. But all the same
Bertha threw off her coat; she could not bear the tight clasp of it
another moment, and the cold air fell on her arms.

But in her bosom there was still that bright glowing place--that
shower of little sparks coming from it. It was almost unbearable. She
hardly dared to breathe for fear of fanning it higher, and yet she
breathed deeply, deeply. She hardly dared to look into the cold
mirror--but she did look, and it gave her back a woman, radiant, with
smiling, trembling lips, with big, dark eyes and an air of listening,
waiting for something...divine to happen...that she knew must
happen...infallibly.

Mary brought in the fruit on a tray and with it a glass bowl, and a
blue dish, very lovely, with a strange sheen on it as though it had
been dipped in milk.

"Shall I turn on the light, M'm?"

"No, thank you. I can see quite well."

There were tangerines and apples stained with strawberry pink. Some
yellow pears, smooth as silk, some white grapes covered with a silver
bloom and a big cluster of purple ones. These last she had bought to
tone in with the new dining-room carpet. Yes, that did sound rather
far-fetched and absurd, but it was really why she had bought them. She
had thought in the shop: "I must have some purple ones to bring the
carpet up to the table." And it had seemed quite sense at the time.

When she had finished with them and had made two pyramids of these
bright round shapes, she stood away from the table to get the
effect--and it really was most curious. For the dark table seemed to
melt into the dusky light and the glass dish and the blue bowl to
float in the air. This, of course in her present mood, was so
incredibly beautiful...She began to laugh.

"No, no. I'm getting hysterical." And she seized her bag and coat and
ran upstairs to the nursery.



Nurse sat at a low table giving Little B her supper after her bath.
The baby had on a white flannel gown and a blue woollen jacket, and
her dark, fine hair was brushed up into a funny little peak. She
looked up when she saw her mother and began to jump.

"Now, my lovey, eat it up like a good girl," said Nurse, setting her
lips in a way that Bertha knew, and that meant she had come into the
nursery at another wrong moment.

"Has she been good, Nanny?"

"She's been a little sweet all the afternoon," whispered Nanny. "We
went to the park and I sat down on a chair and took her out of the
pram and a big dog came along and put its head on my knee and she
clutched its ear, tugged it. Oh, you should have seen her."

Bertha wanted to ask if it wasn't rather dangerous to let her clutch
at a strange dog's ear. But she did not dare to. She stood watching
them, her hands by her side, like the poor little girl in front of the
rich little girl with the doll.

The baby looked up at her again, stared, and then smiled so charmingly
that Bertha couldn't help crying:

"Oh, Nanny, do let me finish giving her her supper while you put the
bath things away."

"Well, M'm, she oughtn't to be changed hands while she's eating," said
Nanny, still whispering. "It unsettles her; it's very likely to upset
her."

How absurd it was. Why have a baby if it has to be kept--not in a case
like a rare, rare fiddle--but in another woman's arms?

"Oh, I must!" said she.

Very offended, Nanny handed her over.

"Now, don't excite her after her supper. You know you do, M'm. And I
have such a time with her after!"

Thank heaven! Nanny went out of the room with the bath towels.

"Now I've got you to myself, my little precious," said Bertha, as the
baby leaned against her.

She ate delightfully, holding up her lips for spoon and then waving
her hands. Sometimes she wouldn't let the spoon go; and sometimes,
just as Bertha had filled it, she waved it away to the four winds.

When the soup was finished Bertha turned round to the fire.

"You're nice--you're very nice!" said she, kissing her warm baby. "I'm
fond of you. I like you."

And, indeed, she loved Little B so much--her neck as she bent forward,
her exquisite toes as they shone transparent in the firelight--that
all her feeling of bliss came back again, and again she didn't know
how to express it--what to do with it.

"You're wanted on the telephone," said Nanny, coming back in triumph
and seizing _her_ Little B.



Down she flew. It was Harry.

"Oh, is that you, Ber? Look here. I'll be late. I'll take a taxi and
come along as quickly as I can, but get dinner put back ten
minutes--will you? All right?"

"Yes, perfectly. Oh, Harry!"

"Yes?"

What had she to say? She'd nothing to say. She only wanted to get in
touch with him for a moment. She couldn't absurdly cry: "Hasn't it
been a divine day!"

"What is it?" rapped out the little voice.

"Nothing. _Entendu_," said Bertha, and hung up the receiver, thinking
how more than idiotic civilization was.



They had people coming to dinner. The Norman Knights--a very sound
couple--he was about to start a theatre, and she was awfully keen on
interior decoration, a young man, Eddie Warren, who had just published
a little book of poems and whom everybody was asking to dine, and a
"find" of Bertha's called Pearl Fulton. What Miss Fulton did, Bertha
didn't know. They had met at the club and Bertha had fallen in love
with her, as she always did fall in love with beautiful women who had
something strange about them.

The provoking thing was that, though they had been about together and
met a number of times and really talked, Bertha couldn't yet make her
out. Up to a certain point Miss Fulton was rarely, wonderfully frank,
but the certain point was there, and beyond that she would not go.

Was there anything beyond it? Harry said "No." Voted her dullish, and
"cold like all blond women, with a touch, perhaps, of anæmia of the
brain." But Bertha wouldn't agree with him; not yet, at any rate.

"No, the way she has of sitting with her head a little on one side,
and smiling, has something behind it, Harry, and I must find out what
that something is."

"Most likely it's a good stomach," answered Harry.

He made a point of catching Bertha's heels with replies of that
kind..."liver frozen, my dear girl," or "pure flatulence," or "kidney
disease,"...and so on. For some strange reason Bertha liked this,
and almost admired it in him very much.

She went into the drawing-room and lighted the fire; then, picking up
the cushions, one by one, that Mary had disposed so carefully, she
threw them back on to the chairs and the couches. That made all the
difference; the room came alive at once. As she was about to throw the
last one she surprised herself by suddenly hugging it to her,
passionately, passionately. But it did not put out the fire in her
bosom. Oh, on the contrary!

The windows of the drawing-room opened on to a balcony overlooking the
garden. At the far end, against the wall, there was a tall, slender
pear tree in fullest, richest bloom; it stood perfect, as though
becalmed against the jade-green sky. Bertha couldn't help feeling,
even from this distance, that it had not a single bud or a faded
petal. Down below, in the garden beds, the red and yellow tulips,
heavy with flowers, seemed to lean upon the dusk. A grey cat, dragging
its belly, crept across the lawn, and a black one, its shadow, trailed
after. The sight of them, so intent and so quick, gave Bertha a
curious shiver.

"What creepy things cats are!" she stammered, and she turned away from
the window and began walking up and down...

How strong the jonquils smelled in the warm room. Too strong? Oh, no.
And yet, as though overcome, she flung down on a couch and pressed her
hands to her eyes.

"I'm too happy--too happy!" she murmured.

And she seemed to see on her eyelids the lovely pear tree with its
wide open blossoms as a symbol of her own life.

Really--really--she had everything. She was young. Harry and she were
as much in love as ever, and they got on together splendidly and were
really good pals. She had an adorable baby. They didn't have to worry
about money. They had this absolutely satisfactory house and garden.
And friends--modern, thrilling friends, writers and painters and poets
or people keen on social questions--just the kind of friends they
wanted. And then there were books, and there was music, and she had
found a wonderful little dressmaker, and they were going abroad in the
summer, and their new cook made the most superb omelettes...

"I'm absurd. Absurd!" She sat up; but she felt quite dizzy, quite
drunk. It must have been the spring.

Yes, it was the spring. Now she was so tired she could not drag
herself upstairs to dress.

A white dress, a string of jade beads, green shoes and stockings. It
wasn't intentional. She had thought of this scheme hours before she
stood at the drawing-room window.

Her petals rustled softly into the hall, and she kissed Mrs. Norman
Knight, who was taking off the most amusing orange coat with a
procession of black monkeys round the hem and up the fronts.

"...Why! Why! Why is the middle-class so stodgy--so utterly without
a sense of humour! My dear, it's only by a fluke that I am here at
all--Norman being the protective fluke. For my darling monkeys so
upset the train that it rose to a man and simply ate me with its eyes.
Didn't laugh--wasn't amused--that I should have loved. No, just
stared--and bored me through and through."

"But the cream of it was," said Norman, pressing a large
tortoiseshell-rimmed monocle into his eye, "you don't mind me telling
this, Face, do you?" (In their home and among their friends they
called each other Face and Mug.) "The cream of it was when she, being
full fed, turned to the woman beside her and said: 'Haven't you ever
seen a monkey before?'"

"Oh, yes!" Mrs. Norman Knight joined in the laughter. "Wasn't that too
absolutely creamy?"

And a funnier thing still was that now her coat was off she did look
like a very intelligent monkey--who had even made that yellow silk
dress out of scraped banana skins. And her amber ear-rings; they were
like little dangling nuts.

"This is a sad, sad fall!" said Mug, pausing in front of Little B's
perambulator. "When the perambulator comes into the hall----" and he
waved the rest of the quotation away.

The bell rang. It was lean, pale Eddie Warren (as usual) in a state of
acute distress.

"It _is_ the right house, _isn't_ it?" he pleaded.

"Oh, I think so--I hope so," said Bertha brightly.

"I have had such a _dreadful_ experience with a taxi-man; he was
_most_ sinister. I couldn't get him to _stop._ The _more_ I knocked
and called the _faster_ he went. And _in_ the moonlight this _bizarre_
figure with the _flattened_ head _crouching_ over the _lit-tle_ wheel..."

He shuddered, taking off an immense white silk scarf. Bertha noticed
that his socks were white, too--most charming.

"But how dreadful!" she cried.

"Yes, it really was," said Eddie, following her into the drawing-room.
"I saw myself _driving_ through Eternity in a _timeless_ taxi."

He knew the Norman Knights. In fact, he was going to write a play for
N. K. when the theatre scheme came off.

"Well, Warren, how's the play?" said Norman Knight, dropping his
monocle and giving his eye a moment in which to rise to the surface
before it was screwed down again.

And Mrs. Norman Knight: "Oh, Mr. Warren, what happy socks?"

"I _am_ so glad you like them," said he, staring at his feet. "They
seem to have got so _much_ whiter since the moon rose." And he turned
his lean sorrowful young face to Bertha. "There _is_ a moon, you
know."

She wanted to cry: "I am sure there is--often--often!"

He really was a most attractive person. But so was Face, crouched
before the fire in her banana skins, and so was Mug, smoking a
cigarette and saying as he flicked the ash: "Why doth the bridegroom
tarry?"

"There he is, now."

Bang went the front door open and shut. Harry shouted: "Hullo, you
people. Down in five minutes." And they heard him swarm up the stairs.
Bertha couldn't help smiling; she knew how he loved doing things at
high pressure. What, after all, did an extra five minutes matter? But
he would pretend to himself that they mattered beyond measure. And
then he would make a great point of coming into the drawing-room,
extravagantly cool and collected.

Harry had such a zest for life. Oh, how she appreciated it in him. And
his passion for fighting--for seeking in everything that came up
against him another test of his power and of his courage--that, too,
she understood. Even when it made him just occasionally, to other
people, who didn't know him well, a little ridiculous perhaps...For
there were moments when he rushed into battle where no battle was...She
talked and laughed and positively forgot until he had come
in (just as she had imagined) that Pearl Fulton had not turned up.

"I wonder if Miss Fulton has forgotten?"

"I expect so," said Harry. "Is she on the 'phone?"

"Ah! There's a taxi, now." And Bertha smiled with that little air of
proprietorship that she always assumed while her women finds were new
and mysterious. "She lives in taxis."

"She'll run to fat if she does," said Harry coolly, ringing the bell
for dinner. "Frightful danger for blond women."

"Harry--don't," warned Bertha, laughing up at him.

Came another tiny moment, while they waited, laughing and talking,
just a trifle too much at their ease, a trifle too unaware. And then
Miss Fulton, all in silver, with a silver fillet binding her pale
blond hair, came in smiling, her head a little on one side.

"Am I late?"

"No, not at all," said Bertha. "Come along." And she took her arm and
they moved into the dining-room.

What was there in the touch of that cool arm that could
fan--fan--start blazing--blazing--the fire of bliss that Bertha did
not know what to do with?

Miss Fulton did not look at her; but then she seldom did look at
people directly. Her heavy eyelids lay upon her eyes and the strange
half smile came and went upon her lips as though she lived by
listening rather than seeing. But Bertha knew, suddenly, as if the
longest, most intimate look had passed between them--as if they had
said to each other: "You, too?"--that Pearl Fulton stirring the
beautiful red soup in the grey plate was feeling just what she was
feeling.

And the others? Face and Mug, Eddie and Harry, their spoons rising and
falling--dabbing their lips with their napkins, crumbling bread,
fiddling with the forks and glasses and talking.

"I met her at the Alpha show--the weirdest little person. She'd not
only cut off her hair, but she seemed to have taken a dreadfully good
snip off her legs and arms and her neck and her poor little nose as
well."

"Isn't she very _liée_ with Michael Oat?"

"The man who wrote _Love in False Teeth?_"

"He wants to write a play for me. One act. One man. Decides to commit
suicide. Gives all the reasons why he should and why he shouldn't. And
just as he has made up his mind either to do it or not to do
it--curtain. Not half a bad idea."

"What's he going to call it--'Stomach Trouble'?"

"I _think_ I've come across the same _idea_ in a lit-tle French
review, _quite_ unknown in England."

No, they didn't share it. They were dears--dears--and she loved having
them there, at her table, and giving them delicious food and wine. In
fact, she longed to tell them how delightful they were, and what a
decorative group they made, how they seemed to set one another off and
how they reminded her of a play by Tchekof!

Harry was enjoying his dinner. It was part of his--well, not his
nature, exactly, and certainly not his pose--his--something or
other--to talk about food and to glory in his "shameless passion for
the white flesh of the lobster" and "the green of pistachio
ices--green and cold like the eyelids of Egyptian dancers."

When he looked up at her and said: "Bertha, this is a very admirable
_soufflée!_" she almost could have wept with child-like pleasure.

Oh, why did she feel so tender towards the whole world to-night?
Everything was good--was right. All that happened seemed to fill again
her brimming cup of bliss.

And still, in the back of her mind, there was the pear tree. It would
be silver now, in the light of poor dear Eddie's moon, silver as Miss
Fulton, who sat there turning a tangerine in her slender fingers that
were so pale a light seemed to come from them.

What she simply couldn't make out--what was miraculous--was how she
should have guessed Miss Fulton's mood so exactly and so instantly.
For she never doubted for a moment that she was right, and yet what
had she to go on? Less than nothing.

"I believe this does happen very, very rarely between women. Never
between men," thought Bertha. "But while I am making the coffee in the
drawing-room perhaps she will 'give a sign.'"

What she meant by that she did not know, and what would happen after
that she could not imagine.

While she thought like this she saw herself talking and laughing. She
had to talk because of her desire to laugh.

"I must laugh or die."

But when she noticed Face's funny little habit of tucking something
down the front of her bodice--as if she kept a tiny, secret hoard of
nuts there, too--Bertha had to dig her nails into her hands--so as not
to laugh too much.



It was over at last. And: "Come and see my new coffee machine," said
Bertha.

"We only have a new coffee machine once a fortnight," said Harry. Face
took her arm this time; Miss Fulton bent her head and followed after.

The fire had died down in the drawing-room to a red, flickering "nest
of baby phoenixes," said Face.

"Don't turn up the light for a moment. It is so lovely." And down she
crouched by the fire again. She was always cold..."without her
little red flannel jacket, of course," thought Bertha.

At that moment Miss Fulton "gave the sign."

"Have you a garden?" said the cool, sleepy voice.

This was so exquisite on her part that all Bertha could do was to
obey. She crossed the room, pulled the curtains apart, and opened
those long windows.

"There!" she breathed.

And the two women stood side by side looking at the slender, flowering
tree. Although it was so still it seemed, like the flame of a candle,
to stretch up, to point, to quiver in the bright air, to grow taller
and taller as they gazed--almost to touch the rim of the round, silver
moon.

How long did they stand there? Both, as it were, caught in that circle
of unearthly light, understanding each other perfectly, creatures of
another world, and wondering what they were to do in this one with all
this blissful treasure that burned in their bosoms and dropped, in
silver flowers, from their hair and hands?

For ever--for a moment? And did Miss Fulton murmur: "Yes. Just
_that._" Or did Bertha dream it?

Then the light was snapped on and Face made the coffee and Harry said:
"My dear Mrs. Knight, don't ask me about my baby. I never see her. I
shan't feel the slightest interest in her until she has a lover," and
Mug took his eye out of the conservatory for a moment and then put it
under glass again and Eddie Warren drank his coffee and set down the
cup with a face of anguish as though he had drunk and seen the spider.

"What I want to do is to give the young men a show. I believe London
is simply teeming with first-chop, unwritten plays. What I want to say
to 'em is: 'Here's the theatre. Fire ahead.'"

"You know, my dear, I am going to decorate a room for the Jacob
Nathans. Oh, I am so tempted to do a fried-fish scheme, with the backs
of the chairs shaped like frying pans and lovely chip potatoes
embroidered all over the curtains."

"The trouble with our young writing men is that they are still too
romantic. You can't put out to sea without being seasick and wanting a
basin. Well, why won't they have the courage of those basins?"

"A _dreadful_ poem about a _girl_ who was _violated_ by a beggar
without a nose in a lit-tle wood..."

Miss Fulton sank into the lowest, deepest chair and Harry handed round
the cigarettes.

From the way he stood in front of her shaking the silver box and
saying abruptly: "Egyptian? Turkish? Virginian? They're all mixed up,"
Bertha realized that she not only bored him; he really disliked her.
And she decided from the way Miss Fulton said: "No, thank you, I won't
smoke," that she felt it, too, and was hurt.

"Oh, Harry, don't dislike her. You are quite wrong about her. She's
wonderful, wonderful. And, besides, how can you feel so differently
about someone who means so much to me. I shall try to tell you when we
are in bed to-night what has been happening. What she and I have
shared."



At those last words something strange and almost terrifying darted
into Bertha's mind. And this something blind and smiling whispered to
her: "Soon these people will go. The house will be quiet--quiet. The
lights will be out. And you and he will be alone together in the dark
room--the warm bed..."

She jumped up from her chair and ran over to the piano.

"What a pity someone does not play!" she cried. "What a pity somebody
does not play."

For the first time in her life Bertha Young desired her husband.

Oh, she'd loved him--she'd been in love with him, of course, in every
other way, but just not in that way. And, equally, of course, she'd
understood that he was different. They'd discussed it so often. It had
worried her dreadfully at first to find that she was so cold, but
after a time it had not seemed to matter. They were so frank with each
other--such good pals. That was the best of being modern.

But now--ardently! ardently! The word ached in her ardent body! Was
this what that feeling of bliss had been leading up to? But then
then----

"My dear," said Mrs. Norman Knight, "you know our shame. We are the
victims of time and train. We live in Hampstead. It's been so nice."

"I'll come with you into the hall," said Bertha. "I loved having you.
But you must not miss the last train. That's so awful, isn't it?"

"Have a whisky, Knight, before you go?" called Harry.

"No, thanks, old chap."

Bertha squeezed his hand for that as she shook it.

"Good night, good-bye," she cried from the top step, feeling that this
self of hers was taking leave of them for ever.

When she got back into the drawing-room the others were on the move.

"...Then you can come part of the way in my taxi."

"I shall be _so_ thankful _not_ to have to face _another_ drive
_alone_ after my _dreadful_ experience."

"You can get a taxi at the rank just at the end of the street. You
won't have to walk more than a few yards."

"That's a comfort. I'll go and put on my coat."

Miss Fulton moved towards the hall and Bertha was following when Harry
almost pushed past.

"Let me help you."

Bertha knew that he was repenting his rudeness--she let him go. What a
boy he was in some ways--so impulsive--so--simple.

And Eddie and she were left by the fire.

"I _wonder_ if you have seen Bilks' _new_ poem called _Table d'Hôte_,"
said Eddie softly. "It's _so_ wonderful. In the last Anthology. Have
you got a copy? I'd _so_ like to _show_ it to you. It begins with an
_incredibly_ beautiful line: 'Why Must it Always be Tomato Soup?'"

"Yes," said Bertha. And she moved noiselessly to a table opposite the
drawing-room door and Eddie glided noiselessly after her. She picked
up the little book and gave it to him; they had not made a sound.

While he looked it up she turned her head towards the hall. And she
saw...Harry with Miss Fulton's coat in his arms and Miss Fulton
with her back turned to him and her head bent. He tossed the coat
away, put his hands on her shoulders and turned her violently to him.
His lips said: "I adore you," and Miss Fulton laid her moonbeam
fingers on his cheeks and smiled her sleepy smile. Harry's nostrils
quivered; his lips curled back in a hideous grin while he whispered:
"To-morrow," and with her eyelids Miss Fulton said: "Yes."

"Here it is," said Eddie. "'Why Must it Always be Tomato Soup?' It's
so _deeply_ true, don't you feel? Tomato soup is so _dreadfully_
eternal."

"If you prefer," said Harry's voice, very loud, from the hall, "I can
phone you a cab to come to the door."

"Oh, no. It's not necessary," said Miss Fulton, and she came up to
Bertha and gave her the slender fingers to hold.

"Good-bye. Thank you so much."

"Good-bye," said Bertha.

Miss Fulton held her hand a moment longer.

"Your lovely pear tree!" she murmured.

And then she was gone, with Eddie following, like the black cat
following the grey cat.

"I'll shut up shop," said Harry, extravagantly cool and collected.

"Your lovely pear tree--pear tree--pear tree!"

Bertha simply ran over to the long windows.

"Oh, what is going to happen now?" she cried.

But the pear tree was as lovely as ever and as full of flower and as
still.




THE WIND BLOWS

SUDDENLY--dreadfully--she wakes up. What has happened? Something
dreadful has happened. No--nothing has happened. It is only the wind
shaking the house, rattling the windows, banging a piece of iron on
the roof and making her bed tremble. Leaves flutter past the window,
up and away; down in the avenue a whole newspaper wags in the air like
a lost kite and falls, spiked on a pine tree. It is cold. Summer is
over--it is autumn--everything is ugly. The carts rattle by, swinging
from side to side; two Chinamen lollop along under their wooden yokes
with the straining vegetable baskets--their pigtails and blue blouses
fly out in the wind. A white dog on three legs yelps past the gate. It
is all over! What is? Oh, everything! And she begins to plait her hair
with shaking fingers, not daring to look in the glass. Mother is
talking to grandmother in the hall.

"A perfect idiot! Imagine leaving anything out on the line in weather
like this...Now my best little Teneriffe-work teacloth is simply
in ribbons. _What_ is that extraordinary smell? It's the porridge
burning. Oh, heavens--this wind!"

She has a music lesson at ten o'clock. At the thought the minor
movement of the Beethoven begins to play in her head, the trills long
and terrible like little rolling drums...Marie Swainson runs into
the garden next door to pick the "chrysanths" before they are ruined.
Her skirt flies up above her waist; she tries to beat it down, to tuck
it between her legs while she stoops, but it is no use--up it flies.
All the trees and bushes beat about her. She picks as quickly as she
can but she is quite distracted. She doesn't mind what she does--she
pulls the plants up by the roots and bends and twists them, stamping
her foot and swearing.

"For heaven's sake keep the front door shut! Go round to the back,"
shouts someone. And then she hears Bogey:

"Mother, you're wanted on the telephone. Telephone, Mother. It's the
butcher."

How hideous life is--revolting, simply revolting...And now her
hat-elastic's snapped. Of course it would. She'll wear her old tam and
slip out the back way. But Mother has seen.

"Matilda. Matilda. Come back im-me-diately! What on earth have you got
on your head? It looks like a tea cosy. And why have you got that mane
of hair on your forehead."

"I can't come back. Mother. I'll be late for my lesson."

"Come back immediately!"

She won't. She won't. She hates Mother. "Go to hell," she shouts,
running down the road.

In waves, in clouds, in big round whirls the dust comes stinging, and
with it little bits of straw and chaff and manure. There is a loud
roaring sound from the trees in the gardens, and standing at the
bottom of the road outside Mr. Bullen's gate she can hear the sea sob:
"Ah!...Ah!...Ah-h!" But Mr. Bullen's drawing-room is as quiet
as a cave. The windows are closed, the blinds half pulled, and she is
not late. The-girl-before-her has just started playing MacDowell's "To
an Iceberg." Mr. Bullen looks over at her and half smiles.

"Sit down," he says. "Sit over there in the sofa corner, little lady."

How funny he is. He doesn't exactly laugh at you...but there is
just something...Oh, how peaceful it is here. She likes this
room. It smells of art serge and stale smoke and chrysanthemums...there
is a big vase of them on the mantelpiece behind the pale photograph
of Rubinstein..._à mon ami Robert Bullen._...Over the black
glittering piano hangs "Solitude"--a dark tragic woman draped
in white, sitting on a rock, her knees crossed, her chin on her hands.

"No, no!" says Mr. Bullen, and he leans over the other girl, put his
arms over her shoulders and plays the passage for her. The
stupid--she's blushing! How ridiculous!

Now the-girl-before-her has gone; the front door slams. Mr. Bullen
comes back and walks up and down, very softly, waiting for her. What
an extraordinary thing. Her fingers tremble so that she can't undo the
knot in the music satchel. It's the wind...And her heart beats so
hard she feels it must lift her blouse up and down. Mr. Bullen does
not say a word. The shabby red piano seat is long enough for two
people to sit side by side. Mr. Bullen sits down by her.

"Shall I begin with scales," she asks, squeezing her hands together.
"I had some arpeggios, too."

But he does not answer. She doesn't believe he even hears...and
then suddenly his fresh hand with the ring on it reaches over and
opens Beethoven.

"Let's have a little of the old master," he says.

But why does he speak so kindly--so awfully kindly--and as though they
had known each other for years and years and knew everything about
each other.

He turns the page slowly. She watches his hand--it is a very nice hand
and always looks as though it had just been washed.

"Here we are," says Mr. Bullen.

Oh, that kind voice--Oh, that minor movement. Here come the little
drums...

"Shall I take the repeat?"

"Yes, dear child."

His voice is far, far too kind. The crotchets and quavers are dancing
up and down the stave like little black boys on a fence. Why is he
so...She will not cry--she has nothing to cry about...

"What is it, dear child?"

Mr. Bullen takes her hands. His shoulder is there--just by her head.
She leans on it ever so little, her cheek against the springy tweed.

"Life is so dreadful," she murmurs, but she does not feel it's
dreadful at all. He says something about "waiting" and "marking time"
and "that rare thing, a woman," but she does not hear. It is so
comfortable...for ever...

Suddenly the door opens and in pops Marie Swainson, hours before her
time.

"Take the allegretto a little faster," says Mr. Bullen, and gets up
and begins to walk up and down again.

"Sit in the sofa corner, little lady," he says to Marie.



The wind, the wind. It's frightening to be here in her room by
herself. The bed, the mirror, the white jug and basin gleam like the
sky outside. It's the bed that is frightening. There it lies, sound
asleep...Does Mother imagine for one moment that she is going to
darn all those stockings knotted up on the quilt like a coil of
snakes? She's not. No, Mother. I do not see why I should...The
wind--the wind! There's a funny smell of soot blowing down the
chimney. Hasn't anyone written poems to the wind?..."I bring fresh
flowers to the leaves and showers."...What nonsense.

"Is that you, Bogey?"

"Come for a walk round the esplanade, Matilda. I can't stand this any
longer."

"Right-o. I'll put on my ulster. Isn't it an awful day!" Bogey's
ulster is just like hers. Hooking the collar she looks at herself in
the glass. Her face is white, they have the same excited eyes and hot
lips. Ah, they know those two in the glass. Good-bye, dears; we shall
be back soon.

"This is better, isn't it?"

"Hook on," says Bogey.

They cannot walk fast enough. Their heads bent, their legs just
touching, they stride like one eager person through the town, down the
asphalt zigzag where the fennel grows wild and on to the esplanade. It
is dusky--just getting dusky. The wind is so strong that they have to
fight their way through it, rocking like two old drunkards. All the
poor little pahutukawas on the esplanade are bent to the ground.

"Come on! Come on! Let's get near."

Over by the breakwater the sea is very high. They pull off their hats
and her hair blows across her mouth, tasting of salt. The sea is so
high that the waves do not break at all; they thump against the rough
stone wall and suck up the weedy, dripping steps. A fine spray skims
from the water right across the esplanade. They are covered with
drops; the inside of her mouth tastes wet and cold.

Bogey's voice is breaking. When he speaks he rushes up and down the
scale. It's funny--it makes you laugh--and yet it just suits the day.
The wind carries their voices--away fly the sentences like little
narrow ribbons.

"Quicker! Quicker!"

It is getting very dark. In the harbour the coal hulks show two
lights--one high on a mast, and one from the stern.

"Look, Bogey. Look over there."

A big black steamer with a long loop of smoke streaming, with the
portholes lighted, with lights everywhere, is putting out to sea. The
wind does not stop her; she cuts through the waves, making for the
open gate between the pointed rocks that leads to...It's the light
that makes her look so awfully beautiful and mysterious..._They_
are on board leaning over the rail arm in arm.

"...Who are they?"

"...Brother and sister."

"Look, Bogey, there's the town. Doesn't it look small? There's the
post office clock chiming for the last time. There's the esplanade
where we walked that windy day. Do you remember? I cried at my music
lesson that day--how many years ago! Good-bye, little island,
good-bye..."

Now the dark stretches a wing over the tumbling water. They can't see
those two any more. Good-bye, good-bye. Don't forget...But the
ship is gone, now.

The wind--the wind.




PSYCHOLOGY

WHEN she opened the door and saw him standing there she was more
pleased than ever before, and he, too, as he followed her into the
studio, seemed very very happy to have come.

"Not busy?"

"No. Just going to have tea."

"And you are not expecting anybody?"

"Nobody at all."

"Ah! That's good."

He laid aside his coat and hat gently, lingeringly, as though he had
time and to spare for everything, or as though he were taking leave of
them for ever, and came over to the fire and held out his hands to the
quick, leaping flame.

Just for a moment both of them stood silent in that leaping light.
Still, as it were, they tasted on their smiling lips the sweet shock
of their greeting. Their secret selves whispered:

"Why should we speak? Isn't this enough?"

"More than enough. I never realized until this moment..."

"How good it is just to be with you..."

"Like this..."

"It's more than enough."

But suddenly he turned and looked at her and she moved quickly away.

"Have a cigarette? I'll put the kettle on. Are you longing for tea?"

"No. Not longing."

"Well, I am."

"Oh, you." He thumped the Armenian cushion and flung on to the
_sommier._ "You're a perfect little Chinee."

"Yes, I am," she laughed. "I long for tea as strong men long for
wine."

She lighted the lamp under its broad orange shade, pulled the curtains
and drew up the tea table. Two birds sang in the kettle; the fire
fluttered. He sat up clasping his knees. It was delightful--this
business of having tea--and she always had delicious things to
eat--little sharp sandwiches, short sweet almond fingers, and a dark,
rich cake tasting of rum--but it was an interruption. He wanted it
over, the table pushed away, their two chairs drawn up to the light,
and the moment came when he took out his pipe, filled it, and said,
pressing the tobacco tight into the bowl: "I have been thinking over
what you said last time and it seems to me..."

Yes, that was what he waited for and so did she. Yes, while she shook
the teapot hot and dry over the spirit flame she saw those other two,
him, leaning back, taking his ease among the cushions, and her, curled
up _en escargot_ in the blue shell arm-chair. The picture was so clear
and so minute it might have been painted on the blue teapot lid. And
yet she couldn't hurry. She could almost have cried: "Give me time."
She must have time in which to grow calm. She wanted time in which to
free herself from all these familiar things with which she lived so
vividly. For all these gay things round her were part of her--her
offspring--and they knew it and made the largest, most vehement
claims. But now they must go. They must be swept away, shooed
away--like children, sent up the shadowy stairs, packed into bed and
commanded to go to sleep--at once--without a murmur!

For the special thrilling quality of their friendship was in their
complete surrender. Like two open cities in the midst of some vast
plain their two minds lay open to each other. And it wasn't as if he
rode into hers like a conqueror, armed to the eyebrows and seeing
nothing but a gay silken flutter--nor did she enter his like a queen
walking soft on petals. No, they were eager, serious travellers,
absorbed in understanding what was to be seen and discovering what was
hidden--making the most of this extraordinary absolute chance which
made it possible for him to be utterly truthful to her and for her to
be utterly sincere with him.

And the best of it was they were both of them old enough to enjoy
their adventure to the full without any stupid emotional complication.
Passion would have ruined everything; they quite saw that. Besides,
all that sort of thing was over and done with for both of them--he was
thirty-one, she was thirty--they had had their experiences, and very
rich and varied they had been, but now was the time for
harvest--harvest. Weren't his novels to be very big novels indeed?
And her plays. Who else had her exquisite sense of real English
Comedy?...

Carefully she cut the cake into thick little wads and he reached
across for a piece.

"Do realize how good it is," she implored. "Eat it imaginatively. Roll
your eyes if you can and taste it on the breath. It's not a sandwich
from the hatter's bag--it's the kind of cake that might have been
mentioned in the Book of Genesis...And God said: 'Let there be
cake. And there was cake. And God saw that it was good.'"

"You needn't entreat me," said he. "Really you needn't. It's a queer
thing but I always do notice what I eat here and never anywhere else.
I suppose it comes of living alone so long and always reading while I
feed...my habit of looking upon food as just food...something
that's there, at certain times...to be devoured...to be...not
there." He laughed. "That shocks you. Doesn't it?"

"To the bone," said she.

"But--look here----" He pushed away his cup and began to speak very
fast. "I simply haven't got any external life at all. I don't know the
names of things a bit--trees and so on--and I never notice places or
furniture or what people look like. One room is just like another to
me--a place to sit and read or talk in--except," and here he paused,
smiled in a strange naive way, and said, "except this studio." He
looked round him and then at her; he laughed in his astonishment and
pleasure. He was like a man who wakes up in a train to find that he
has arrived, already, at the journey's end.

"Here's another queer thing. If I shut my eyes I can see this place
down to every detail--every detail...Now I come to think of
it--I've never realized this consciously before. Often when I am away
from here I revisit it in spirit--wander about among your red chairs,
stare at the bowl of fruit on the black table--and just touch, very
lightly, that marvel of a sleeping boy's head."

He looked at it as he spoke. It stood on the corner of the
mantelpiece; the head to one side down-drooping, the lips parted, as
though in his sleep the little boy listened to some sweet sound...

"I love that little boy," he murmured. And then they both were silent.

A new silence came between them. Nothing in the least like the
satisfactory pause that had followed their greetings--the "Well, here
we are together again, and there's no reason why we shouldn't go on
from just where we left off last time." That silence could be
contained in the circle of warm, delightful fire and lamplight. How
many times hadn't they flung something into it just for the fun of
watching the ripples break on the easy shores. But into this
unfamiliar pool the head of the little boy sleeping his timeless sleep
dropped--and the ripples flowed away, away--boundlessly far--into deep
glittering darkness.

And then both of them broke it. She said: "I must make up the fire,"
and he said: "I have been trying a new..." Both of them escaped.
She made up the fire and put the table back, the blue chair was
wheeled forward, she curled up and he lay back among the cushions.
Quickly! Quickly! They must stop it from happening again.

"Well, I read the book you left last time."

"Oh, what do you think of it?"

They were off and all was as usual. But was it? Weren't they just a
little too quick, too prompt with their replies, too ready to take
each other up? Was this really anything more than a wonderfully good
imitation of other occasions? His heart beat; her cheek burned and the
stupid thing was she could not discover where exactly they were or
what exactly was happening. She hadn't time to glance back. And just
as she had got so far it happened again. They faltered, wavered, broke
down, were silent. Again they were conscious of the boundless,
questioning dark. Again, there they were--two hunters, bending over
their fire, but hearing suddenly from the jungle beyond a shake of
wind and a loud, questioning cry...

She lifted her head. "It's raining," she murmured. And her voice was
like his when he had said: "I love that little boy."

Well. Why didn't they just give way to it--yield--and see what will
happen then? But no. Vague and troubled though they were, they knew
enough to realize their precious friendship was in danger. She was the
one who would be destroyed--not they--and they'd be no party to that.

He got up, knocked out his pipe, ran his hand through his hair and
said: "I have been wondering very much lately whether the novel of the
future will be a psychological novel or not. How sure are you that
psychology _qua_ psychology has got anything to do with literature at
all?"

"Do you mean you feel there's quite a chance that the mysterious
non-existent creatures--the young writers of to-day--are trying simply
to jump the psycho-analyst's claim?"

"Yes, I do. And I think it's because this generation is just wise
enough to know that it is sick and to realize that its only chance of
recovery is by going into its symptoms--making an exhaustive study of
them--tracking them down--trying to get at the root of the trouble."

"But oh," she wailed. "What a dreadfully dismal outlook."

"Not at all," said he. "Look here..." On the talk went. And now it
seemed they really had succeeded. She turned in her chair to look at
him while she answered. Her smile said: "We have won." And he smiled
back, confident: "Absolutely."

But the smile undid them. It lasted too long; it became a grin. They
saw themselves as two little grinning puppets jigging away in
nothingness.

"What have we been talking about?" thought he. He was so utterly bored
he almost groaned.

"What a spectacle we have made of ourselves," thought she. And she saw
him laboriously--oh, laboriously--laying out the grounds and herself
running after, putting here a tree and there a flowery shrub and here
a handful of glittering fish in a pool. They were silent this time
from sheer dismay.

The clock struck six merry little pings and the fire made a soft
flutter. What fools they were--heavy, stodgy, elderly--with positively
upholstered minds.

And now the silence put a spell upon them like solemn music. It was
anguish--anguish for her to bear it and he would die--he'd die if it
were broken...And yet he longed to break it. Not by speech. At
any rate not by their ordinary maddening chatter. There was another
way for them to speak to each other, and in the new way he wanted to
murmur: "Do you feel this too? Do you understand it at all?"...

Instead, to his horror, he heard himself say: "I must be off; I'm
meeting Brand at six."

What devil made him say that instead of the other? She jumped--simply
jumped out of her chair, and he heard her crying: "You must rush,
then. He's so punctual. Why didn't you say so before?"

"You've hurt me; you've hurt me! We've failed!" said her secret self
while she handed him his hat and stick, smiling gaily. She wouldn't
give him a moment for another word, but ran along the passage and
opened the big outer door.

Could they leave each other like this? How could they? He stood on the
step and she just inside holding the door. It was not raining now.

"You've hurt me--hurt me," said her heart. "Why don't you go? No,
don't go. Stay. No--go!" And she looked out upon the night.

She saw the beautiful fall of the steps, the dark garden ringed with
glittering ivy, on the other side of the road the huge bare willows
and above them the sky big and bright with stars. But of course he
would see nothing of all this. He was superior to it all. He--with his
wonderful "spiritual" vision!

She was right. He did see nothing at all. Misery! He'd missed it. It
was too late to do anything now. Was it too late? Yes, it was. A cold
snatch of hateful wind blew into the garden. Curse life! He heard her
cry "au revoir" and the door slammed.

Running back into the studio she behaved so strangely. She ran up and
down lifting her arms and crying: "Oh! Oh! How stupid! How imbecile!
How stupid!" And then she flung herself down on the _sommier_ thinking
of nothing--just lying there in her rage. All was over. What was over?
Oh--something was. And she'd never see him again--never. After a long
long time (or perhaps ten minutes) had passed in that black gulf her
bell rang a sharp quick jingle. It was he, of course. And equally, of
course, she oughtn't to have paid the slightest attention to it but
just let it go on ringing and ringing. She flew to answer.

On the doorstep there stood an elderly virgin, a pathetic creature who
simply idolized her (heaven knows why) and had this habit of turning
up and ringing the bell and then saying, when she opened the door: "My
dear, send me away!" She never did. As a rule she asked her in and let
her admire everything and accepted the bunch of slightly soiled
looking flowers--more than graciously. But to-day...

"Oh, I am so sorry," she cried. "But I've got someone with me. We are
working on some woodcuts. I'm hopelessly busy all evening."

"It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter at all, darling," said the good
friend. "I was just passing and I thought I'd leave you some violets."
She fumbled down among the ribs of a large old umbrella. "I put them
down here. Such a good place to keep flowers out of the wind. Here
they are," she said, shaking out a little dead bunch.

For a moment she did not take the violets. But while she stood just
inside, holding the door, a strange thing happened...Again she
saw the beautiful fall of the steps, the dark garden ringed with
glittering ivy, the willows, the big bright sky. Again she felt the
silence that was like a question. But this time she did not hesitate.
She moved forward. Very softly and gently, as though fearful of making
a ripple in that boundless pool of quiet she put her arms round her
friend.

"My dear," murmured her happy friend, quite overcome by this
gratitude. "They are really nothing. Just the simplest little
thrippenny bunch."

But as she spoke she was enfolded--more tenderly, more beautifully
embraced, held by such a sweet pressure and for so long that the poor
dear's mind positively reeled and she just had the strength to quaver:
"Then you really don't mind me too much?"

"Good night, my friend," whispered the other. "Come again soon."

"Oh, I will. I will."

This time she walked back to the studio slowly, and standing in the
middle of the room with half-shut eyes she felt so light, so rested,
as if she had woken up out of a childish sleep. Even the act of
breathing was a joy...

The _sommier_ was very untidy. All the cushions "like furious
mountains" as she said; she put them in order before going over to the
writing-table.

"I have been thinking over our talk about the psychological novel,"
she dashed off, "it really is intensely interesting."...And so on
and so on.

At the end she wrote: "Good night, my friend. Come again soon."




PICTURES

EIGHT o'clock in the morning. Miss Ada Moss lay in a black iron
bedstead, staring up at the ceiling. Her room, a Bloomsbury top-floor
back, smelled of soot and face powder and the paper of fried potatoes
she brought in for supper the night before.

"Oh, dear," thought Miss Moss, "I am cold. I wonder why it is that I
always wake up so cold in the mornings now. My knees and feet and my
back--especially my back; it's like a sheet of ice. And I always was
such a one for being warm in the old days. It's not as if I was
skinny--I'm just the same full figure that I used to be. No, it's
because I don't have a good hot dinner in the evenings."

A pageant of Good Hot Dinners passed across the ceiling, each of them
accompanied by a bottle of Nourishing Stout...

"Even if I were to get up now," she thought, "and have a sensible
substantial breakfast..." A pageant of Sensible Substantial
Breakfasts followed the dinners across the ceiling, shepherded by an
enormous, white, uncut ham. Miss Moss shuddered and disappeared under
the bedclothes. Suddenly, in bounced the landlady.

"There's a letter for you, Miss Moss."

"Oh," said Miss Moss, far too friendly, "thank you very much, Mrs.
Pine. It's very good of you, I'm sure, to take the trouble."

"No trouble at all," said the landlady. "I thought perhaps it was the
letter you'd been expecting."

"Why," said Miss Moss brightly, "yes, perhaps it is." She put her head
on one side and smiled vaguely at the letter. "I shouldn't be
surprised."

The landlady's eyes popped. "Well, I should, Miss Moss," said she,
"and that's how it is. And I'll trouble you to open it, if you please.
Many is the lady in my place as would have done it for you and have
been within her rights. For things can't go on like this, Miss Moss,
no indeed they can't. What with week in week out and first you've got
it and then you haven't, and then it's another letter lost in the post
or another manager down at Brighton but will be back on Tuesday for
certain--I'm fair sick and tired and I won't stand it no more. Why
should I, Miss Moss, I ask you, at a time like this, with prices
flying up in the air and my poor dear lad in France? My sister Eliza
was only saying to me yesterday--'Minnie,' she says, 'you're too
soft-hearted. You could have let that room time and time again,' says
she, 'and if people won't look after themselves in times like these,
nobody else will,' she says. 'She may have had a College eddication
and sung in West End concerts,' says she, 'but if your Lizzie says
what's true,' she says, 'and she's washing her own wovens and drying
them on the towel rail, it's easy to see where the finger's pointing.
And it's high time you had done with it,' says she."

Miss Moss gave no sign of having heard this. She sat up in bed, tore
open her letter and read:


"Dear Madam,

  Yours to hand. Am not producing at present, but have filed photo for
future ref.

    Yours truly,
      BACKWASH FILM CO."


This letter seemed to afford her peculiar satisfaction; she read it
through twice before replying to the landlady.

"Well, Mrs. Pine, I think you'll be sorry for what you said. This is
from a manager, asking me to be there with evening dress at ten
o'clock next Saturday morning."

But the landlady was too quick for her. She pounced, secured the
letter.

"Oh, is it! Is it indeed!" she cried.

"Give me back that letter. Give it back to me at once, you bad, wicked
woman," cried Miss Moss, who could not get out of bed because her
nightdress was slit down the back. "Give me back my private letter."
The landlady began slowly backing out of the room, holding the letter
to her buttoned bodice.

"So it's come to this, has it?" said she. "Well, Miss Moss, if I don't
get my rent at eight o'clock to-night, we'll see who's a bad, wicked
woman--that's all." Here she nodded, mysteriously. "And I'll keep this
letter." Here her voice rose. "It will be a pretty little bit of
evidence!" And here it fell, sepulchral, "_My lady._"

The door banged and Miss Moss was alone. She flung off the bed
clothes, and sitting by the side of the bed, furious and shivering,
she stared at her fat white legs with their great knots of greeny-blue
veins.

"Cockroach! That's what she is. She's a cockroach!" said Miss Moss. "I
could have her up for snatching my letter--I'm sure I could." Still
keeping on her nightdress she began to drag on her clothes.

"Oh, if I could only pay that woman, I'd give her a piece of my mind
that she wouldn't forget. I'd tell her off proper." She went over to
the chest of drawers for a safety-pin, and seeing herself in the glass
she gave a vague smile and shook her head. "Well, old girl," she
murmured, "you're up against it this time, and no mistake." But the
person in the glass made an ugly face at her.

"You silly thing," scolded Miss Moss. "Now what's the good of crying:
you'll only make your nose red. No, you get dressed and go out and try
your luck--that's what you've got to do."

She unhooked her vanity bag from the bedpost, rooted in it, shook it,
turned it inside out.

"I'll have a nice cup of tea at an A B C to settle me before I go
anywhere," she decided. "I've got one and thrippence--yes, just one
and three."

Ten minutes later, a stout lady in blue serge, with a bunch of
artificial "parmas" at her bosom, a black hat covered with purple
pansies, white gloves, boots with white uppers, and a vanity bag
containing one and three, sang in a low contralto voice:

  Sweet-heart, remember when days are forlorn
  It al-ways is dar-kest before the dawn.

But the person in the glass made a face at her, and Miss Moss went
out. There were grey crabs all the way down the street slopping water
over grey stone steps. With his strange, hawking cry and the jangle of
the cans the milk boy went his rounds. Outside Brittweiler's Swiss
House he made a splash, and an old brown cat without a tail appeared
from nowhere, and began greedily and silently drinking up the spill.
It gave Miss Moss a queer feeling to watch--a sinking--as you might
say.

But when she came to the A B C she found the door propped open; a man
went in and out carrying trays of rolls, and there was nobody inside
except a waitress doing her hair and the cashier unlocking cash-boxes.
She stood in the middle of the floor but neither of them saw her.

"My boy came home last night," sang the waitress.

"Oh, I say--how topping for you!" gurgled the cashier.

"Yes, wasn't it," sang the waitress. "He brought me a sweet little
brooch. Look, it's got 'Dieppe' written on it."

The cashier ran across to look and put her arm round the waitress'
neck.

"Oh, I say--how topping for you."

"Yes, isn't it," said the waitress. "O-oh, he is brahn. 'Hullo,' I
said, 'hullo, old mahogany.'"

"Oh, I say," gurgled the cashier, running back into her cage and
nearly bumping into Miss Moss on the way. "You are a _treat!"_ Then
the man with the rolls came in again, swerving past her.

"Can I have a cup of tea, Miss?" she asked.

But the waitress went on doing her hair. "Oh," she sang, "we're not
_open_ yet." She turned round and waved her comb at the cashier.

"_Are_ we, dear?"

"Oh, no," said the cashier. Miss Moss went out.

"I'll go to Charing Cross. Yes, that's what I'll do," she decided.
"But I won't have a cup of tea. No, I'll have a coffee. There's more
of a tonic in coffee...Cheeky, those girls are! Her boy came home
last night; he brought her a brooch with 'Dieppe' written on it." She
began to cross the road...

"Look out, Fattie; don't go to sleep!" yelled a taxi driver. She
pretended not to hear.

"No, I won't go to Charing Cross," she decided. "I'll go straight to
Kig and Kadgit. They're open at nine. If I get there early Mr. Kadgit
may have something by the morning's post...I'm very glad you
turned up so early, Miss Moss. I've just heard from a manager who
wants a lady to play...I think you'll just suit him. I'll give
you a card to go and see him. It's three pounds a week and all found.
If I were you I'd hop round as fast as I could. Lucky you turned up so
early..."

But there was nobody at Kig and Kadgit's except the charwoman wiping
over the "lino" in the passage.

"Nobody here yet, Miss," said the char.

"Oh, isn't Mr. Kadgit here?" said Miss Moss, trying to dodge the pail
and brush. "Well, I'll just wait a moment, if I may."

"You can't wait in the waiting-room, Miss. I 'aven't done it yet. Mr.
Kadgit's never 'ere before 'leven-thirty Saturdays. Sometimes 'e don't
come at all." And the char began crawling towards her.

"Dear me--how silly of me," said Miss Moss. "I forgot it was
Saturday."

"Mind your feet, _please_, Miss," said the char. And Miss Moss was
outside again.

That was one thing about Beit and Bithems; it was lively. You walked
into the waiting-room, into a great buzz of conversation, and there
was everybody; you knew almost everybody. The early ones sat on chairs
and the later ones sat on the early ones' laps, while the gentlemen
leaned negligently against the walls or preened themselves in front of
the admiring ladies.

"Hello," said Miss Moss, very gay. "Here we are again!"

And young Mr. Clayton, playing the banjo on his walking-stick, sang:
"Waiting for the Robert E. Lee."

"Mr. Bithem here yet?" asked Miss Moss, taking out an old dead powder
puff and powdering her nose mauve.

"Oh, yes, dear," cried the chorus. "He's been here for ages. We've all
been waiting here for more than an hour."

"Dear me!" said Miss Moss. "Anything doing, do you think?"

"Oh, a few jobs going for South Africa," said young Mr. Clayton.
"Hundred and fifty a week for two years, you know."

"Oh!" cried the chorus. "You _are_ weird, Mr. Clayton. Isn't he a
_cure?_ Isn't he a _scream_, dear? Oh, Mr. Clayton, you do make me
laugh. Isn't he a _comic?_"

A dark, mournful girl touched Miss Moss on the arm.

"I just missed a lovely job yesterday," she said. "Six weeks in the
provinces and then the West End. The manager said I would have got it
for certain if only I'd been robust enough. He said if my figure had
been fuller, the part was made for me." She stared at Miss Moss, and
the dirty dark red rose under the brim of her hat looked, somehow, as
though it shared the blow with her, and was crushed, too.

"Oh, dear, that was hard lines," said Miss Moss trying to appear
indifferent. "What was it--if I may ask?"

But the dark, mournful girl saw through her and a gleam of spite came
into her heavy eyes.

"Oh, no good to you, my dear," said she. "He wanted someone young, you
know--a dark Spanish type--my style, but more figure, that was all."

The inner door opened and Mr. Bithem appeared in his shirt sleeves. He
kept one hand on the door ready to whisk back again, and held up the
other.

"Look here, ladies----" and then he paused, grinned his famous grin
before he said--"_and bhoys._" The waiting-room laughed so loudly at
this that he had to hold both hands up. "It's no good waiting this
morning. Come back Monday; I'm expecting several calls on Monday."

Miss Moss made a desperate rush forward. "Mr. Bithem, I wonder if
you've heard from..."

"Now let me see," said Mr. Bithem slowly, staring; he had only seen
Miss Moss four times a week for the past--how many weeks? "Now, who
are you?"

"Miss Ada Moss."

"Oh, yes, yes; of course, my dear. Not yet, my dear. Now I had a call
for twenty-eight ladies to-day, but they had to be young and able to
hop it a bit--see? And I had another call for sixteen--but they had to
know something about sand-dancing. Look here, my dear, I'm up to the
eyebrows this morning. Come back on Monday week; it's no good coming
before that." He gave her a whole grin to herself and patted her fat
back. "Hearts of oak, dear lady," said Mr. Bithem, "hearts of oak!"

At the North-East Film Company the crowd was all the way up the
stairs. Miss Moss found herself next to a fair little baby thing about
thirty in a white lace hat with cherries round it.

"What a crowd!" said she. "Anything special on?"

"_Didn't_ you know, dear?" said the baby, opening her immense pale
eyes. "There was a call at nine-thirty for _attractive_ girls. We've
all been waiting for _hours._ Have you played for this company
before?" Miss Moss put her head on one side. "No, I don't think I
have."

"They're a lovely company to play for," said the baby. "A friend of
mine has a friend who gets thirty pounds a day...Have you
_arcted_ much for the _fil_-lums?"

"Well, I'm not an actress by profession," confessed Miss Moss. "I'm a
contralto singer. But things have been so bad lately that I've been
doing a little."

"It's _like_ that, isn't it, dear?" said the baby.

"I had a splendid education at the College of Music," said Miss Moss,
"and I got my silver medal for singing. I've often sung at West End
concerts. But I thought, for a change, I'd try my luck..."

"Yes, it's _like_ that, isn't it, dear?" said the baby.

At that moment a beautiful typist appeared at the top of the stairs.

"Are you all waiting for the North-East call?"

"Yes!" cried the chorus.

"Well, it's off. I've just had a phone through."

"But look here! What about our expenses?" shouted a voice.

The typist looked down at them, and she couldn't help laughing.

"Oh, you weren't to have been _paid._ The North-East never _pay_ their
crowds."

There was only a little round window at the Bitter Orange Company. No
waiting-room--nobody at all except a girl, who came to the window when
Miss Moss knocked, and said: "Well?"

"Can I see the producer, please?" said Miss Moss pleasantly. The girl
leaned on the window-bar, half shut her eyes and seemed to go to sleep
for a moment. Miss Moss smiled at her. The girl not only frowned; she
seemed to smell something vaguely unpleasant; she sniffed. Suddenly
she moved away, came back with a paper and thrust it at Miss Moss.

"Fill up the form!" said she. And banged the window down.

"Can you aviate--high-dive--drive a car--buck-jump--shoot?" read Miss
Moss. She walked along the street asking herself those questions.
There was a high, cold wind blowing; it tugged at her, slapped her
face, jeered; it knew she could not answer them. In the Square Gardens
she found a little wire basket to drop the form into. And then she sat
down on one of the benches to powder her nose. But the person in the
pocket mirror made a hideous face at her, and that was too much for
Miss Moss; she had a good cry. It cheered her wonderfully.

"Well, that's over," she sighed. "It's one comfort to be off my feet.
And my nose will soon get cool in the air...It's very nice in
here. Look at the sparrows. Cheep. Cheep. How close they come. I
expect somebody feeds them. No, I've nothing for you, you cheeky
little things..." She looked away from them. What was the big
building opposite--the Café de Madrid? My goodness, what a smack that
little child came down! Poor little mite! Never mind--up again...By
eight o'clock to-night...Café de Madrid. "I could just go in
and sit there and have a coffee, that's all," thought Miss Moss. "It's
such a place for artists too. I might just have a stroke of luck...A
dark handsome gentleman in a fur coat comes in with a friend,
and sits at my table, perhaps. 'No, old chap, I've searched London for
a contralto and I can't find a soul. You see, the music is difficult;
have a look at it.'" And Miss Moss heard herself saying: "Excuse
me, I happen to be a contralto, and I have sung that part many
times...Extraordinary! 'Come back to my studio and I'll try your voice
now.'...Ten pounds a week...Why should I feel nervous? It's
not nervousness. Why shouldn't I go to the Café de Madrid? I'm a
respectable woman--I'm a contralto singer. And I'm only trembling
because I've had nothing to eat to-day...'A nice little piece of
evidence, _my lady._'...Very well, Mrs. Pine. Café de Madrid. They
have concerts there in the evenings...'Why don't they begin?' The
contralto has not arrived...'Excuse me, I happen to be a
contralto; I have sung that music many times.'"

It was almost dark in the café. Men, palms, red plush seats, white
marble tables, waiters in aprons, Miss Moss walked through them all.
Hardly had she sat down when a very stout gentleman wearing a very
small hat that floated on the top of his head like a little yacht
flopped into the chair opposite hers.

"Good evening!" said he.

Miss Moss said, in her cheerful way: "Good evening!"

"Fine evening," said the stout gentleman.

"Yes, very fine. Quite a treat, isn't it?" said she.

He crooked a sausage finger at the waiter--"Bring me a large whisky"
--and turned to Miss Moss. "What's yours?"

"Well, I think I'll take a brandy if it's all the same."

Five minutes later the stout gentleman leaned across the table and
blew a puff of cigar smoke full in her face.

"That's a tempting bit o' ribbon!" said he.

Miss Moss blushed until a pulse at the top of her head that she never
had felt before pounded away.

"I always was one for pink," said she.

The stout gentleman considered her, drumming with her fingers on the
table.

"I like 'em firm and well covered," said he.

Miss Moss, to her surprise, gave a loud snigger.

Five minutes later the stout gentleman heaved himself up. "Well, am I
goin' your way, or are you comin' mine?" he asked.

"I'll come with you, if it's all the same," said Miss Moss. And she
sailed after the little yacht out of the café.




THE MAN WITHOUT A TEMPERAMENT

HE stood at the hall door turning the ring, turning the heavy signet
ring upon his little finger while his glance travelled coolly,
deliberately, over the round tables and basket chairs scattered about
the glassed-in verandah. He pursed his lips--he might have been going
to whistle--but he did not whistle--only turned the ring--turned the
ring on his pink, freshly washed hands.

Over in the corner sat The Two Topknots, drinking a decoction they
always drank at this hour--something whitish, greyish, in glasses,
with little husks floating on the top--and rooting in a tin full of
paper shavings for pieces of speckled biscuit, which they broke,
dropped into the glasses and fished for with spoons. Their two coils
of knitting, like two snakes, slumbered beside the tray.

The American Woman sat where she always sat against the glass wall, in
the shadow of a great creeping thing with wide open purple eyes that
pressed--that flattened itself against the glass, hungrily watching
her. And she knoo it was there--she knoo it was looking at her just
that way. She played up to it; she gave herself little airs. Sometimes
she even pointed at it, crying: "Isn't that the most terrible thing
you've ever seen! Isn't that ghoulish!" It was on the other side of
the verandah, after all...and besides it couldn't touch her, could
it, Klaymongso? She was an American Woman, wasn't she Klaymongso, and
she'd just go right away to her Consul. Klaymongso, curled in her lap,
with her torn antique brocade bag, a grubby handkerchief, and a pile
of letters from home on top of him, sneezed for reply.

The other tables were empty. A glance passed between the American and
the Topknots. She gave a foreign little shrug; they waved an
understanding biscuit. But he saw nothing. Now he was still, now from
his eyes you saw he listened. "Hoo-e-zip-zoo-oo!" sounded the lift.
The iron cage clanged open. Light dragging steps sounded across the
hall, coming towards him. A hand, like a leaf, fell on his shoulder. A
soft voice said: "Let's go and sit over there--where we can see the
drive. The trees are so lovely." And he moved forward with the hand
still on his shoulder, and the light, dragging steps beside his. He
pulled out a chair and she sank into it, slowly, leaning her head
against the back, her arms falling along the sides.

"Won't you bring the other up closer? It's such miles away." But he
did not move.

"Where's your shawl?" he asked.

"Oh!" She gave a little groan of dismay. "How silly I am, I've left it
upstairs on the bed. Never mind. Please don't go for it. I shan't want
it, I know I shan't."

"You'd better have it." And he turned and swiftly crossed the verandah
into the dim hall with its scarlet plush and gilt furniture--conjuror's
furniture--its Notice of Services at the English Church,
its green baize board with the unclaimed letters climbing the black
lattice, huge "Presentation" clock that struck the hours at the
half-hours, bundles of sticks and umbrellas and sunshades in the clasp
of a brown wooden bear, past the two crippled palms, two ancient
beggars at the foot of the staircase, up the marble stairs three at a
time, past the life-size group on the landing of two stout peasant
children with their marble pinnies full of marble grapes, and along
the corridor, with its piled-up wreckage of old tin boxes, leather
trunks, canvas hold-alls, to their room.

The servant girl was in their room, singing loudly while she emptied
soapy water into a pail. The windows were open wide, the shutters put
back, and the light glared in. She had thrown the carpets and the big
white pillows over the balcony rails; the nets were looped up from the
beds; on the writing table there stood a pan of fluff and match-ends.
When she saw him her small impudent eyes snapped and her singing
changed to humming. But he gave no sign. His eyes searched the glaring
room. Where the devil was the shawl!

"_Vous desirez, Monsieur?_" mocked the servant girl.

No answer. He had seen it. He strode across the room, grabbed the grey
cobweb and went out, banging the door. The servant girl's voice at its
loudest and shrillest followed him along the corridor.

"Oh, there you are. What happened? What kept you? The tea's here, you
see. I've just sent Antonio off for the hot water. Isn't it
extraordinary? I must have told him about it sixty times at least, and
still he doesn't bring it. Thank you. That's very nice. One does just
feel the air when one bends forward."

"Thanks." He took his tea and sat down in the other chair. "No,
nothing to eat."

"Oh do! Just one, you had so little at lunch and it's hours before
dinner."

Her shawl dropped off as she bent forward to hand him the biscuits. He
took one and put it in his saucer.

"Oh, those trees along the drive," she cried, "I could look at them
for ever. They are like the most exquisite huge ferns. And you see
that one with the grey-silver bark and the clusters of cream coloured
flowers, I pulled down a head of them yesterday to smell and the
scent"--she shut her eyes at the memory and her voice thinned away,
faint, airy--"was like freshly ground nutmegs." A little pause. She
turned to him and smiled. "You do know what nutmegs smell like--do
you, Robert?"

And he smiled back at her. "Now how am I going to prove to you that I
do?"

Back came Antonio with not only the hot water--with letters on a
salver and three rolls of paper.

"Oh, the post! Oh, how lovely! Oh, Robert, they mustn't be all for
you! Have they just come, Antonio?" Her thin hands flew up and hovered
over the letters that Antonio offered her, bending forward.

"Just this moment, Signora," grinned Antonio. "I took-a them from the
postman myself. I made-a the postman give them for me."

"Noble Antonio!" laughed she. "There--those are mine, Robert; the rest
are yours."

Antonio wheeled sharply, stiffened, the grin went out of his face. His
striped linen jacket and his flat gleaming fringe made him look like a
wooden doll.

Mr. Salesby put the letters into his pocket; the papers lay on the
table. He turned the ring, turned the signet ring on his little finger
and stared in front of him, blinking, vacant.

But she--with her teacup in one hand, the sheets of thin paper in the
other, her head tilted back, her lips open, a brush of bright colour
on her cheek-bones, sipped, sipped, drank...drank...

"From Lottie," came her soft murmur. "Poor dear...such trouble...left
foot. She thought...neuritis...Doctor Blyth...flat foot...massage.
So many robins this year...maid most satisfactory...Indian
Colonel...every grain of rice separate ...very heavy fall of snow."
And her wide lighted eyes looked up from the letter. "Snow, Robert!
Think of it!" And she touched the little dark violets pinned on her
thin bosom and went back to the letter.



...Snow. Snow in London. Millie with the early morning cup of tea.
"There's been a terrible fall of snow in the night, Sir." "Oh, has
there, Millie?" The curtains ring apart, letting in the pale,
reluctant light. He raises himself in the bed; he catches a glimpse of
the solid houses opposite framed in white, of their window boxes full
of great sprays of white coral...In the bathroom--overlooking the
back garden. Snow--heavy snow over everything. The lawn is covered
with a wavy pattern of cat's paws; there is a thick, thick icing on
the garden table; the withered pods of the laburnum tree are
white tassels; only here and there in the ivy is a dark leaf
showing...Warming his back at the dining-room fire, the paper drying
over a chair. Millie with the bacon. "Oh, if you please, Sir, there's
two little boys come as will do the steps and front for a shilling,
shall I let them?"...And then flying lightly, lightly down the
stairs--Jinnie. "Oh, Robert, isn't it wonderful! Oh, what a pity
it has to melt. Where's the pussy-wee?" "I'll get him from
Millie"..."Millie, you might just hand me up the kitten if you've
got him down there." "Very good, Sir." He feels the little beating
heart under his hand. "Come on, old chap, your Missus wants you."
"Oh, Robert, do show him the snow--his first snow. Shall I open
the window and give him a little piece on his paw to hold?..."



"Well, that's very satisfactory on the whole--very. Poor Lottie!
Darling Anne! How I only wish I could send them something of this,"
she cried, waving her letters at the brilliant, dazzling garden. "More
tea, Robert? Robert dear, more tea?"

"No, thanks, no. It was very good," he drawled.

"Well mine wasn't. Mine was just like chopped hay. Oh, here comes the
Honeymoon Couple."

Half striding, half running, carrying a basket between them and rods
and lines, they came up the drive, up the shallow steps.

"My! have you been out fishing?" cried the American Woman.

They were out of breath, they panted: "Yes, yes, we have been out in a
little boat all day. We have caught seven. Four are good to eat. But
three we shall give away. To the children."

Mrs. Salesby turned her chair to look; the Topknots laid the snakes
down. They were a very dark young couple--black hair, olive skin,
brilliant eyes and teeth. He was dressed "English fashion" in a
flannel jacket, white trousers and shoes. Round his neck he wore a
silk scarf; his head, with his hair brushed back, was bare. And he
kept mopping his forehead, rubbing his hands with a brilliant
handkerchief. Her white skirt had a patch of wet; her neck and throat
were stained a deep pink. When she lifted her arms big half-hoops of
perspiration showed under her arm-pits; her hair clung in wet curls to
her cheeks. She looked as though her young husband had been dipping
her in the sea, and fishing her out again to dry in the sun and
then--in with her again--all day.

"Would Klaymongso like a fish?" they cried. Their laughing voices
charged with excitement beat against the glassed-in verandah like
birds, and a strange saltish smell came from the basket.

"You will sleep well to-night," said a Topknot, picking her ear with a
knitting needle while the other Topknot smiled and nodded.

The Honeymoon Couple looked at each other. A great wave seemed to go
over them. They gasped, gulped, staggered a little and then came up
laughing--laughing.

"We cannot go upstairs, we are too tired. We must have tea just as we
are. Here--coffee. No--tea. No--coffee. Tea--coffee, Antonio!" Mrs.
Salesby turned.

"Robert! Robert!" Where was he? He wasn't there. Oh, there he was at
the other end of the verandah, with his back turned, smoking a
cigarette. "Robert, shall we go for our little turn?"

"Right." He stumped the cigarette into an ash-tray and sauntered over,
his eyes on the ground. "Will you be warm enough?"

"Oh, quite."

"Sure?"

"Well," she put her hand on his arm, "perhaps"--and gave his arm the
faintest pressure--"it's not upstairs, it's only in the hall--perhaps
you'd get me my cape. Hanging up."

He came back with it and she bent her small head while he dropped it
on her shoulders. Then, very stiff, he offered her his arm. She bowed
sweetly to the people on the verandah while he just covered a yawn,
and they went down the steps together.

"_Vous avez voo ça!_" said the American Woman.

"He is not a man," said the Two Topknots, "he is an ox. I say to my
sister in the morning and at night when we are in bed, I tell
her--_No_ man is he, but an ox!"

Wheeling, tumbling, swooping, the laughter of the Honeymoon Couple
dashed against the glass of the verandah.

The sun was still high. Every leaf, every flower in the garden lay
open, motionless, as if exhausted, and a sweet, rich, rank smell
filled the quivering air. Out of the thick, fleshy leaves of a cactus
there rose an aloe stem loaded with pale flowers that looked as though
they had been cut out of butter; light flashed upon the lifted spears
of the palms; over a bed of scarlet waxen flowers some big black
insects "zoom-zoomed"; a great, gaudy creeper, orange splashed with
jet, sprawled against a wall.

"I don't need my cape after all," said she. "It's really too warm." So
he took it off and carried it over his arm. "Let us go down this path
here. I feel so well to-day--marvellously better. Good heavens--look
at those children! And to think it's November!"

In a corner of the garden there were two brimming tubs of water. Three
little girls, having thoughtfully taken off their drawers and hung
them on a bush, their skirts clasped to their waists, were standing in
the tubs and tramping up and down. They screamed, their hair fell over
their faces, they splashed one another. But suddenly, the smallest,
who had a tub to herself, glanced up and saw who was looking. For a
moment she seemed overcome with terror, then clumsily she struggled
and strained out of her tub, and still holding her clothes above her
waist. "The Englishman! The Englishman!" she shrieked and fled away to
hide. Shrieking and screaming, the other two followed her. In a moment
they were gone; in a moment there was nothing but the two brimming
tubs and their little drawers on the bush.

"How--very--extraordinary!" said she. "What made them so frightened?
Surely they were much too young to..." She looked up at him. She
thought he looked pale--but wonderfully handsome with that great
tropical tree behind him with its long, spiked thorns.

For a moment he did not answer. Then he met her glance, and smiling
his slow smile, "_Très_ rum!" said he.

_Très_ rum! Oh, she felt quite faint. Oh, why should she love him so
much just because he said a thing like that. _Très_ rum! That was
Robert all over. Nobody else but Robert could ever say such a thing.
To be so wonderful, so brilliant, so learned, and then to say in that
queer, boyish voice...She could have wept.

"You know you're very absurd, sometimes," said she.

"I am," he answered. And they walked on.

But she was tired. She had had enough. She did not want to walk any
more.

"Leave me here and go for a little constitutional, won't you? I'll be
in one of these long chairs. What a good thing you've got my cape; you
won't have to go upstairs for a rug. Thank you, Robert, I shall look
at that delicious heliotrope...You won't be gone long?"

"No--no. You don't mind being left?"

"Silly! I want you to go. I can't expect you to drag after your
invalid wife every minute...How long will you be?"

He took out his watch. "It's just after half-past four. I'll be back
at a quarter past five."

"Back at a quarter past five," she repeated, and she lay still in the
long chair and folded her hands.

He turned away. Suddenly he was back again. "Look here, would you like
my watch?" And he dangled it before her.

"Oh!" She caught her breath. "Very, very much." And she clasped the
watch, the warm watch, the darling watch in her fingers. "Now go
quickly."

The gates of the Pension Villa Excelsior were open wide, jammed open
against some bold geraniums. Stooping a little, staring straight
ahead, walking swiftly, he passed through them and began climbing the
hill that wound behind the town like a great rope looping the villas
together. The dust lay thick. A carriage came bowling along driving
towards the Excelsior. In it sat the General and the Countess; they
had been for his daily airing. Mr. Salesby stepped to one side but the
dust beat up, thick, white, stifling like wool. The Countess just had
time to nudge the General.

"There he goes," she said spitefully.

But the General gave a loud caw and refused to look.

"It is the Englishman," said the driver, turning round and smiling.
And the Countess threw up her hands and nodded so amiably that he spat
with satisfaction and gave the stumbling horse a cut.

On--on--past the finest villas in the town, magnificent palaces,
palaces worth coming any distance to see, past the public gardens with
the carved grottoes and statues and stone animals drinking at the
fountain, into a poorer quarter. Here the road ran narrow and foul
between high lean houses, the ground floors of which were scooped and
hollowed into stables and carpenters' shops. At a fountain ahead of
him two old hags were beating linen. As he passed them they squatted
back on their haunches, stared, and then their "A-hak-kak-kak!" with
the slap, slap, of the stone on the linen sounded after him.

He reached the top of the hill; he turned a corner and the town was
hidden. Down he looked into a deep valley with a dried up river bed at
the bottom. This side and that was covered with small dilapidated
houses that had broken stone verandahs where the fruit lay drying,
tomato lanes in the garden, and from the gates to the doors a trellis
of vines. The late sunlight, deep, golden, lay in the cup of the
valley; there was a smell of charcoal in the air. In the gardens the
men were cutting grapes. He watched a man standing in the greenish
shade, raising up, holding a black cluster in one hand, taking the
knife from his belt, cutting, laying the bunch in a flat boat-shaped
basket. The man worked leisurely, silently, taking hundreds of years
over the job. On the hedges on the other side of the road there were
grapes small as berries, growing wild, growing among the stones. He
leaned against a wall, filled his pipe, put a match to it...



Leaned across a gate, turned up the collar of his mackintosh. It was
going to rain. It didn't matter, he was prepared for it. You didn't
expect anything else in November. He looked over the bare field. From
the corner by the gate there came the smell of swedes, a great stack
of them, wet, rank coloured. Two men passed walking towards the
straggling village. "Good day!" "Good day!" By Jove! he had to hurry
if he was going to catch that train home. Over the gate, across a
field, over the stile, into the lane, swinging along in the drifting
rain and dusk...Just home in time for a bath and a change before
supper...In the drawing-room; Jinnie is sitting pretty nearly in
the fire. "Oh, Robert, I didn't hear you come in. Did you have a good
time? How nice you smell! A present?" "Some bits of blackberry I
picked for you. Pretty colour." "Oh, lovely, Robert! Dennis and Beaty
are coming to supper." Supper--cold beef, potatoes in their jackets,
claret, household bread. They are gay--everybody's laughing. "Oh, we
all know Robert," says Dennis, breathing on his eyeglasses and
polishing them. "By the way, Dennis, I picked up a very jolly little
edition of..."



A clock struck. He wheeled sharply. What time was it. Five? A quarter
past? Back, back the way he came. As he passed through the gates he
saw her on the look-out. She got up, waved and slowly she came to meet
him, dragging the heavy cape. In her hand she carried a spray of
heliotrope.

"You're late," she cried gaily. "You're three minutes late. Here's
your watch, it's been very good while you were away. Did you have a
nice time? Was it lovely? Tell me. Where did you go?"

"I say--put this _on_," he said, taking the cape from her.

"Yes, I will. Yes, it's getting chilly. Shall we go up to our room?"

When they reached the lift she was coughing. He frowned.

"It's nothing. I haven't been out too late. Don't be cross." She sat
down on one of the red plush chairs while he rang and rang, and then,
getting no answer, kept his finger on the bell.

"Oh, Robert, do you think you ought to?"

"Ought to what?"

The door of the _salon_ opened. "What is that? Who is making that
noise?" sounded from within. Klaymongso began to yelp. "Caw! Caw!
Caw!" came from the General. A Topknot darted out with one hand to her
ear, opened the staff door, "Mr. Queet! Mr. Queet!" she bawled. That
brought the manager up at a run.

"Is that you ringing the bell, Mr. Salesby? Do you want the lift? Very
good, Sir. I'll take you up myself. Antonio wouldn't have been a
minute, he was just taking off his apron----" And having ushered them
in, the oily manager went to the door of the _salon._ "Very sorry you
should have been troubled, ladies and gentlemen." Salesby stood in the
cage, sucking in his cheeks, staring at the ceiling and turning the
ring, turning the signet ring on his little finger...

Arrived in their room he went swiftly over to the washstand, shook the
bottle, poured her out a dose and brought it across.

"Sit down. Drink it. And don't talk." And he stood over her while she
obeyed. Then he took the glass, rinsed it and put it back in its case.
"Would you like a cushion?"

"No, I'm quite all right. Come over here. Sit down by me just a
minute, will you, Robert? Ah, that's very nice." She turned and thrust
the piece of heliotrope in the lapel of his coat. "That," she said,
"is most becoming." And then she leaned her head against his shoulder,
and he put his arm round her.

"Robert----" her voice like a sigh--like a breath.

"Yes----"

They sat there for a long while. The sky flamed, paled; the two white
beds were like two ships...At last he heard the servant girl
running along the corridor with the hot water cans, and gently he
released her and turned on the light.

"Oh, what time is it? Oh, what a heavenly evening. Oh, Robert, I was
thinking while you were away this afternoon..."

They were the last couple to enter the dining-room. The Countess was
there with her lorgnette and her fan, the General was there with his
special chair and the air cushion and the small rug over his knees.
The American Woman was there showing Klaymongso a copy of the
_Saturday Evening Post._..."We're having a feast of reason and a
flow of soul." The Two Topknots were there feeling over the peaches
and the pears in their dish of fruit, and putting aside all they
considered unripe or overripe to show to the manager, and the
Honeymoon Couple leaned across the table, whispering, trying not to
burst out laughing.

Mr. Queet, in everyday clothes and white canvas shoes, served the
soup, and Antonio, in full evening dress, handed it round.

"No," said the American Woman, "take it away, Antonio. We can't eat
soup. We can't eat anything mushy, can we, Klaymongso?"

"Take them back and fill them to the rim!" said the Topknots, and they
turned and watched while Antonio delivered the message.

"What is it? Rice? Is it cooked?" The Countess peered through her
lorgnette. "Mr. Queet, the General can have some of this soup if it is
cooked."

"Very good, Countess."

The Honeymoon Couple had their fish instead.

"Give me that one. That's the one I caught. No it's not. Yes, it is.
No it's not. Well, it's looking at me with its eye so it must be. Tee!
Hee! Hee!" Their feet were locked together under the table.

"Robert, you're not eating again. Is anything the matter?"

"No. Off food, that's all."

"Oh, what a bother. There are eggs and spinach coming. You don't like
spinach, do you. I must tell them in future..."

An egg and mashed potatoes for the General.

"Mr. Queet! Mr. Queet!"

"Yes, Countess."

"The General's egg's too hard again."

"Caw! Caw! Caw!"

"Very sorry, Countess. Shall I have you another cooked, General?"

...They are the first to leave the dining-room. She rises,
gathering her shawl and he stands aside, waiting for her to pass,
turning the ring, turning the signet ring on his little finger. In the
hall Mr. Queet hovers. "I thought you might not want to wait for the
lift. Antonio's just serving the finger bowls. And I'm sorry the bell
won't ring, it's out of order. I can't think what's happened."

"Oh, I do hope..." from her.

"Get in," says he.

Mr. Queet steps after them and slams the door...

..."Robert, do you mind if I go to bed very soon? Won't you go down
to the _salon_ or out into the garden? Or perhaps you might smoke a
cigar on the balcony. It's lovely out there. And I like cigar smoke. I
always did. But if you'd rather..."

"No, I'll sit here."

He takes a chair and sits on the balcony. He hears her moving about in
the room, lightly, lightly, moving and rustling. Then she comes over
to him. "Good night, Robert."

"Good night." He takes her hand and kisses the palm. "Don't catch
cold."

The sky is the colour of jade. There are a great many stars; an
enormous white moon hangs over the garden. Far away lightning
flutters--flutters like a wing--flutters like a broken bird that tries
to fly and sinks again and again struggles.

The lights from the _salon_ shine across the garden path and there is
the sound of a piano. And once the American Woman, opening the French
window to let Klaymongso into the garden, cries: "Have you seen this
moon?" But nobody answers.

He gets very cold sitting there, staring at the balcony rail. Finally
he comes inside. The moon--the room is painted white with moonlight.
The light trembles in the mirrors; the two beds seem to float. She is
asleep. He sees her through the nets, half sitting, banked up with
pillows, her white hands crossed on the sheet. Her white cheeks, her
fair hair pressed against the pillow, are silvered over. He undresses
quickly, stealthily and gets into bed. Lying there, his hands clasped
behind his head...



...In his study. Late summer. The Virginia creeper just on the
turn...

"Well, my dear chap, that's the whole story. That's the long and the
short of it. If she can't cut away for the next two years and give a
decent climate a chance she don't stand a dog's--h'm--show. Better be
frank about these things." "Oh, certainly..." "And hang it all,
old man, what's to prevent you going with her? It isn't as though
you've got a regular job like us wage earners. You can do what you do
wherever you are----" "Two years." "Yes, I should give it two years.
You'll have no trouble about letting this house you know. As a matter
of fact..."

...He is with her. "Robert, the awful thing is--I suppose it's my
illness--I simply feel I could not go alone. You see--you're
everything. You're bread and wine, Robert, bread and wine. Oh, my
darling--what am I saying? Of course I could, of course I won't take
you away..."



He hears her stirring. Does she want something?

"Boogles?"

Good Lord! She is talking in her sleep. They haven't used that name
for years.

"Boogles. Are you awake?"

"Yes, do you want anything?"

"Oh, I'm going to be a bother. I'm so sorry. Do you mind? There's a
wretched mosquito inside my net--I can hear him singing. Would you
catch him? I don't want to move because of my heart."

"No, don't move. Stay where you are." He switches on the light, lifts
the net. "Where is the little beggar? Have you spotted him?"

"Yes, there, over by the corner. Oh, I do feel such a fiend to have
dragged you out of bed. Do you mind dreadfully?"

"No, of course not." For a moment he hovers in his blue and white
pyjamas. Then, "got him," he said.

"Oh, good. Was he a juicy one?"

"Beastly." He went over to the washstand and dipped his fingers in
water. "Are you all right now? Shall I switch off the light?"

"Yes, please. No. Boogles! Come back here a moment. Sit down by me.
Give me your hand." She turns his signet ring. "Why weren't you
asleep? Boogles, listen. Come closer. I sometimes wonder--do you mind
awfully being out here with me?"

He bends down. He kisses her. He tucks her in, he smoothes the pillow.

"Rot!" he whispers.




MR. REGINALD PEACOCK'S DAY

IF there was one thing that he hated more than another it was the way
she had of waking him in the morning. She did it on purpose, of
course. It was her way of establishing her grievance for the day, and
he was not going to let her know how successful it was. But really,
really, to wake a sensitive person like that was positively dangerous!
It took him hours to get over it--simply hours. She came into the room
buttoned up in an overall, with a handkerchief over her head--thereby
proving that she had been up herself and slaving since dawn--and
called in a low, warning voice: "Reginald!"

"Eh! What! What's that? What's the matter?"

"It's time to get up; it's half-past eight." And out she went,
shutting the door quietly after her, to gloat over her triumph, he
supposed.

He rolled over in the big bed, his heart still beating in quick, dull
throbs, and with every throb he felt his energy escaping him, his--his
inspiration for the day stifling under those thudding blows. It seemed
that she took a malicious delight in making life more difficult for
him than--Heaven knows--it was, by denying him his rights as an
artist, by trying to drag him down to her level. What was the matter
with her? What the hell did she want? Hadn't he three times as many
pupils now as when they were first married, earned three times as
much, paid for every stick and stone that they possessed, and now had
begun to shell out for Adrian's kindergarten?...And had he ever
reproached her for not having a penny to her name? Never a word--never
a sign! The truth was that once you married a woman she became
insatiable, and the truth was that nothing was more fatal for an
artist than marriage, at any rate until he was well over forty...Why
had he married her? He asked himself this question on an average
about three times a day, but he never could answer it satisfactorily.
She had caught him at a weak moment, when the first plunge into
reality had bewildered and overwhelmed him for a time. Looking back,
he saw a pathetic, youthful creature, half child, half wild untamed
bird, totally incompetent to cope with bills and creditors and all the
sordid details of existence. Well--she had done her best to clip his
wings, if that was any satisfaction for her, and she could
congratulate herself on the success of this early morning trick. One
ought to wake exquisitely, reluctantly, he thought, slipping down in
the warm bed. He began to imagine a series of enchanting scenes which
ended with his latest, most charming pupil putting her bare, scented
arms round his neck, and covering him with her long, perfumed hair.
"Awake, my love!"...

As was his daily habit, while the bath water ran, Reginald Peacock
tried his voice.

  When her mother tends her before the laughing mirror,
  Looping up her laces, tying up her hair,

he sang, softly at first, listening to the quality, nursing his voice
until he came to the third line:

  Often she thinks, were this wild thing wedded...

and upon the word "wedded" he burst into such a shout of triumph that
the tooth-glass on the bathroom shelf trembled and even the bath tap
seemed to gush stormy applause...

Well, there was nothing wrong with his voice, he thought, leaping into
the bath and soaping his soft, pink body all over with a loofah shaped
like a fish. He could fill Covent Garden with it! "_Wedded_," he
shouted again, seizing the towel with a magnificent operatic gesture,
and went on singing while he rubbed as though he had been Lohengrin
tipped out by an unwary Swan and drying himself in the greatest haste
before that tiresome Elsa came along along...

Back in his bedroom, he pulled the blind up with a jerk, and standing
upon the pale square of sunlight that lay upon the carpet like a sheet
of cream blotting-paper, he began to do his exercises--deep breathing,
bending forward and back, squatting like a frog and shooting out his
legs--for if there was one thing he had a horror of it was of getting
fat, and men in his profession had a dreadful tendency that way.
However, there was no sign of it at present. He was, he decided, just
right, just in good proportion. In fact, he could not help a thrill of
satisfaction when he saw himself in the glass, dressed in a morning
coat, dark grey trousers, grey socks and a black tie with a silver
thread in it. Not that he was vain--he couldn't stand vain men--no;
the sight of himself gave him a thrill of purely artistic
satisfaction. "_Voilà tout!"_ said he, passing his hand over his sleek
hair.

That little, easy French phrase blown so lightly from his lips, like a
whiff of smoke, reminded him that someone had asked him again, the
evening before, if he was English. People seemed to find it impossible
to believe that he hadn't some Southern blood. True, there was an
emotional quality in his singing that had nothing of the John Bull in
it...The door-handle rattled and turned round and round. Adrian's
head popped through.

"Please, father, mother says breakfast is quite ready, please."

"Very well," said Reginald. Then, just as Adrian disappeared:
"Adrian!"

"Yes, father."

"You haven't said 'good morning.'"

A few months ago Reginald had spent a week-end in a very aristocratic
family, where the father received his little sons in the morning and
shook hands with them. Reginald thought the practice charming, and
introduced it immediately, but Adrian felt dreadfully silly at having
to shake hands with his own father every morning. And why did his
father always sort of sing to him instead of talk?...

In excellent temper, Reginald walked into the dining-room and sat down
before a pile of letters, a copy of the _Times_, and a little covered
dish. He glanced at the letters and then at his breakfast. There were
two thin slices of bacon and one egg.

"Don't you want any bacon?" he asked.

"No, I prefer a cold baked apple. I don't feel the need of bacon every
morning."

Now, did she mean that there was no need for him to have bacon every
morning, either, and that she grudged having to cook it for him?

"If you don't want to cook the breakfast," said he, "why don't you
keep a servant? You know we can afford one, and you know how I loathe
to see my wife doing the work. Simply because all the women we have
had in the past have been failures and utterly upset my regime, and
made it almost impossible for me to have any pupils here, you've given
up trying to find a decent woman. It's not impossible to train a
servant--is it? I mean, it doesn't require genius?"

"But I prefer to do the work myself; it makes life so much more
peaceful...Run along, Adrian darling, and get ready for school."

"Oh no, that's not it!" Reginald pretended to smile. "You do the work
yourself, because, for some extraordinary reason, you love to
humiliate me. Objectively, you may not know that, but, subjectively,
it's the case." This last remark so delighted him that he cut open an
envelope as gracefully as if he had been on the stage...


"DEAR MR. PEACOCK,

I feel I cannot go to sleep until I have thanked you again for the
wonderful joy your singing gave me this evening. Quite unforgettable.
You make me wonder, as I have not wondered since I was a girl, if this
is _all._ I mean, if this ordinary world is _all._ If there is not,
perhaps, for those of us who understand, divine beauty and richness
awaiting us if we only have the _courage_ to see it. And to make it
ours...The house is so quiet. I wish you were here now that I
might thank you in person. You are doing a great thing. You are
teaching the world to escape from life!

Yours, most sincerely,
  ÆNONE FELL.

P.S.--I am in every afternoon this week..."


The letter was scrawled in violet ink on thick, handmade paper.
Vanity, that bright bird, lifted its wings again, lifted them until he
felt his breast would break.

"Oh well, don't let us quarrel," said he, and actually flung out a
hand to his wife.

But she was not great enough to respond.

"I must hurry and take Adrian to school," said she. "Your room is
quite ready for you."

Very well--very well--let there be open war between them! But he was
hanged if he'd be the first to make it up again!

He walked up and down his room, and was not calm again until he heard
the outer door close upon Adrian and his wife. Of course, if this went
on, he would have to make some other arrangement. That was obvious.
Tied and bound like this, how could he help the world to escape from
life? He opened the piano and looked up his pupils for the morning.
Miss Betty Brittle, the Countess Wilkowska and Miss Marian Morrow.
They were charming, all three.

Punctually at half-past ten the door-bell rang. He went to the door.
Miss Betty Brittle was there, dressed in white, with her music in a
blue silk case.

"I'm afraid I'm early," she said, blushing and shy, and she opened her
big blue eyes very wide. "Am I?"

"Not at all, dear lady. I am only too charmed," said Reginald. "Won't
you come in?"

"It's such a heavenly morning," said Miss Brittle. "I walked across
the Park. The flowers were too marvellous."

"Well, think about them while you sing your exercises," said Reginald,
sitting down at the piano. "It will give your voice colour and
warmth."

Oh, what an enchanting idea! What a _genius_ Mr. Peacock was. She
parted her pretty lips, and began to sing like a pansy.

"Very good, very good, indeed," said Reginald, playing chords that
would waft a hardened criminal to heaven. "Make the notes round. Don't
be afraid. Linger over them, breathe them like a perfume."

How pretty she looked, standing there in her white frock, her little
blonde head tilted, showing her milky throat.

"Do you ever practise before a glass?" asked Reginald. "You ought to,
you know; it makes the lips more flexible. Come over here."

They went over to the mirror and stood side by side.

"Now sing--moo-e-koo-e-oo-e-a!"

But she broke down, and blushed more brightly than ever.

"Oh," she cried, "I can't. It makes me feel so silly. It makes me want
to laugh. I do look so absurd!"

"No, you don't. Don't be afraid," said Reginald, but laughed, too,
very kindly. "Now, try again!"

The lesson simply flew, and Betty Brittle quite got over her shyness.

"When can I come again?" she asked, tying the music up again in the
blue silk case. "I want to take as many lessons as I can just now. Oh,
Mr. Peacock, I _do_ enjoy them so much. May I come the day after
to-morrow?"

"Dear lady, I shall be only too charmed," said Reginald, bowing her
out.

Glorious girl! And when they had stood in front of the mirror, her
white sleeve had just touched his black one. He could feel--yes, he
could actually feel a warm glowing spot, and he stroked it. She loved
her lessons. His wife came in.

"Reginald, can you let me have some money? I must pay the dairy. And
will you be in for dinner to-night?"

"Yes, you know I'm singing at Lord Timbuck's at half-past nine. Can
you make me some clear soup, with an egg in it?"

"Yes. And the money, Reginald. It's eight and sixpence."

"Surely that's very heavy--isn't it?"

"No, it's just what it ought to be. And Adrian must have milk."

There she was--off again. Now she was standing up for Adrian against
him.

"I have not the slightest desire to deny my child a proper amount of
milk," said he. "Here is ten shillings."

The door-bell rang. He went to the door.

"Oh," said the Countess Wilkowska, "the stairs. I have not a breath."
And she put her hand over her heart as she followed him into the
music-room. She was all in black, with a little black hat with a
floating veil--violets in her bosom.

"Do not make me sing exercises, to-day," she cried, throwing out her
hands in her delightful foreign way. "No, to-day, I want only to sing
songs...And may I take off my violets? They fade so soon."

"They fade so soon--they fade so soon," played Reginald on the piano.

"May I put them here?" asked the Countess, dropping them in a little
vase that stood in front of one of Reginald's photographs.

"Dear lady, I should be only too charmed!"

She began to sing, and all was well until she came to the phrase: "You
love me. Yes, I _know_ you love me!" Down dropped his hands from the
keyboard, he wheeled round, facing her.

"No, no; that's not good enough. You can do better than that," cried
Reginald ardently. "You must sing as if you were in love. Listen; let
me try and show you." And he sang.

"Oh, yes, yes. I see what you mean," stammered the little Countess.
"May I try it again?"

"Certainly. Do not be afraid. Let yourself go. Confess yourself. Make
proud surrender!" he called above the music. And she sang.

"Yes; better that time. But I still feel you are capable of more. Try
it with me. There must be a kind of exultant defiance as well--don't
you feel?" And they sang together. Ah! now she was sure she
understood. "May I try once again?"

"You love me. Yes, I _know_ you love me."

The lesson was over before that phrase was quite perfect. The little
foreign hands trembled as they put the music together.

"And you are forgetting your violets," said Reginald softly.

"Yes, I think I will forget them," said the Countess, biting her
underlip. What fascinating ways these foreign women have!

"And you will come to my house on Sunday and make music?" she asked.

"Dear lady, I shall be only too charmed!" said Reginald.

  Weep ye no more, sad fountains
  Why need ye flow so fast?

sang Miss Marian Morrow, but her eyes filled with tears and her chin
trembled.

"Don't sing just now," said Reginald. "Let me play it for you." He
played so softly.

"Is there anything the matter?" asked Reginald. "You're not quite
happy this morning."

No, she wasn't; she was awfully miserable.

"You don't care to tell me what it is?"

It really was nothing particular. She had those moods sometimes when
life seemed almost unbearable.

"Ah, I know," he said; "if I could only help!"

"But you do; you do! Oh, if it were not for my lessons I don't feel I
could go on."

"Sit down in the arm-chair and smell the violets and let me sing to
you. It will do you just as much good as a lesson."

Why weren't all men like Mr. Peacock?

"I wrote a poem after the concert last night--just about what I felt.
Of course, it wasn't _personal._ May I send it to you?"

"Dear lady, I should be only too charmed!"

By the end of the afternoon he was quite tired and lay down on a sofa
to rest his voice before dressing. The door of his room was open. He
could hear Adrian and his wife talking in the dining-room.

"Do you know what that teapot reminds me of, Mummy? It reminds me of a
little sitting-down kitten."

"Does it, Mr. Absurdity?"

Reginald dozed. The telephone bell woke him.

"Ænone Fell is speaking. Mr. Peacock, I have just heard that you are
singing at Lord Timbuck's to-night. Will you dine with me, and we can
go on together afterwards?" And the words of his reply dropped like
flowers down the telephone.

"Dear lady, I should be only too charmed."

What a triumphant evening! The little dinner _tête-à-tête_ with Ænone
Fell, the drive to Lord Timbuck's in her white motor-car, when she
thanked him again for the unforgettable joy. Triumph upon triumph! And
Lord Timbuck's champagne simply flowed.

"Have some more champagne, Peacock," said Lord Timbuck. Peacock, you
notice--not Mr. Peacock--but Peacock, as if he were one of them. And
wasn't he? He was an artist. He could sway them all. And wasn't he
teaching them all to escape from life? How he sang! And as he sang, as
in a dream he saw their feathers and their flowers and their fans,
offered to him, laid before him, like a huge bouquet.

"Have another glass of wine, Peacock."

"I could have any one I liked by lifting a finger," thought Peacock,
positively staggering home.

But as he let himself into the dark flat his marvellous sense of
elation began to ebb away. He turned up the light in the bedroom. His
wife lay asleep, squeezed over to her side of the bed. He remembered
suddenly how she had said when he had told her he was going out to
dinner: "You might have let me know before!" And how he had answered:
"Can't you possibly speak to me without offending against even good
manners?" It was incredible, he thought, that she cared so little for
him--incredible that she wasn't interested in the slightest in his
triumphs and his artistic career. When so many women in her place
would have given their eyes...Yes, he knew it...Why not
acknowledge it?...And there she lay, an enemy, even in her
sleep....Must it ever be thus? he thought, the champagne still working.
Ah, if we only were friends, how much I could tell her now! About this
evening; even about Timbuck's manner to me, and all that they said to
me and so on and so on. If only I felt that she was here to come back
to--that I could confide in her--and so on and so on.

In his emotion he pulled off his evening boot and simply hurled it in
the corner. The noise woke his wife with a terrible start. She sat up,
pushing back her hair. And he suddenly decided to have one more try to
treat her as a friend, to tell her everything, to win her. Down he sat
on the side of the bed, and seized one of her hands. But of all those
splendid things he had to say, not one could he utter. For some
fiendish reason, the only words he could get out were: "Dear lady, I
should be so charmed--so charmed!"




SUN AND MOON

IN the afternoon the chairs came, a whole big cart full of little gold
ones with their legs in the air. And then the flowers came. When you
stared down from the balcony at the people carrying them the flower
pots looked like funny awfully nice hats nodding up the path.

Moon thought they were hats. She said: "Look. There's a man wearing a
palm on his head." But she never knew the difference between real
things and not real ones.

There was nobody to look after Sun and Moon. Nurse was helping Annie
alter Mother's dress which was much-too-long-and-tight-under-the-arms
and Mother was running all over the house and telephoning Father to be
sure not to forget things. She only had time to say: "Out of my way,
children!"

They kept out of her way--at any rate Sun did. He did so hate being
sent stumping back to the nursery. It didn't matter about Moon. If she
got tangled in people's legs they only threw her up and shook her till
she squeaked. But Sun was too heavy for that. He was so heavy that the
fat man who came to dinner on Sundays used to say: "Now, young man,
let's try to lift you." And then he'd put his thumbs under Sun's arms
and groan and try and give it up at last saying: "He's a perfect
little ton of bricks!"

Nearly all the furniture was taken out of the dining-room. The big
piano was put in a corner and then there came a row of flower pots and
then there came the goldy chairs. That was for the concert. When Sun
looked in a white faced man sat at the piano--not playing, but banging
at it and then looking inside. He had a bag of tools on the piano and
he had stuck his hat on a statue against the wall. Sometimes he just
started to play and then he jumped up again and looked inside. Sun
hoped he wasn't the concert.

But of course the place to be in was the kitchen. There was a man
helping in a cap like a blancmange, and their real cook, Minnie, was
all red in the face and laughing. Not cross at all. She gave them each
an almond finger and lifted them up on to the flour bin so that they
could watch the wonderful things she and the man were making for
supper. Cook brought in the things and he put them on dishes and
trimmed them. Whole fishes, with their heads and eyes and tails still
on, he sprinkled with red and green and yellow bits; he made squiggles
all over the jellies, he stuck a collar on a ham and put a very thin
sort of a fork in it; he dotted almonds and tiny round biscuits on the
creams. And more and more things coming.

"Ah, but you haven't seen the ice pudding," said Cook. "Come along."
Why was she being so nice, thought Sun as she gave them each a hand.
And they looked into the refrigerator.

Oh! Oh! Oh! It was a little house. It was a little pink house with
white snow on the roof and green windows and a brown door and stuck in
the door there was a nut for a handle.

When Sun saw the nut he felt quite tired and had to lean against Cook.

"Let me touch it. Just let me put my finger on the roof," said Moon,
dancing. She always wanted to touch all the food. Sun didn't.

"Now, my girl, look sharp with the table," said Cook as the housemaid
came in.

"It's a picture, Min," said Nellie. "Come along and have a look." So
they all went into the dining-room. Sun and Moon were almost
frightened. They wouldn't go up to the table at first; they just stood
at the door and made eyes at it.

It wasn't real night yet but the blinds were down in the dining-room
and the lights turned on--and all the lights were red roses. Red
ribbons and bunches of roses tied up the table at the corners. In the
middle was a lake with rose petals floating on it.

"That's where the ice pudding is to be," said Cook.

Two silver lions with wings had fruit on their backs, and the salt
cellars were tiny birds drinking out of basins.

And all the winking glasses and shining plates and sparkling knives
and forks--and all the food. And the little red table napkins made
into roses...

"Are people going to eat the food?" asked Sun.

"I should just think they were," laughed Cook, laughing with Nellie.
Moon laughed, too; she always did the same as other people. But Sun
didn't want to laugh. Round and round he walked with his hands behind
his back. Perhaps he never would have stopped if Nurse hadn't called
suddenly: "Now then, children. It's high time you were washed and
dressed." And they were marched off to the nursery.

While they were being unbuttoned Mother looked in with a white thing
over her shoulders; she was rubbing stuff on her face.

"I'll ring for them when I want them, Nurse, and then they can just
come down and be seen and go back again," said she.

Sun was undressed, first nearly to his skin, and dressed again in a
white shirt with red and white daisies speckled on it, breeches with
strings at the sides and braces that came over, white socks and red
shoes.

"Now you're in your Russian costume," said Nurse, flattening down his
fringe.

"Am I?" said Sun.

"Yes. Sit quiet in that chair and watch your little sister."

Moon took ages. When she had her socks put on she pretended to fall
back on the bed and waved her legs at Nurse as she always did, and
every time Nurse tried to make her curls with a finger and a wet brush
she turned round and asked Nurse to show her the photo of her brooch
or something like that. But at last she was finished too. Her dress
stuck out, with fur on it, all white; there was even fluffy stuff on
the legs of her drawers. Her shoes were white with big blobs on them.

"There you are, my lamb," said Nurse. "And you look like a sweet
little cherub of a picture of a powder-puff?" Nurse rushed to the
door. "Ma'am, one moment."

Mother came in again with half her hair down.

"Oh," she cried. "What a picture!"

"Isn't she," said Nurse.

And Moon held out her skirts by the tips and dragged one of her feet.
Sun didn't mind people not noticing him--much...

After that they played clean tidy games up at the table while Nurse
stood at the door, and when the carriages began to come and the sound
of laughter and voices and soft rustlings came from down below she
whispered: "Now then, children, stay where you are." Moon kept jerking
the table cloth so that it all hung down her side and Sun hadn't
any--and then she pretended she didn't do it on purpose.

At last the bell rang. Nurse pounced at them with the hair brush,
flattened his fringe, made her bow stand on end and joined their hands
together.

"Down you go!" she whispered.

And down they went. Sun did feel silly holding Moon's hand like that
but Moon seemed to like it. She swung her arm and the bell on her
coral bracelet jingled.

At the drawing-room door stood Mother fanning herself with a black
fan. The drawing-room was full of sweet smelling, silky, rustling
ladies and men in black with funny tails on their coats--like beetles.
Father was among them, talking very loud, and rattling something in
his pocket.

"What a picture!" cried the ladies. "Oh, the ducks! Oh, the lambs! Oh,
the sweets! Oh, the pets!"

All the people who couldn't get at Moon kissed Sun, and a skinny old
lady with teeth that clicked said: "Such a serious little poppet," and
rapped him on the head with something hard.

Sun looked to see if the same concert was there, but he was gone.
Instead, a fat man with a pink head leaned over the piano talking to a
girl who held a violin at her ear.

There was only one man that Sun really liked. He was a little grey
man, with long grey whiskers, who walked about by himself. He came up
to Sun and rolled his eyes in a very nice way and said: "Hullo, my
lad." Then he went away. But soon he came back again and said: "Fond
of dogs?" Sun said: "Yes." But then he went away again, and though Sun
looked for him everywhere he couldn't find him. He thought perhaps
he'd gone outside to fetch in a puppy.

"Good night, my precious babies," said Mother, folding them up in her
bare arms. "Fly up to your little nest."

Then Moon went and made a silly of herself again. She put up her arms
in front of everybody and said: "My Daddy must carry me."

But they seemed to like it, and Daddy swooped down and picked her up
as he always did.

Nurse was in such a hurry to get them to bed that she even interrupted
Sun over his prayers and said: "Get on with them, child, _do._" And
the moment after they were in bed and in the dark except for the
nightlight in its little saucer.

"Are you asleep?" asked Moon.

"No," said Sun. "Are you?"

"No," said Moon.

A long while after Sun woke up again. There was a loud, loud noise of
clapping from downstairs, like when it rains. He heard Moon turn over.

"Moon, are you awake?"

"Yes, are you."

"Yes. Well, let's go and look over the stairs."

They had just got settled on the top step when the drawing-room door
opened and they heard the party cross over the hall into the
dining-room. Then that door was shut; there was a noise of "pops" and
laughing. Then that stopped and Sun saw them all walking round and
round the lovely table with their hands behind their backs like he had
done...Round and round they walked, looking and staring. The man
with the grey whiskers liked the little house best. When he saw the
nut for a handle he rolled his eyes like he did before and said to
Sun: "Seen the nut?"

"Don't nod your head like that, Moon."

"I'm not nodding. It's you."

"It is not. I never nod my head."

"O-oh, you do. You're nodding it now."

"I'm not. I'm only showing you how not to do it."

When they woke up again they could only hear Father's voice very loud,
and Mother, laughing away. Father came out of the dining-room, bounded
up the stairs, and nearly fell over them.

"Hullo!" he said. "By Jove, Kitty, come and look at this."

Mother came out. "Oh, you naughty children," said she from the hall.

"Let's have 'em down and give 'em a bone," said Father. Sun had never
seen him so jolly.

"No, certainly not," said Mother.

"Oh, my Daddy, do! Do have us down," said Moon.

"I'm hanged if I won't," cried Father. "I won't be bullied. Kitty--way
there." And he caught them up, one under each arm.

Sun thought Mother would have been dreadfully cross. But she wasn't.
She kept on laughing at Father.

"Oh, you dreadful boy!" said she. But she didn't mean Sun.

"Come on, kiddies. Come and have some pickings," said this jolly
Father. But Moon stopped a minute.

"Mother--your dress is right off one side."

"Is it?" said Mother. And Father said "Yes" and pretended to bite her
white shoulder, but she pushed him away.

And so they went back to the beautiful dining-room.

But--oh! oh! what had happened. The ribbons and the roses were all
pulled untied. The little red table napkins lay on the floor, all the
shining plates were dirty and all the winking glasses. The lovely food
that the man had trimmed was all thrown about, and there were bones
and bits and fruit peels and shells everywhere. There was even a
bottle lying down with stuff coming out of it on to the cloth and
nobody stood it up again.

And the little pink house with the snow roof and the green windows was
broken--broken--half melted away in the centre of the table.

"Come on, Sun," said Father, pretending not to notice.

Moon lifted up her pyjama legs and shuffled up to the table and stood
on a chair, squeaking away.

"Have a bit of this ice," said Father, smashing in some more of the
roof.

Mother took a little plate and held it for him; she put her other arm
round his neck.

"Daddy. Daddy," shrieked Moon. "The little handle's left. The little
nut. Kin I eat it?" And she reached across and picked it out of the
door and scrunched it up, biting hard and blinking.

"Here, my lad," said Father.

But Sun did not move from the door. Suddenly he put up his head and
gave a loud wail.

"I think it's horrid--horrid--horrid!" he sobbed.

"There, you see!" said Mother. "You see!"

"Off with you," said Father, no longer jolly. "This moment. Off you
go!"

And wailing loudly, Sun stumped off to the nursery.




FEUILLE D'ALBUM

HE really was an impossible person. Too shy altogether. With
absolutely nothing to say for himself. And such a weight. Once he was
in your studio he never knew when to go, but would sit on and on until
you nearly screamed, and burned to throw something enormous after him
when he did finally blush his way out--something like the tortoise
stove. The strange thing was that at first sight he looked most
interesting. Everybody agreed about that. You would drift into the
café one evening and there you would see, sitting in a corner, with a
glass of coffee in front of him, a thin, dark boy, wearing a blue
jersey with a little grey flannel jacket buttoned over it. And somehow
that blue jersey and the grey jacket with the sleeves that were too
short gave him the air of a boy that has made up his mind to run away
to sea. Who has run away, in fact, and will get up in a moment and
sling a knotted handkerchief containing his nightshirt and his
mother's picture on the end of a stick, and walk out into the night
and be drowned...Stumble over the wharf edge on his way to the
ship, even...He had black close-cropped hair, grey eyes with long
lashes, white cheeks and a mouth pouting as though he were determined
not to cry...How could one resist him? Oh, one's heart was wrung
at sight. And, as if that were not enough, there was his trick of
blushing...Whenever the waiter came near him he turned
crimson--he might have been just out of prison and the waiter in the
know...

"Who is he, my dear? Do you know?"

"Yes. His name is Ian French. Painter. Awfully clever, they say.
Someone started by giving him a mother's tender care. She asked him
how often he heard from home, whether he had enough blankets on his
bed, how much milk he drank a day. But when she went round to his
studio to give an eye to his socks, she rang and rang, and though she
could have sworn she heard someone breathing inside, the door was not
answered...Hopeless!"

Someone else decided that he ought to fall in love. She summoned him
to her side, called him "boy," leaned over him so that he might smell
the enchanting perfume of her hair, took his arm, told him how
marvellous life could be if one only had the courage, and went round
to his studio one evening and rang and rang...Hopeless.

"What the poor boy really wants is thoroughly rousing," said a third.
So off they went to cafés and cabarets, little dances, places where
you drank something that tasted like tinned apricot juice, but cost
twenty-seven shillings a bottle and was called champagne, other
places, too thrilling for words, where you sat in the most awful
gloom, and where some one had always been shot the night before. But
he did not turn a hair. Only once he got very drunk, but instead of
blossoming forth, there he sat, stony, with two spots of red on his
cheeks, like, my dear, yes, the dead image of that ragtime thing they
were playing, like a "Broken Doll." But when she took him back to his
studio he had quite recovered, and said "good night" to her in
the street below, as though they had walked home from church
together...Hopeless.

After heaven knows how many more attempts--for the spirit of kindness
dies very hard in women--they gave him up. Of course, they were still
perfectly charming, and asked him to their shows, and spoke to him in
the café, but that was all. When one is an artist one has no time
simply for people who won't respond. Has one?

"And besides I really think there must be something rather fishy
somewhere...don't you? It can't all be as innocent as it looks!
Why come to Paris if you want to be a daisy in the field? No, I'm not
suspicious. But----"

He lived at the top of a tall mournful building overlooking the river.
One of those buildings that look so romantic on rainy nights and
moonlight nights, when the shutters are shut, and the heavy door, and
the sign advertising "a little apartment to let immediately" gleams
forlorn beyond words. One of those buildings that smell so unromantic
all the year round, and where the concierge lives in a glass cage on
the ground floor, wrapped up in a filthy shawl, stirring something in
a saucepan and ladling out tit-bits to the swollen old dog lolling on
a bead cushion...Perched up in the air the studio had a wonderful
view. The two big windows faced the water; he could see the boats and
the barges swinging up and down, and the fringe of an island planted
with trees, like a round bouquet. The side window looked across to
another house, shabbier still and smaller, and down below there was a
flower market. You could see the tops of huge umbrellas, with frills
of bright flowers escaping from them, booths covered with striped
awning where they sold plants in boxes and clumps of wet gleaming
palms in terra-cotta jars. Among the flowers the old women scuttled
from side to side, like crabs. Really there was no need for him to go
out. If he sat at the window until his white beard fell over the sill
he still would have found something to draw...

How surprised those tender women would have been if they had managed
to force the door. For he kept his studio as neat as a pin. Everything
was arranged to form a pattern, a little "still life" as it were--the
saucepans with their lids on the wall behind the gas stove, the bowl
of eggs, milk jug and teapot on the shelf, the books and the lamp with
the crinkly paper shade on the table. An Indian curtain that had a
fringe of red leopards marching round it covered his bed by day, and
on the wall beside the bed on a level with your eyes when you were
lying down there was a small neatly printed notice: GET UP AT ONCE.

Every day was much the same. While the light was good he slaved at his
painting, then cooked his meals and tidied up the place. And in the
evenings he went off to the café, or sat at home reading or making out
the most complicated list of expenses headed: "What I ought to be able
to do it on," and ending with a sworn statement..."I swear not to
exceed this amount for next month. Signed, Ian French."

Nothing very fishy about this; but those far-seeing women were quite
right. It wasn't all.

One evening he was sitting at the side window eating some prunes and
throwing the stones on to the tops of the huge umbrellas in the
deserted flower market. It had been raining--the first real spring
rain of the year had fallen--a bright spangle hung on everything, and
the air smelled of buds and moist earth. Many voices sounding languid
and content rang out in the dusky air, and the people who had come to
close their windows and fasten the shutters leaned out instead. Down
below in the market the trees were peppered with new green. What kind
of trees were they? he wondered. And now came the lamplighter. He
stared at the house across the way, the small, shabby house, and
suddenly, as if in answer to his gaze, two wings of windows opened and
a girl came out on to the tiny balcony carrying a pot of daffodils.
She was a strangely thin girl in a dark pinafore, with a pink
handkerchief tied over her hair. Her sleeves were rolled up almost to
her shoulders and her slender arms shone against the dark stuff.

"Yes, it is quite warm enough. It will do them good," she said,
putting down the pot and turning to some one in the room inside. As
she turned she put her hands up to the handkerchief and tucked away
some wisps of hair. She looked down at the deserted market and up at
the sky, but where he sat there might have been a hollow in the air.
She simply did not see the house opposite. And then she disappeared.

His heart fell out of the side window of his studio, and down to the
balcony of the house opposite--buried itself in the pot of daffodils
under the half-opened buds and spears of green...That room with
the balcony was the sitting-room, and the one next door to it was the
kitchen. He heard the clatter of the dishes as she washed up after
supper, and then she came to the window, knocked a little mop against
the ledge, and hung it on a nail to dry. She never sang or unbraided
her hair, or held out her arms to the moon as young girls are supposed
to do. And she always wore the same dark pinafore and the pink
handkerchief over her hair...Whom did she live with? Nobody else
came to those two windows, and yet she was always talking to some one
in the room. Her mother, he decided, was an invalid. They took in
sewing. The father was dead...He had been a journalist--very
pale, with long moustaches, and a piece of black hair falling over his
forehead.

By working all day they just made enough money to live on, but they
never went out and they had no friends. Now when he sat down at his
table he had to make an entirely new set of sworn statements...Not
to go to the side window before a certain hour: signed, Ian
French. Not to think about her until he had put away his painting
things for the day: signed, Ian French.

It was quite simple. She was the only person he really wanted to know,
because she was, he decided, the only other person alive who was just
his age. He couldn't stand giggling girls, and he had no use for
grown-up women...She was his age, she was--well, just like him.
He sat in his dusky studio, tired, with one arm hanging over the back
of his chair, staring in at her window and seeing himself in there
with her. She had a violent temper; they quarrelled terribly at times,
he and she. She had a way of stamping her foot and twisting her hands
in her pinafore...furious. And she very rarely laughed. Only when
she told him about an absurd little kitten she once had who used to
roar and pretend to be a lion when it was given meat to eat. Things
like that made her laugh...But as a rule they sat together very
quietly; he, just as he was sitting now, and she with her hands folded
in her lap and her feet tucked under, talking in low tones, or silent
and tired after the day's work. Of course, she never asked him about
his pictures, and of course he made the most wonderful drawings of her
which she hated, because he made her so thin and so dark...But
how could he get to know her? This might go on for years...

Then he discovered that once a week, in the evenings, she went out
shopping. On two successive Thursdays she came to the window wearing
an old-fashioned cape over the pinafore, and carrying a basket. From
where he sat he could not see the door of her house, but on the next
Thursday evening at the same time he snatched up his cap and ran down
the stairs. There was a lovely pink light over everything. He saw it
glowing in the river, and the people walking towards him had pink
faces and pink hands.

He leaned against the side of his house waiting for her and he had no
idea of what he was going to do or say. "Here she comes," said a voice
in his head. She walked very quickly, with small, light steps; with
one hand she carried the basket, with the other she kept the cape
together...What could he do? He could only follow...First
she went into the grocer's and spent a long time in there, and then
she went into the butcher's where she had to wait her turn. Then she
was an age at the draper's matching something, and then she went to
the fruit shop and bought a lemon. As he watched her he knew more
surely than ever he must get to know her, now. Her composure, her
seriousness and her loneliness, the very way she walked as though she
was eager to be done with this world of grown-ups all was so natural
to him and so inevitable.

"Yes, she is always like that," he thought proudly. "We have nothing
to do with these people."

But now she was on her way home and he was as far off as ever...She
suddenly turned into the dairy and he saw her through the window
buying an egg. She picked it out of the basket with such care--a brown
one, a beautifully shaped one, the one he would have chosen. And when
she came out of the dairy he went in after her. In a moment he was out
again, and following her past his house across the flower market,
dodging among the huge umbrellas and treading on the fallen flowers
and the round marks where the pots had stood...Through her door
he crept, and up the stairs after, taking care to tread in time with
her so that she should not notice. Finally, she stopped on the
landing, and took the key out of her purse. As she put it into the
door he ran up and faced her.

Blushing more crimson than ever, but looking at her severely he said,
almost angrily: "Excuse me, Mademoiselle, you dropped this."

And he handed her an egg.




A DILL PICKLE

AND then, after six years, she saw him again. He was seated at one of
those little bamboo tables decorated with a Japanese vase of paper
daffodils. There was a tall plate of fruit in front of him, and very
carefully, in a way she recognized immediately as his "special" way,
he was peeling an orange.

He must have felt that shock of recognition in her for he looked up
and met her eyes. Incredible! He didn't know her! She smiled; he
frowned. She came towards him. He closed his eyes an instant, but
opening them his face lit up as though he had struck a match in a dark
room. He laid down the orange and pushed back his chair, and she took
her little warm hand out of her muff and gave it to him.

"Vera!" he exclaimed. "How strange. Really, for a moment I didn't know
you. Won't you sit down? You've had lunch? Won't you have some
coffee?"

She hesitated, but of course she meant to.

"Yes, I'd like some coffee." And she sat down opposite him.

"You've changed. You've changed very much," he said, staring at her
with that eager, lighted look. "You look so well. I've never seen you
look so well before."

"Really?" She raised her veil and unbuttoned her high fur collar. "I
don't feel very well. I can't bear this weather, you know."

"Ah, no. You hate the cold..."

"Loathe it." She shuddered. "And the worst of it is that the older one
grows..."

He interrupted her. "Excuse me," and tapped on the table for the
waitress. "Please bring some coffee and cream." To her: "You are sure
you won't eat anything? Some fruit, perhaps. The fruit here is very
good."

"No, thanks. Nothing."

"Then that's settled." And smiling just a hint too broadly he took up
the orange again. "You were saying--the older one grows----"

"The colder," she laughed. But she was thinking how well she
remembered that trick of his--the trick of interrupting her--and of
how it used to exasperate her six years ago. She used to feel then as
though he, quite suddenly, in the middle of what she was saying, put
his hand over her lips, turned from her, attended to something
different, and then took his hand away, and with just the same
slightly too broad smile, gave her his attention again...Now we
are ready. That is settled.

"The colder!" He echoed her words, laughing too. "Ah, ah. You still
say the same things. And there is another thing about you that is not
changed at all--your beautiful voice--your beautiful way of speaking."
Now he was very grave; he leaned towards her, and she smelled the
warm, stinging scent of the orange peel. "You have only to say one
word and I would know your voice among all other voices. I don't know
what it is--I've often wondered--that makes your voice such
a--haunting memory.  Do you remember that first afternoon we spent
together at Kew Gardens? You were so surprised because I did not know
the names of any flowers. I am still just as ignorant for all your
telling me. But whenever it is very fine and warm, and I see some
bright colours--it's awfully strange--I hear your voice saying:
'Geranium, marigold and verbena.' And I feel those three words are all
I recall of some forgotten, heavenly language...You remember that
afternoon?"

"Oh, yes, very well." She drew a long, soft breath, as though the
paper daffodils between them were almost too sweet to bear. Yet, what
had remained in her mind of that particular afternoon was an absurd
scene over the tea table. A great many people taking tea in a Chinese
pagoda, and he behaving like a maniac about the wasps--waving them
away, flapping at them with his straw hat, serious and infuriated out
of all proportion to the occasion. How delighted the sniggering tea
drinkers had been. And how she had suffered.

But now, as he spoke, that memory faded. His was the truer. Yes, it
had been a wonderful afternoon, full of geranium and marigold and
verbena, and--warm sunshine. Her thoughts lingered over the last two
words as though she sang them.

In the warmth, as it were, another memory unfolded. She saw herself
sitting on a lawn. He lay beside her, and suddenly, after a long
silence, he rolled over and put his head in her lap.

"I wish," he said, in a low, troubled voice, "I wish that I had taken
poison and were about to die--here now!"

At that moment a little girl in a white dress, holding a long,
dripping water lily, dodged from behind a bush, stared at them, and
dodged back again. But he did not see. She leaned over him.

"Ah, why do you say that? I could not say that."

But he gave a kind of soft moan, and taking her hand he held it to his
cheek.

"Because I know I am going to love you too much--far too much. And I
shall suffer so terribly. Vera, because you never, never will love
me."

He was certainly far better looking now than he had been then. He had
lost all that dreamy vagueness and indecision. Now he had the air of a
man who has found his place in life, and fills it with a confidence
and an assurance which was, to say the least, impressive. He must have
made money, too. His clothes were admirable, and at that moment he
pulled a Russian cigarette case out of his pocket.

"Won't you smoke?"

"Yes, I will." She hovered over them. "They look very good."

"I think they are. I get them made for me by a little man in St.
James's Street. I don't smoke very much. I'm not like you--but when I
do, they must be delicious, very fresh cigarettes. Smoking isn't a
habit with me; it's a luxury--like perfume. Are you still so fond of
perfumes? Ah, when I was in Russia..."

She broke in: "You've really been to Russia?"

"Oh, yes. I was there for over a year. Have you forgotten how we used
to talk of going there?"

"No, I've not forgotten."

He gave a strange half laugh and leaned back in his chair. "Isn't it
curious. I have really carried out all those journeys that we planned.
Yes, I have been to all those places that we talked of, and stayed in
them long enough to--as you used to say, 'air oneself' in them. In
fact, I have spent the last three years of my life travelling all the
time. Spain, Corsica, Siberia, Russia, Egypt. The only country left is
China, and I mean to go there, too, when the war is over."

As he spoke, so lightly, tapping the end of his cigarette against the
ash-tray, she felt the strange beast that had slumbered so long within
her bosom stir, stretch itself, yawn, prick up its ears, and suddenly
bound to its feet, and fix its longing, hungry stare upon those far
away places. But all she said was, smiling gently: "How I envy you."

He accepted that. "It has been," he said, "very wonderful--especially
Russia. Russia was all that we had imagined, and far, far more. I even
spent some days on a river boat on the Volga. Do you remember that
boatman's song that you used to play?"

"Yes." It began to play in her mind as she spoke.

"Do you ever play it now?"

"No, I've no piano."

He was amazed at that. "But what has become of your beautiful piano?"

She made a little grimace. "Sold. Ages ago."

"But you were so fond of music," he wondered.

"I've no time for it now," said she.

He let it go at that. "That river life," he went on, "is something
quite special. After a day or two you cannot realize that you have
ever known another. And it is not necessary to know the language--the
life of the boat creates a bond between you and the people that's more
than sufficient. You eat with them, pass the day with them, and in the
evening there is that endless singing."

She shivered, hearing the boatman's song break out again loud and
tragic, and seeing the boat floating on the darkening river with
melancholy trees on either side..."Yes, I should like that," said
she, stroking her muff.

"You'd like almost everything about Russian life," he said warmly.
"It's so informal, so impulsive, so free without question. And then
the peasants are so splendid. They are such human beings--yes, that is
it. Even the man who drives your carriage has--has some real part in
what is happening. I remember the evening a party of us, two friends
of mine and the wife of one of them, went for a picnic by the Black
Sea. We took supper and champagne and ate and drank on the grass. And
while we were eating the coachman came up. 'Have a dill pickle,' he
said. He wanted to share with us. That seemed to me so right, so--you
know what I mean?"

And she seemed at that moment to be sitting on the grass beside the
mysteriously Black Sea, black as velvet, and rippling against the
banks in silent, velvet waves. She saw the carriage drawn up to one
side of the road, and the little group on the grass, their faces and
hands white in the moonlight. She saw the pale dress of the woman
outspread and her folded parasol, lying on the grass like a huge pearl
crochet hook. Apart from them, with his supper in a cloth on his
knees, sat the coachman. "Have a dill pickle," said he, and although
she was not certain what a dill pickle was, she saw the greenish glass
jar with a red chili like a parrot's beak glimmering through. She
sucked in her cheeks; the dill pickle was terribly sour...

"Yes, I know perfectly what you mean," she said.

In the pause that followed they looked at each other. In the past when
they had looked at each other like that they had felt such a boundless
understanding between them that their souls had, as it were, put their
arms round each other and dropped into the same sea, content to be
drowned, like mournful lovers. But now, the surprising thing was that
it was he who held back. He who said:

"What a marvellous listener you are. When you look at me with those
wild eyes I feel that I could tell you things that I would never
breathe to another human being."

Was there just a hint of mockery in his voice or was it her fancy? She
could not be sure.

"Before I met you," he said, "I had never spoken of myself to anybody.
How well I remember one night, the night that I brought you the little
Christmas tree, telling you all about my childhood. And of how I was
so miserable that I ran away and lived under a cart in our yard for
two days without being discovered. And you listened, and your eyes
shone, and I felt that you had even made the little Christmas tree
listen too, as in a fairy story."

But of that evening she had remembered a little pot of caviare. It had
cost seven and sixpence. He could not get over it. Think of it--a tiny
jar like that costing seven and sixpence. While she ate it he watched
her, delighted and shocked.

"No, really, that is eating money. You could not get seven shillings
into a little pot that size. Only think of the profit they must make..."
And he had begun some immensely complicated calculations...But now
good-bye to the caviare. The Christmas tree was on the table, and the
little boy lay under the cart with his head pillowed on the yard dog.

"The dog was called Bosun," she cried delightedly.

But he did not follow. "Which dog? Had you a dog? I don't remember a
dog at all."

"No, no. I mean the yard dog when you were a little boy." He laughed
and snapped the cigarette case to.

"Was he? Do you know I had forgotten that. It seems such ages ago. I
cannot believe that it is only six years. After I had recognized you
to-day--I had to take such a leap--I had to take a leap over my whole
life to get back to that time. I was such a kid then." He drummed on
the table. "I've often thought how I must have bored you. And now I
understand so perfectly why you wrote to me as you did--although at
the time that letter nearly finished my life. I found it again the
other day, and I couldn't help laughing as I read it. It was so
clever--such a true picture of me." He glanced up. "You're not going?"

She had buttoned her collar again and drawn down her veil.

"Yes, I am afraid I must," she said, and managed a smile. Now she knew
that he had been mocking.

"Ah, no, please," he pleaded. "Don't go just for a moment," and he
caught up one of her gloves from the table and clutched at it as if
that would hold her. "I see so few people to talk to nowadays, that I
have turned into a sort of barbarian," he said. "Have I said something
to hurt you?"

"Not a bit," she lied. But as she watched him draw her glove through
his fingers, gently, gently, her anger really did die down, and
besides, at the moment he looked more like himself of six years ago...

"What I really wanted then," he said softly, "was to be a sort of
carpet--to make myself into a sort of carpet for you to walk on so
that you need not be hurt by the sharp stones and the mud that you
hated so. It was nothing more positive than that--nothing more
selfish. Only I did desire, eventually, to turn into a magic carpet
and carry you away to all those lands you longed to see."

As he spoke she lifted her head as though she drank something; the
strange beast in her bosom began to purr...

"I felt that you were more lonely than anybody else in the world," he
went on, "and yet, perhaps, that you were the only person in the world
who was really, truly alive. Born out of your time," he murmured,
stroking the glove, "fated."

Ah, God! What had she done! How had she dared to throw away her
happiness like this. This was the only man who had ever understood
her. Was it too late? Could it be too late? _She_ was that glove that
he held in his fingers...

"And then the fact that you had no friends and never had made friends
with people. How I understood that, for neither had I. Is it just the
same now?"

"Yes," she breathed. "Just the same. I am as alone as ever."

"So am I," he laughed gently, "just the same."

Suddenly with a quick gesture he handed her back the glove and scraped
his chair on the floor, "But what seemed to me so mysterious then is
perfectly plain to me now. And to you, too, of course...It simply
was that we were such egoists, so self-engrossed, so wrapped up in
ourselves that we hadn't a corner in our hearts for anybody else. Do
you know," he cried, naive and hearty, and dreadfully like another
side of that old self again, "I began studying a Mind System when I
was in Russia, and I found that we were not peculiar at all. It's
quite a well known form of..."

She had gone. He sat there, thunder-struck, astounded beyond
words....And then he asked the waitress for his bill.

"But the cream has not been touched," he said. "Please do not charge
me for it."




THE LITTLE GOVERNESS

OH, dear, how she wished that it wasn't night-time. She'd have much
rather travelled by day, much much rather. But the lady at the
Governess Bureau had said: "You had better take an evening boat and
then if you get into a compartment for 'Ladies Only' in the train you
will be far safer than sleeping in a foreign hotel. Don't go out of
the carriage; don't walk about the corridors and _be sure_ to lock the
lavatory door if you go there. The train arrives at Munich at eight
o'clock, and Frau Arnholdt says that the Hotel Grunewald is only one
minute away. A porter can take you there. She will arrive at six the
same evening, so you will have a nice quiet day to rest after the
journey and rub up your German. And when you want anything to eat I
would advise you to pop into the nearest baker's and get a bun and
some coffee. You haven't been abroad before, have you?" "No." "Well, I
always tell my girls that it's better to mistrust people at first
rather than trust them, and it's safer to suspect people of evil
intentions rather than good ones...It sounds rather hard but
we've got to be women of the world, haven't we?"

It had been nice in the Ladies' Cabin. The stewardess was so kind and
changed her money for her and tucked up her feet. She lay on one of
the hard pink-sprigged couches and watched the other passengers,
friendly and natural, pinning their hats to the bolsters, taking off
their boots and skirts, opening dressing-cases and arranging
mysterious rustling little packages, tying their heads up in veils
before lying down. _Thud_, _thud_, _thud_, went the steady screw of
the steamer. The stewardess pulled a green shade over the light and
sat down by the stove, her skirt turned back over her knees, a long
piece of knitting on her lap. On a shelf above her head there was a
water-bottle with a tight bunch of flowers stuck in it. "I like
travelling very much," thought the little governess. She smiled and
yielded to the warm rocking.

But when the boat stopped and she went up on deck, her dress-basket in
one hand, her rug and umbrella in the other, a cold, strange wind flew
under her hat. She looked up at the masts and spars of the ship black
against a green glittering sky and down to the dark landing stage
where strange muffled figures lounged, waiting; she moved forward with
the sleepy flock, all knowing where to go to and what to do except
her, and she felt afraid. Just a little--just enough to wish--oh, to
wish that it was daytime and that one of those women who had smiled at
her in the glass, when they both did their hair in the Ladies' Cabin,
was somewhere near now. "Tickets, please. Show your tickets. Have your
tickets ready." She went down the gangway balancing herself carefully
on her heels. Then a man in a black leather cap came forward and
touched her on the arm. "Where for, Miss?" He spoke English--he must
be a guard or a stationmaster with a cap like that. She had scarcely
answered when he pounced on her dress-basket. "This way," he shouted,
in a rude, determined voice, and elbowing his way he strode past the
people. "But I don't want a porter." What a horrible man! "I don't
want a porter. I want to carry it myself." She had to run to keep up
with him, and her anger, far stronger than she, ran before her and
snatched the bag out of the wretch's hand. He paid no attention at
all, but swung on down the long dark platform, and across a railway
line. "He is a robber." She was sure he was a robber as she stepped
between the silvery rails and felt the cinders crunch under her shoes.
On the other side--oh, thank goodness!--there was a train with Munich
written on it. The man stopped by the huge lighted carriages. "Second
class?" asked the insolent voice. "Yes, a Ladies' compartment." She
was quite out of breath. She opened her little purse to find something
small enough to give this horrible man while he tossed her dress-basket
into the rack of an empty carriage that had a ticket, _Dames
Seules_, gummed on window. She got into the train and handed twenty
centimes. "What's this?" shouted the man, glaring at the money and
then at her, holding it up to his nose, sniffing at it as though he
had never in his life seen, much less held, such a sum. "It's a franc.
You know that, don't you? It's a franc. That's my fare!" A franc! Did
he imagine that she was going to give him a franc for playing a trick
like that just because she was a girl and travelling alone at night?
Never, never! She squeezed her purse in her hand and simply did not
see him--she looked at a view of St. Malo on the wall opposite and
simply did not hear him. "Ah, no. Ah, no. Four sous. You make a
mistake. Here, take it. It's a franc I want." He leapt on to the step
of the train and threw the money on to her lap. Trembling with terror
she screwed herself tight, tight, and put out an icy hand and took the
money--stowed it away in her hand. "That's all you're going to get,"
she said. For a minute or two she felt his sharp eyes pricking her all
over, while he nodded slowly, pulling down his mouth: "Ve-ry well.
_Trrrès bien._" He shrugged his shoulders and disappeared into the
dark. Oh, the relief! How simply terrible that had been! As she stood
up to feel if the dress-basket was firm she caught sight of herself in
the mirror, quite white, with big round eyes. She untied her "motor
veil" and unbuttoned her green cape. "But it's all over now," she said
to the mirror face, feeling in some way that it was more frightened
than she.

People began to assemble on the platform. They stood together in
little groups talking; a strange light from the station lamps painted
their faces almost green. A little boy in red clattered up with a huge
tea wagon and leaned against it, whistling and flicking his boots with
a serviette. A woman in a black alpaca apron pushed a barrow with
pillows for hire. Dreamy and vacant she looked--like a woman wheeling
a perambulator--up and down, up and down--with a sleeping baby inside
it. Wreaths of white smoke floated up from somewhere and hung below
the roof like misty vines. "How strange it all is," thought the little
governess, "and the middle of the night, too." She looked out from her
safe corner, frightened no longer but proud that she had not given
that franc. "I can look after myself--of course I can. The great thing
is not to----" Suddenly from the corridor there came a stamping of
feet and men's voices, high and broken with snatches of loud laughter.
They were coming her way. The little governess shrank into her corner
as four young men in bowler hats passed, staring through the door and
window. One of them, bursting with the joke, pointed to the notice
_Dames Seules_ and the four bent down the better to see the one little
girl in the corner. Oh dear, they were in the carriage next door. She
heard them tramping about and then a sudden hush followed by a tall
thin fellow with a tiny black moustache who flung her door open. "If
mademoiselle cares to come in with us," he said, in French. She saw
the others crowding behind him, peeping under his arm and over his
shoulder, and she sat very straight and still. "If mademoiselle will
do us the honour," mocked the tall man. One of them could be quiet no
longer; his laughter went off in a loud crack. "Mademoiselle is
serious," persisted the young man, bowing and grimacing. He took off
his hat with a flourish, and she was alone again.

"_En voiture. En voi-ture!_" Some one ran up and down beside the
train. "I wish it wasn't night-time. I wish there was another woman in
the carriage. I'm frightened of the men next door." The little
governess looked out to see her porter coming back again--the same man
making for her carriage with his arms full of luggage. But--but what
_was_ he doing? He put his thumb nail under the label _Dames Seules_
and tore it right off and then stood aside squinting at her while an
old man wrapped in a plaid cape climbed up the high step. "But this is
a ladies' compartment." "Oh, no, Mademoiselle, you make a mistake. No,
no, I assure you. Merci, Monsieur." "_En voi-turre!_" A shrill
whistle. The porter stepped off triumphant and the train started. For
a moment or two big tears brimmed her eyes and through them she saw
the old man unwinding a scarf from his neck and untying the flaps of
his Jaeger cap. He looked very old. Ninety at least. He had a white
moustache and big gold-rimmed spectacles with little blue eyes behind
them and pink wrinkled cheeks. A nice face--and charming the way he
bent forward and said in halting French: "Do I disturb you,
Mademoiselle? Would you rather I took all these things out of the rack
and found another carriage?" What! that old man have to move all those
heavy things just because she..."No, it's quite all right. You
don't disturb me at all." "Ah, a thousand thanks." He sat down
opposite her and unbuttoned the cape of his enormous coat and flung it
off his shoulders.

The train seemed glad to have left the station. With a long leap it
sprang into the dark. She rubbed a place in the window with her glove
but she could see nothing--just a tree outspread like a black fan or a
scatter of lights, or the line of a hill, solemn and huge. In the
carriage next door the young men started singing "_Un, deux, trois._"
They sang the same song over and over at the tops of their voices.

"I never could have dared to go to sleep if I had been alone," she
decided. "_I couldn't_ have put my feet up or even taken off my hat."
The singing gave her a queer little tremble in her stomach and,
hugging herself to stop it, with her arms crossed under her cape, she
felt really glad to have the old man in the carriage with her. Careful
to see that he was not looking she peeped at him through her long
lashes. He sat extremely upright, the chest thrown out, the chin well
in, knees pressed together, reading a German paper. That was why he
spoke French so funnily. He was a German. Something in the army, she
supposed--a Colonel or a General--once, of course, not now; he was too
old for that now. How spick and span he looked for an old man. He wore
a pearl pin stuck in his black tie and a ring with a dark red stone on
his little finger; the tip of a white silk handkerchief showed in the
pocket of his double-breasted jacket. Somehow, altogether, he was
really nice to look at. Most old men were so horrid. She couldn't bear
them doddery--or they had a disgusting cough or something. But not
having a beard--that made all the difference--and then his cheeks were
so pink and his moustache so very white. Down went the German paper
and the old man leaned forward with the same delightful courtesy: "Do
you speak German, Mademoiselle?" "_Ja, ein wenig, mehr als
Franzosisch_," said the little governess, blushing a deep pink colour
that spread slowly over her cheeks and made her blue eyes look almost
black. "Ach, so!" The old man bowed graciously. "Then perhaps you
would care to look at some illustrated papers." He slipped a rubber
band from a little roll of them and handed them across. "Thank you
very much." She was very fond of looking at pictures, but first she
would take off her hat and gloves. So she stood up, unpinned the brown
straw and put it neatly in the rack beside the dress-basket, stripped
off her brown kid gloves, paired them in a tight roll and put them in
the crown of the hat for safety, and then sat down again, more
comfortably this time, her feet crossed, the papers on her lap. How
kindly the old man in the corner watched her bare little hand turning
over the big white pages, watched her lips moving as she pronounced
the long words to herself, rested upon her hair that fairly blazed
under the light. Alas! how tragic for a little governess to possess
hair that made one think of tangerines and marigolds, of apricots and
tortoiseshell cats and champagne! Perhaps that was what the old man
was thinking as he gazed and gazed, and that not even the dark ugly
clothes could disguise her soft beauty. Perhaps the flush that licked
his cheeks and lips was a flush of rage that anyone so young and
tender should have to travel alone and unprotected through the night.
Who knows he was not murmuring in his sentimental German fashion:
"_Ja, es ist eine Tragoedie!_ Would to God I were the child's
grandpapa!"

"Thank you very much. They were very interesting." She smiled prettily
handing back the papers. "But you speak German extremely well," said
the old man. "You have been in Germany before, of course?" "Oh no,
this is the first time"--a little pause, then--"this is the first time
that I have ever been abroad at all." "Really! I am surprised. You
gave me the impression, if I may say so, that you were accustomed to
travelling." "Oh, well--I have been about a good deal in England, and
to Scotland, once." "So. I myself have been in England once, but I
could not learn English." He raised one hand and shook his head,
laughing. "No, it was too difficult for me...'Ow-do-you-do.
Please vich is ze vay to Leicestaire Squaare.'" She laughed too.
"Foreigners always say..." They had quite a little talk about it.
"But you will like Munich," said the old man. "Munich is a wonderful
city. Museums, pictures, galleries, fine buildings and shops,
concerts, theatres, restaurants--all are in Munich. I have travelled
all over Europe many, many times in my life, but it is always to
Munich that I return. You will enjoy yourself there." "I am not going
to _stay_ in Munich," said the little governess, and she added shyly,
"I am going to a post as governess to a doctor's family in Augsburg."
"Ah, that was it." Augsburg he knew. Augsburg--well--was not
beautiful. A solid manufacturing town. But if Germany was new to her
he hoped she would find something interesting there too. "I am sure I
shall." "But what a pity not to see Munich before you go. You ought to
take a little holiday on your way"--he smiled--"and store up some
pleasant memories." "I am afraid I could not do _that_," said the
little governess, shaking her head, suddenly important and serious.
"And also, if one is alone..." He quite understood. He bowed,
serious too. They were silent after that. The train shattered on,
baring its dark, flaming breast to the hills and to the valleys. It
was warm in the carriage. She seemed to lean against the dark rushing
and to be carried away and away. Little sounds made themselves heard;
steps in the corridor, doors opening and shutting--a murmur of
voices--whistling...Then the window was pricked with long needles
of rain...But it did not matter...it was outside...and
she had her umbrella...she pouted, sighed, opened and shut her
hands once and fell fast asleep.



"Pardon! Pardon!" The sliding back of the carriage door woke her with
a start. What had happened? Some one had come in and gone out again.
The old man sat in his corner, more upright than ever, his hands in
the pockets of his coat, frowning heavily. "Ha! ha! ha!" came from the
carriage next door. Still half asleep, she put her hands to her hair
to make sure it wasn't a dream. "Disgraceful!" muttered the old man
more to himself than to her. "Common, vulgar fellows! I am afraid they
disturbed you, gracious Fräulein, blundering in here like that." No,
not really. She was just going to wake up, and she took out silver
watch to look at the time. Half-past four. A cold blue light filled
the window panes. Now when she rubbed a place she could see bright
patches of fields, a clump of white houses like mushrooms, a road
"like a picture" with poplar trees on either side, a thread of river.
How pretty it was! How pretty and how different! Even those pink
clouds in the sky looked foreign. It was cold, but she pretended that
it was far colder and rubbed her hands together and shivered, pulling
at the collar of her coat because she was so happy.

The train began to slow down. The engine gave a long shrill whistle.
They were coming to a town. Taller houses, pink and yellow, glided by,
fast asleep behind their green eyelids, and guarded by the poplar
trees that quivered in the blue air as if on tiptoe, listening. In one
house a woman opened the shutters, flung a red and white mattress
across the window frame and stood staring at the train. A pale woman
with black hair and a white woollen shawl over her shoulders. More
women appeared at the doors and at the windows of the sleeping houses.
There came a flock of sheep. The shepherd wore a blue blouse and
pointed wooden shoes. Look! look what flowers--and by the railway
station too! Standard roses like bridesmaids' bouquets, white
geraniums, waxy pink ones that you would _never_ see out of a
greenhouse at home. Slower and slower. A man with a watering-can was
spraying the platform. "A-a-a-ah!" Somebody came running and waving
his arms. A huge fat woman waddled through the glass doors of the
station with a tray of strawberries. Oh, she was thirsty! She was very
thirsty! "A-a-a-ah!" The same somebody ran back again. The train
stopped.

The old man pulled his coat round him and got up, smiling at her. He
murmured something she didn't quite catch, but she smiled back at him
as he left the carriage. While he was away the little governess looked
at herself again in the glass, shook and patted herself with the
precise practical care of a girl who is old enough to travel by
herself and has nobody else to assure her that she is "quite all right
behind." Thirsty and thirsty! The air tasted of water. She let down
the window and the fat woman with the strawberries passed as if on
purpose; holding up the tray to her. "_Nein, danke,_" said the little
governess, looking at the big berries on their gleaming leaves. "_Wie
viel?_" she asked as the fat woman moved away. "Two marks fifty,
Fräulein." "Good gracious!" She came in from the window and sat down
in the corner, very sobered for a minute. Half a crown!
"H-o-o-o-o-o-e-e-e!" shrieked the train, gathering itself together to
be off again. She hoped the old man wouldn't be left behind. Oh, it
was daylight--everything was lovely if only she hadn't been so
thirsty. Where _was_ the old man--oh, here he was--she dimpled at him
as though he were an old accepted friend as he closed the door and,
turning, took from under his cape a basket of the strawberries. "If
Fräulein would honour me by accepting these..." "What for me?" But
she drew back and raised her hands as though he were about to put a
wild little kitten on her lap.

"Certainly, for you," said the old man. "For myself it is twenty years
since I was brave enough to eat strawberries." "Oh, thank you very
much. _Danke bestens_," she stammered, "_sie sind so sehr schön!_"
"Eat them and see," said the old man looking pleased and friendly.
"You won't have even one?" "No, no, no." Timidly and charmingly her
hand hovered. They were so big and juicy she had to take two bites to
them--the juice ran all down her fingers--and it was while she munched
the berries that she first thought of the old man as a grandfather.
What a perfect grandfather he would make! Just like one out of a book!

The sun came out, the pink clouds in the sky, the strawberry clouds
were eaten by the blue. "Are they good?" asked the old man. "As good
as they look?"

When she had eaten them she felt she had known him for years. She told
him about Frau Arnholdt and how she had got the place. Did he know the
Hotel Grunewald? Frau Arnholdt would not arrive until the evening. He
listened, listened until he knew as much about the affair as she did,
until he said--not looking at her--but smoothing the palms of his
brown suède gloves together: "I wonder if you would let me show you a
little of Munich to-day. Nothing much--but just perhaps a picture
gallery and the Englischer Garten. It seems such a pity that you
should have to spend the day at the hotel, and also a little
uncomfortable...in a strange place. _Nicht wahr?_ You would be
back there by the early afternoon or whenever you wish, of course, and
you would give an old man a great deal of pleasure."

It was not until long after she had said "Yes"--because the moment she
had said it and he had thanked her he began telling her about his
travels in Turkey and attar of roses--that she wondered whether she
had done wrong. After all, she really did not know him. But he was so
old and he had been so very kind--not to mention the strawberries...And
she couldn't have explained the reason why she said "No,"
and it was her _last_ day in a way, her last day to really enjoy
herself in. "Was I wrong? Was I?" A drop of sunlight fell into her
hands and lay there, warm and quivering. "If I might accompany you as
far as the hotel," he suggested, "and call for you again at about ten
o'clock." He took out his pocket-book and handed her a card. "Herr
Regierungsrat..." He had a title! Well, it was _bound_ to be all
right! So after that the little governess gave herself up to the
excitement of being really abroad, to looking out and reading the
foreign advertisement signs, to being told about the places they came
to--having her attention and enjoyment looked after by the charming
old grandfather--until they reached Munich and the Hauptbahnhof.
"Porter! Porter!" He found her a porter, disposed of his own luggage
in a few words, guided her through the bewildering crowd out of the
station down the clean white steps into the white road to the hotel.
He explained who she was to the manager as though all this had been
bound to happen, and then for one moment her little hand lost itself
in the big brown suède ones. "I will call for you at ten o'clock." He
was gone.

"This way, Fräulein," said a waiter, who had been dodging behind the
manager's back, all eyes and ears for the strange couple. She followed
him up two flights of stairs into a dark bedroom. He dashed down her
dress-basket and pulled up a clattering, dusty blind. Ugh! what an
ugly, cold room--what enormous furniture! Fancy spending the day in
here! "Is this the room Frau Arnholdt ordered?" asked the little
governess. The waiter had a curious way of staring as if there was
something _funny_ about her. He pursed up his lips about to whistle,
and then changed his mind. "_Gewiss_," he said. Well, why didn't he
go? Why did he stare so? "_Gehen Sie,_" said the little governess,
with frigid English simplicity. His little eyes, like currants, nearly
popped out of his doughy cheeks. "_Gehen Sie sofort,_" she repeated
icily. At the door he turned. "And the gentleman," said he, "shall I
show the gentleman upstairs when he comes?"



Over the white streets big white clouds fringed with silver--and
sunshine everywhere. Fat, fat coachmen driving fat cabs; funny women
with little round hats cleaning the tramway lines; people laughing and
pushing against one another; trees on both sides of the streets and
everywhere you looked almost, immense fountains; a noise of laughing
from the footpaths or the middle of the streets or the open windows.
And beside her, more beautifully brushed than ever, with a rolled
umbrella in one hand and yellow gloves instead of brown ones, her
grandfather who had asked her to spend the day. She wanted to run, she
wanted to hang on his arm, she wanted to cry every minute, "Oh, I am
so frightfully happy!" He guided her across the roads, stood still
while she "looked," and his kind eyes beamed on her and he said "just
whatever you wish." She ate two white sausages and two little rolls of
fresh bread at eleven o'clock in the morning and she drank some beer,
which he told her wasn't intoxicating, wasn't at all like English
beer, out of a glass like a flower vase. And then they took a cab and
really she must have seen thousands and thousands of wonderful
classical pictures in about a quarter of an hour! "I shall have to
think them over when I am alone."...But when they came out of the
picture gallery it was raining. The grandfather unfurled his umbrella
and held it over the little governess. They started to walk to the
restaurant for lunch. She, very close beside him so that he should
have some of the umbrella, too. "It goes easier," he remarked in a
detached way, "if you take my arm, Fräulein. And besides it is the
custom in Germany." So she took his arm and walked beside him while he
pointed out the famous statues, so interested that he quite forgot to
put down the umbrella even when the rain was long over.

After lunch they went to a café to hear a gipsy band, but she did not
like that at all. Ugh! such horrible men where there with heads like
eggs and cuts on their faces, so she turned her chair and cupped her
burning cheeks in her hands and watched her old friend instead...Then
they went to the Englischer Garten.

"I wonder what the time is," asked the little governess. "My watch has
stopped. I forgot to wind it in the train last night. We've seen such
a lot of things that I feel it must be quite late." "Late!" He stopped
in front of her laughing and shaking his head in a way she had begun
to know. "Then you have not really enjoyed yourself. Late! Why, we
have not had any ice cream yet!" "Oh, but I have enjoyed myself," she
cried, distressed, "more than I can possibly say. It has been
wonderful! Only Frau Arnholdt is to be at the hotel at six and I ought
to be there by five." "So you shall. After the ice cream I shall put
you into a cab and you can go there comfortably." She was happy again.
The chocolate ice cream melted--melted in little sips a long way down.
The shadows of the trees danced on the table cloths, and she sat with
her back safely turned to the ornamental clock that pointed to
twenty-five minutes to seven. "Really and truly," said the little
governess earnestly, "this has been the happiest day of my life. I've
never even imagined such a day." In spite of the ice cream her
grateful baby heart glowed with love for the fairy grandfather.

So they walked out of the garden down a long alley. The day was nearly
over. "You see those big buildings opposite," said the old man. "The
third storey--that is where I live. I and the old housekeeper who
looks after me." She was very interested. "Now just before I find a
cab for you, will you come and see my little 'home' and let me give
you a bottle of the attar of roses I told you about in the train? For
remembrance?" She would love to. "I've never seen a bachelor's flat in
my life," laughed the little governess.

The passage was quite dark. "Ah, I suppose my old woman has gone out
to buy me a chicken. One moment." He opened a door and stood aside for
her to pass, a little shy but curious, into a strange room. She did
not know quite what to say. It wasn't pretty. In a way it was very
ugly--but neat, and, she supposed, comfortable for such an old man.
"Well, what do you think of it?" He knelt down and took from a
cupboard a round tray with two pink glasses and a tall pink bottle.
"Two little bedrooms beyond," he said gaily, "and a kitchen. It's
enough, eh?" "Oh, quite enough." "And if ever you should be in Munich
and care to spend a day or two--why there is always a little nest--a
wing of a chicken, and a salad, and an old man delighted to be your
host once more and many many times, dear little Fräulein!" He took the
stopper out of the bottle and poured some wine into the two pink
glasses. His hand shook and the wine spilled over the tray. It was
very quiet in the room. She said: "I think I ought to go now." "But
you will have a tiny glass of wine with me--just one before you go?"
said the old man. "No, really no. I never drink wine. I--I have
promised never to touch wine or anything like that." And though he
pleaded and though she felt dreadfully rude, especially when he seemed
to take it to heart so, she was quite determined. "No, _really_,
please." "Well, will you just sit down on the sofa for five minutes
and let me drink your health?" The little governess sat down on the
edge of the red velvet couch and he sat down beside her and drank her
health at a gulp. "Have you really been happy to-day?" asked the old
man, turning round, so close beside her that she felt his knee
twitching against hers. Before she could answer he held her hands.
"And are you going to give me one little kiss before you go?" he
asked, drawing her closer still.

It was a dream! It wasn't true! It wasn't the same old man at all. Ah,
how horrible! The little governess stared at him in terror. "No, no,
no!" she stammered, struggling out of his hands. "One little kiss. A
kiss. What is it? Just a kiss, dear little Fräulein. A kiss." He
pushed his face forward, his lips smiling broadly; and how his little
blue eyes gleamed behind the spectacles! "Never--never. How can you!"
She sprang up, but he was too quick and he held her against the wall,
pressed against her his hard old body and his twitching knee and,
though she shook her head from side to side, distracted, kissed her on
the mouth. On the mouth! Where not a soul who wasn't a near relation
had ever kissed her before...

She ran, ran down the street until she found a broad road with tram
lines and a policeman standing in the middle like a clockwork doll. "I
want to get a tram to the Hauptbahnhof," sobbed the little governess.
"Fräulein?" She wrung her hands at him. "The Hauptbahnhof. There--there's
one now," and while he watched very much surprised, the little
girl with her hat on one side, crying without a handkerchief, sprang
on to the tram--not seeing the conductor's eyebrows, nor hearing the
_hochwohlgebildete Dame_ talking her over with a scandalized friend.
She rocked herself and cried out loud and said "Ah, ah!" pressing her
hands to her mouth. "She has been to the dentist," shrilled a fat old
woman, too stupid to be uncharitable. "_Na, sagen Sie 'mal_, what
toothache! The child hasn't one left in her mouth." While the tram
swung and jangled through a world full of old men with twitching knees.



When the little governess reached the hall of the Hotel Grunewald the
same waiter who had come into her room in the morning was standing by
table, polishing a tray of glasses. The sight of the little governess
seemed to fill him out with some inexplicable important content. He
was ready for her question; his answer came pat and suave. "Yes,
Fräulein, the lady has been here. I told her that you had arrived and
gone out again immediately with a gentleman. She asked me when you
were coming back again--but of course I could not say. And then she
went to the manager." He took up a glass from the table, held it up to
the light, looked at it with one eye closed, and started polishing it
with a corner of his apron. "...?" "Pardon, Fräulein? Ach, no,
Fräulein. The manager could tell her nothing--nothing." He shook his
head and smiled at the brilliant glass. "Where is the lady now?" asked
the little governess, shuddering so violently that she had to hold her
handkerchief up to her mouth. "How should I know?" cried the waiter,
and as he swooped past her to pounce upon a new arrival his heart beat
so hard against his ribs that he nearly chuckled aloud. "That's it!
that's it!" he thought. "That will show her." And as he swung the new
arrival's box on to his shoulders--hoop!--as though he were a giant
and the box a feather, he minced over again the little governess's
words, "_Gehen Sie. Gehen Sie sofort._ Shall I! Shall I!" he shouted
to himself.




REVELATIONS

FROM eight o'clock in the morning until about half-past eleven Monica
Tyrell suffered from her nerves, and suffered so terribly that these
hours were--agonizing, simply. It was not as though she could control
them. "Perhaps if I were ten years younger..." she would say. For
now that she was thirty-three she had queer little way of referring to
her age on all occasions, of looking at her friends with grave,
childish eyes and saying: "Yes, I remember how twenty years ago..."
or of drawing Ralph's attention to the girls--real girls--with lovely
youthful arms and throats and swift hesitating movements who sat near
them in restaurants. "Perhaps if I were ten years younger..."

"Why don't you get Marie to sit outside your door and absolutely
forbid anybody to come near your room until you ring your bell?"

"Oh, if it were as simple as that!" She threw her little gloves down
and pressed her eyelids with her fingers in the way he knew so well.
"But in the first place I'd be so conscious of Marie sitting there,
Marie shaking her finger at Rudd and Mrs. Moon, Marie as a kind of
cross between a wardress and a nurse for mental cases! And then,
there's the post. One can't get over the fact that the post comes, and
once it has come, who--who--could wait until eleven for the letters?"

His eyes grew bright; he quickly, lightly clasped her. "_My_ letters,
darling?"

"Perhaps," she drawled, softly, and she drew her hand over his reddish
hair, smiling too, but thinking: "Heavens! What a stupid thing to
say!"

But this morning she had been awakened by one great slam of the front
door. Bang. The flat shook. What was it? She jerked up in bed,
clutching the eiderdown; her heart beat. What could it be? Then she
heard voices in the passage. Marie knocked, and, as the door opened,
with a sharp tearing rip out flew the blind and the curtains,
stiffening, flapping, jerking. The tassel of the blind knocked--knocked
against the window. "Eh-h, _voilà!_" cried Marie, setting down
the tray and running. "_C'est le vent, Madame. C'est un vent
insupportable._"

Up rolled the blind; the window went up with a jerk; a whitey-greyish
light filled the room. Monica caught a glimpse of a huge pale sky and
a cloud like a torn shirt dragging across before she hid her eyes with
her sleeve.

"Marie! the curtains! Quick, the curtains!" Monica fell back into the
bed and then "Ring-ting-a-ping-ping, ring-ting-a-ping-ping." It was
the telephone. The limit of her suffering was reached; she grew quite
calm. "Go and see, Marie."

"It is Monsieur. To know if Madame will lunch at Princes' at
one-thirty to-day." Yes, it was Monsieur himself. Yes, he had asked
that the message be given to Madame immediately. Instead of replying,
Monica put her cup down and asked Marie in a small wondering voice
what time it was. It was half-past nine. She lay still and half closed
her eyes. "Tell Monsieur I cannot come," she said gently. But as the
door shut, anger--anger suddenly gripped her close, close, violent,
half strangling her. How dared he? How dared Ralph do such a thing
when he knew how agonizing her nerves were in the morning! Hadn't she
explained and described and even--though lightly, of course; she
couldn't say such a thing directly--given him to understand that this
was the one unforgivable thing.

And then to choose this frightful windy morning. Did he think it was
just a fad of hers, a little feminine folly to be laughed at and
tossed aside? Why, only last night she had said: "Ah, but you must
take me seriously, too." And he had replied: "My darling, you'll not
believe me, but I know you infinitely better than you know yourself.
Every delicate thought and feeling I bow to, I treasure. Yes, laugh! I
love the way your lip lifts"--and he had leaned across the table--"I
don't care who sees that I adore all of you. I'd be with you on
mountain-top and have all the searchlights of the world play upon us."

"Heavens!" Monica almost clutched her head. Was it possible he had
really said that? How incredible men were! And she had loved him--how
could she have loved a man who talked like that. What had she been
doing ever since that dinner party months ago, when he had seen her
home and asked if he might come and "see again that slow Arabian
smile"? Oh, what nonsense--what utter nonsense--and yet she remembered
at the time a strange deep thrill unlike anything she had ever felt
before.

"Coal! Coal! Coal! Old iron! Old iron! Old iron!" sounded from below.
It was all over. Understand her? He had understood nothing. That
ringing her up on a windy morning was immensely significant. Would he
understand that? She could almost have laughed. "You rang me up when
the person who understood me simply couldn't have." It was the end.
And when Marie said: "Monsieur replied he would be in the vestibule in
case Madame changed her mind," Monica said: "No, not verbena, Marie.
Carnations. Two handfuls."

A wild white morning, a tearing, rocking wind. Monica sat down before
the mirror. She was pale. The maid combed back her dark hair--combed
it all back--and her face was like a mask, with pointed eyelids and
dark red lips. As she stared at herself in the blueish shadowy glass
she suddenly felt--oh, the strangest, most tremendous excitement
filling her slowly, slowly, until she wanted to fling out her arms, to
laugh, to scatter everything, to shock Marie, to cry: "I'm free. I'm
free. I'm free as the wind." And now all this vibrating, trembling,
exciting, flying world was hers. It was her kingdom. No, no, she
belonged to nobody but Life.

"That will do, Marie," she stammered. "My hat, my coat, my bag. And
now get me a taxi." Where was she going? Oh, anywhere. She could not
stand this silent flat, noiseless Marie, this ghostly, quiet, feminine
interior. She must be out; she must be driving quickly--anywhere,
anywhere.

"The taxi is there, Madame." As she pressed open the big outer doors
of the flats the wild wind caught her and floated her across the
pavement. Where to? She got in, and smiling radiantly at the cross,
cold-looking driver, she told him to take her to her hairdresser's.
What would she have done without her hairdresser? Whenever Monica had
nowhere else to go to or nothing on earth to do she drove there. She
might just have her hair waved, and by that time she'd have thought
out a plan. The cross, cold driver drove at a tremendous pace, and she
let herself be hurled from side to side. She wished he would go faster
and faster. Oh, to be free of Princes' at one-thirty, of being the
tiny kitten in the swansdown basket, of being the Arabian, and the
grave, delighted child and the little wild creature..."Never
again," she cried aloud, clenching her small fist. But the cab had
stopped, and the driver was standing holding the door open for her.

The hairdresser's shop was warm and glittering. It smelled of soap and
burnt paper and wallflower brilliantine. There was Madame behind the
counter, round, fat, white, her head like a powder-puff rolling on a
black satin pin-cushion. Monica always had the feeling that they loved
her in this shop and understood her--the real her--far better than
many of her friends did. She was her real self here, and she and
Madame had often talked--quite strangely--together. Then there was
George who did her hair, young, dark, slender George. She was really
fond of him.

But to-day--how curious! Madame hardly greeted her. Her face was
whiter than ever, but rims of bright red showed round her blue bead
eyes, and even the rings on her pudgy fingers did not flash. They were
cold, dead, like chips of glass. When she called through the
wall-telephone to George there was a note in her voice that had never
been there before. But Monica would not believe this. No, she refused
to. It was just her imagination. She sniffed greedily the warm,
scented air, and passed behind the velvet curtain into the small
cubicle.

Her hat and jacket were off and hanging from the peg, and still George
did not come. This was the first time he had ever not been there to
hold the chair for her, to take her hat and hang up her bag, dangling
it in his fingers as though it were something he'd never seen
before--something fairy. And how quiet the shop was! There was not a
sound even from Madame. Only the wind blew, shaking the old house; the
wind hooted, and the portraits of Ladies of the Pompadour Period
looked down and smiled, cunning and sly. Monica wished she hadn't
come. Oh, what a mistake to have come! Fatal. Fatal. Where was George?
If he didn't appear the next moment she would go away. She took off
the white kimono. She didn't want to look at herself any more. When
she opened a big pot of cream on the glass shelf her fingers trembled.
There was a tugging feeling at her heart as though her happiness--her
marvellous happiness--were trying to get free.

"I'll go. I'll not stay." She took down her hat. But just at that
moment steps sounded, and, looking in the mirror, she saw George
bowing in the doorway. How queerly he smiled! It was the mirror of
course. She turned round quickly. His lips curled back in a sort of
grin, and--wasn't he unshaved?--he looked almost green in the face.

"Very sorry to have kept you waiting," he mumbled, sliding, gliding
forward.

Oh, no, she wasn't going to stay. "I'm afraid," she began. But he had
lighted the gas and laid the tongs across, and was holding out the
kimono.

"It's a wind," he said. Monica submitted. She smelled his fresh young
fingers pinning the jacket under her chin. "Yes, there is a wind,"
said she, sinking back into the chair. And silence fell. George took
out the pins in his expert way. Her hair tumbled back, but he didn't
hold it as he usually did, as though to feel how fine and soft and
heavy it was. He didn't say it "was in a lovely condition." He let it
fall, and, taking a brush out of a drawer, he coughed faintly, cleared
his throat and said dully: "Yes, it's a pretty strong one, I should
say it was."

She had no reply to make. The brush fell on her hair. Oh, oh, how
mournful, how mournful! It fell quick and light, it fell like leaves;
and then it fell heavy, tugging like the tugging at her heart. "That's
enough," she cried, shaking herself free.

"Did I do it too much?" asked George. He crouched over the tongs. "I'm
sorry." There came the smell of burnt paper--the smell she loved--and
he swung the hot tongs round in his hand, staring before him. "I
shouldn't be surprised if it rained." He took up a piece of her hair,
when--she couldn't bear it any longer--she stopped him. She looked at
him; she saw herself looking at him in the white kimono like a nun.
"Is there something the matter here? Has something happened?" But
George gave a half shrug and a grimace. "Oh, no, Madame. Just a little
occurrence." And he took up the piece of hair again. But, oh, she
wasn't deceived. That was it. Something awful had happened. The
silence--really, the silence seemed to come drifting down like flakes
of snow. She shivered. It was cold in the little cubicle, all cold and
glittering. The nickel taps and jets and sprays looked somehow almost
malignant. The wind rattled the window-frame; a piece of iron banged,
and the young man went on changing the tongs, crouching over her. Oh,
how terrifying Life was, thought Monica. How dreadful. It is the
loneliness which is so appalling. We whirl along like leaves, and
nobody knows--nobody cares where we fall, in what black river we float
away. The tugging feeling seemed to rise into her throat. It ached,
ached; she longed to cry. "That will do," she whispered. "Give me the
pins." As he stood beside her, so submissive, so silent, she nearly
dropped her arms and sobbed. She couldn't bear any more. Like a wooden
man the gay young George still slid, glided, handed her her hat and
veil, took the note, and brought back the change. She stuffed it into
her bag. Where was she going now?

George took a brush. "There is a little powder on your coat," he
murmured. He brushed it away. And then suddenly he raised himself and,
looking at Monica, gave a strange wave with the brush and said: "The
truth is, Madame, since you are an old customer--my little daughter
died this morning. A first child"--and then his white face crumpled
like paper, and he turned his back on her and began brushing the
cotton kimono. "Oh, oh," Monica began to cry. She ran out of the shop
into the taxi. The driver, looking furious, swung off the seat and
slammed the door again. "Where to?"

"Princes'," she sobbed. And all the way there she saw nothing but a
tiny wax doll with a feather of gold hair, lying meek, its tiny hands
and feet crossed. And then just before she came to Princes' she saw a
flower shop full of white flowers. Oh, what a perfect thought.
Lilies-of-the-valley, and white pansies, double white violets and
white velvet ribbon...From an unknown friend...From one who
understands...For a Little Girl...She tapped against the
window, but the driver did not hear; and, anyway, they were at
Princes' already.





THE ESCAPE

IT was his fault, wholly and solely his fault, that they had missed
the train. What if the idiotic hotel people had refused to produce the
bill? Wasn't that simply because he hadn't impressed upon the waiter
at lunch that they must have it by two o'clock? Any other man would
have sat there and refused to move until they handed it over. But no!
His exquisite belief in human nature had allowed him to get up and
expect one of those idiots to bring it to their room...And then,
when the _voiture_ did arrive, while they were still (Oh, Heavens!)
waiting for change, why hadn't he seen to the arrangement of the boxes
so that they could, at least, have started the moment the money had
come? Had he expected her to go outside, to stand under the awning in
the heat and point with her parasol? Very amusing picture of English
domestic life. Even when the driver had been told how fast he had to
drive he had paid no attention whatsoever--just smiled. "Oh," she
groaned, "if she'd been a driver she couldn't have stopped smiling
herself at the absurd, ridiculous way he was urged to hurry." And she
sat back and imitated his voice: "_Allez, vite, vite_"--and begged the
driver's pardon for troubling him...

And then the station--unforgettable--with the sight of the jaunty
little train shuffling away and those hideous children waving from the
windows. "Oh, why am I made to bear these things? Why am I exposed to
them?..." The glare, the flies, while they waited, and he and the
stationmaster put their heads together over the time-table, trying to
find this other train, which, of course, they wouldn't catch. The
people who'd gathered round, and the woman who'd held up that baby
with that awful, awful head..."Oh, to care as I care--to feel as
I feel, and never to be saved anything--never to know for one moment
what it was to...to..."

Her voice had changed. It was shaking now--crying now. She fumbled
with her bag, and produced from its little maw a scented handkerchief.
She put up her veil and, as though she were doing it for somebody
else, pitifully, as though she were saying to somebody else: "I know,
my darling," she pressed the handkerchief to her eyes.

The little bag, with its shiny, silvery jaws open, lay on her lap. He
could see her powder-puff, her rouge stick, a bundle of letters, a
phial of tiny black pills like seeds, a broken cigarette, a mirror,
white ivory tablets with lists on them that had been heavily scored
through. He thought: "In Egypt she would be buried with those things."

They had left the last of the houses, those small straggling houses
with bits of broken pot flung among the flower-beds and half-naked
hens scratching round the doorsteps. Now they were mounting a long
steep road that wound round the hill and over into the next bay. The
horses stumbled, pulling hard. Every five minutes, every two minutes
the driver trailed the whip across them. His stout back was solid as
wood; there were boils on his reddish neck, and he wore a new, a
shining new straw hat...

There was a little wind, just enough wind to blow to satin the new
leaves on the fruit trees, to stroke the fine grass, to turn to silver
the smoky olives--just enough wind to start in front of the carriage a
whirling, twirling snatch of dust that settled on their clothes like
the finest ash. When she took out her powder-puff the powder came
flying over them both.

"Oh, the dust," she breathed, "the disgusting, revolting dust." And
she put down her veil and lay back as if overcome.

"Why don't you put up your parasol?" he suggested. It was on the front
seat, and he leaned forward to hand it to her. At that she suddenly
sat upright and blazed again.

"Please leave my parasol alone! I don't want my parasol! And anyone
who was not utterly insensitive would know that I'm far, far too
exhausted to hold up a parasol. And with a wind like this tugging at
it...Put it down at once," she flashed, and then snatched the
parasol from him, tossed it into the crumpled hood behind, and
subsided, panting.

Another bend of the road, and down the hill there came a troop of
little children, shrieking and giggling, little girls with
sun-bleached hair, little boys in faded soldiers' caps. In their hands
they carried flowers--any kind of flowers--grabbed by the head, and
these they offered, running beside the carriage. Lilac, faded lilac,
greeny-white snowballs, one arum lily, a handful of hyacinths. They
thrust the flowers and their impish faces into the carriage; one even
threw into her lap a bunch of marigolds. Poor little mice! He had his
hand in his trouser pocket before her. "For Heaven's sake don't give
them anything. Oh, how typical of you! Horrid little monkeys! Now
they'll follow us all the way. Don't encourage them; you _would_
encourage beggars"; and she hurled the bunch out of the carriage with,
"Well, do it when I'm not there, please."

He saw the queer shock on the children's faces. They stopped running,
lagged behind, and then they began to shout something, and went on
shouting until the carriage had rounded yet another bend.

"Oh, how many more are there before the top of the hill is reached?
The horses haven't trotted once. Surely it isn't necessary for them to
walk the whole way."

"We shall be there in a minute now," he said, and took out his
cigarette-case. At that she turned round towards him. She clasped her
hands and held them against her breast; her dark eyes looked immense,
imploring, behind her veil; her nostrils quivered, she bit her lip,
and her head shook with a little nervous spasm. But when she spoke,
her voice was quite weak and very, very calm.

"I want to ask you something. I want to beg something of you," she
said. "I've asked you hundreds and hundreds of times before, but
you've forgotten. It's such a little thing, but if you knew what it
meant to me..." She pressed her hands together. "But you can't
know. No human creature could know and be so cruel." And then, slowly,
deliberately, gazing at him with those huge, sombre eyes: "I beg and
implore you for the last time that when we are driving together you
won't smoke. If you could imagine," she said, "the anguish I suffer
when that smoke comes floating across my face..."

"Very well," he said. "I won't. I forgot." And he put the case back.

"Oh, no," said she, and almost began to laugh, and put the back of her
hand across her eyes. "You couldn't have forgotten. Not that."

The wind came, blowing stronger. They were at the top of the hill.
"Hoy-yip-yip-yip," cried the driver. They swung down the road that
fell into a small valley, skirted the sea coast at the bottom of it,
and then coiled over a gentle ridge on the other side. Now there were
houses again, blue-shuttered against the heat, with bright burning
gardens, with geranium carpets flung over the pinkish walls. The
coast-line was dark; on the edge of the sea a white silky fringe just
stirred. The carriage swung down the hill, bumped, shook. "Yi-ip,"
shouted the driver. She clutched the sides of the seat, she closed her
eyes, and he knew she felt this was happening on purpose; this
swinging and bumping, this was all done--and he was responsible for
it, somehow--to spite her because she had asked if they couldn't go a
little faster. But just as they reached the bottom of the valley there
was one tremendous lurch. The carriage nearly overturned, and he saw
her eyes blaze at him, and she positively hissed, "I suppose you are
enjoying this?"

They went on. They reached the bottom of the valley. Suddenly she
stood up. "_Cocher! Cocher! Arrêtez-vous!_" She turned round and
looked into the crumpled hood behind. "I knew it," she exclaimed. "I
knew it. I heard it fall, and so did you, at that last bump."

"What? Where?"

"My parasol. It's gone. The parasol that belonged to my mother. The
parasol that I prize more than--more than..." She was simply beside
herself. The driver turned round, his gay, broad face smiling.

"I, too, heard something," said he, simply and gaily. "But I thought
as Monsieur and Madame said nothing..."

"There. You hear that. Then you must have heard it too. So _that_
accounts for the extraordinary smile on your face..."

"Look here," he said, "it can't be gone. If it fell out it will be
there still. Stay where you are. I'll fetch it."

But she saw through that. Oh, how she saw through it! "No, thank you."
And she bent her spiteful, smiling eyes upon him, regardless of the
driver. "I'll go myself. I'll walk back and find it, and trust you not
to follow. For"--knowing the driver did not understand, she spoke
softly, gently--"if I don't escape from you for a minute I shall go
mad."

She stepped out of the carriage. "My bag." He handed it to her.

"Madame prefers..."

But the driver had already swung down from his seat, and was seated on
the parapet reading a small newspaper. The horses stood with hanging
heads. It was still. The man in the carriage stretched himself out,
folded his arms. He felt the sun beat on his knees. His head was sunk
on his breast. "Hish, hish," sounded from the sea. The wind sighed in
the valley and was quiet. He felt himself, lying there, a hollow man,
a parched, withered man, as it were, of ashes. And the sea sounded,
"Hish, hish."

It was then that he saw the tree, that he was conscious of its
presence just inside a garden gate. It was an immense tree with a
round, thick silver stem and a great arc of copper leaves that gave
back the light and yet were sombre. There was something beyond the
tree--a whiteness, a softness, an opaque mass, half-hidden--with
delicate pillars. As he looked at the tree he felt his breathing die
away and he became part of the silence. It seemed to grow, it seemed
to expand in the quivering heat until the great carved leaves hid the
sky, and yet it was motionless. Then from within its depths or from
beyond there came the sound of a woman's voice. A woman was singing.
The warm untroubled voice floated upon the air, and it was all part of
the silence as he was part of it. Suddenly, as the voice rose, soft,
dreaming, gentle, he knew that it would come floating to him from the
hidden leaves and his peace was shattered. What was happening to him?
Something stirred in his breast. Something dark, something unbearable
and dreadful pushed in his bosom, and like a great weed it floated,
rocked...it was warm, stifling. He tried to struggle to tear at
it, and at the same moment--all was over. Deep, deep, he sank into the
silence, staring at the tree and waiting for the voice that came
floating, falling, until he felt himself enfolded.

* * * * *

In the shaking corridor of the train. It was night. The train rushed
and roared through the dark. He held on with both hands to the brass
rail. The door of their carriage was open.

"Do not disturb yourself, Monsieur. He will come in and sit down when
he wants to. He likes--he likes--it is his habit..._Oui, Madame,
je suis un peu souffrante...Mes nerfs._ Oh, but my husband is
never so happy as when he is travelling. He likes roughing it...My
husband...My husband..."

The voices murmured, murmured. They were never still. But so great was
his heavenly happiness as he stood there he wished he might live for
ever.


THE END



AND after all the weather was ideal. They could not have had a more perfect day for a garden-party if they had ordered it. Windless, warm, the sky without a cloud. Only the blue was veiled with a haze of light gold, as it is sometimes in early summer. The gardener had been up since dawn, mowing the lawns and sweeping them, until the grass and the dark flat rosettes where the daisy plants had been seemed to shine. As for the roses, you could not help feeling they understood that roses are the only flowers that impress people at garden-parties; the only flowers that everybody is certain of knowing. Hundreds, yes, literally hundreds, had come out in a single night; the green bushes bowed down as though they had been visited by archangels.

Breakfast was not yet over before the men came to put up the marquee.

"Where do you want the marquee put, mother?"

"My dear child, it's no use asking me. I'm determined to leave everything to you children this year. Forget I am your mother. Treat me as an honoured guest."

But Meg could not possibly go and supervise the ï¿½ men. She had washed her hair before breakfast, and she sat drinking her coffee in a green turban, with a dark wet curl stamped on each cheek. Jose, the butterfly, always came down in a silk petticoat and a kimono jacket.

"You'll have to go, Laura; you're the artistic one."

Away Laura flew, still holding her piece of bread-and-butter. It's so delicious to have an excuse for eating out of doors, and besides, she loved having to arrange things; she always felt she could do it so much better than anybody else.

Four men in their shirt-sleeves stood grouped together on the garden path. They carried staves covered with rolls of canvas, and they had big tool-bags slung on their backs. They looked impressive. Laura wished now that she was not holding that piece of bread-and-butter, but there was nowhere to put it, and she couldn't possibly throw it away. She blushed and tried to look severe and even a little bit short-sighted as she came up to them.

"Good morning," she said, copying her mother's voice. But that sounded so fearfully affected that she was ashamed, and stammered like a little girl, "Oh—er—have you come—is it about the marquee?"

"That's right, miss," said the tallest of the men, a lanky, freckled fellow, and he shifted his tool-bag, knocked back his straw hat and smiled down at her. "That's about it." ï¿½

His smile was so easy, so friendly, that Laura recovered. What nice eyes he had, small, but such a dark blue! And now she looked at the others, they were smiling too. "Cheer up, we won't bite," their smile seemed to say. How very nice workmen were! And what a beautiful morning! She mustn't mention the morning; she must be business-like. The marquee.

"Well, what about the lily-lawn? Would that do?"

And she pointed to the lily-lawn with the hand that didn't hold the bread-and-butter. They turned, they stared in the direction. A little fat chap thrust out his under-lip, and the tall fellow frowned.

"I don't fancy it," said he. "Not conspicuous enough. You see, with a thing like a marquee," and he turned to Laura in his easy way, "you want to put it somewhere where it'll give you a bang slap in the eye, if you follow me."

Laura's upbringing made her wonder for a moment whether it was quite respectful of a workman to talk to her of bangs slap in the eye. But she did quite follow him.

"A corner of the tennis-court," she suggested. "But the band's going to be in one corner."

"H'm, going to have a band, are you?" said another of the workmen. He was pale. He had a haggard look as his dark eyes scanned the tennis-court. What was he thinking?

"Only a very small band," said Laura gently. ï¿½ Perhaps he wouldn't mind so much if the band was quite small. But the tall fellow interrupted.

"Look here, miss, that's the place. Against those trees. Over there. That'll do fine."

Against the karakas. Then the karaka-trees would be hidden. And they were so lovely, with their broad, gleaming leaves, and their clusters of yellow fruit. They were like trees you imagined growing on a desert island, proud, solitary, lifting their leaves and fruits to the sun in a kind of silent splendour. Must they be hidden by a marquee?

They must. Already the men had shouldered their staves and were making for the place. Only the tall fellow was left. He bent down, pinched a sprig of lavender, put his thumb and forefinger to his nose and snuffed up the smell. When Laura saw that gesture she forgot all about the karakas in her wonder at him caring for things like that—caring for the smell of lavender. How many men that she knew would have done such a thing? Oh, how extraordinarily nice workmen were, she thought. Why couldn't she have workmen for her friends rather than the silly boys she danced with and who came to Sunday night supper? She would get on much better with men like these.

It's all the fault, she decided, as the tall fellow drew something on the back of an envelope, something that was to be looped up or left to hang, of these absurd class distinctions. Well, for her part, ï¿½ she didn't feel them. Not a bit, not an atom. . . . And now there came the chock-chock of wooden hammers. Someone whistled, someone sang out, "Are you right there, matey?" "Matey!" The friendliness of it, the—the—Just to prove how happy she was, just to show the tall fellow how at home she felt, and how she despised stupid conventions, Laura took a big bite of her bread-and-butter as she stared at the little drawing. She felt just like a work-girl.

"Laura, Laura, where are you? Telephone, Laura!" a voice cried from the house.

"Coming!" Away she skimmed, over the lawn, up the path, up the steps, across the veranda, and into the porch. In the hall her father and Laurie were brushing their hats ready to go to the office.

"I say, Laura," said Laurie very fast, "you might just give a squiz at my coat before this afternoon. See if it wants pressing."

"I will," said she. Suddenly she couldn't stop herself. She ran at Laurie and gave him a small, quick squeeze. "Oh, I do love parties, don't you?" gasped Laura.

"Ra-ther," said Laurie's warm, boyish voice, and he squeezed his sister too, and gave her a gentle push. "Dash off to the telephone, old girl."

The telephone. "Yes, yes; oh yes. Kitty? Good morning, dear. Come to lunch? Do, dear. Delighted of course. It will only be a very scratch meal—just the sandwich crusts and broken mer- ï¿½ ingue-shells and what's left over. Yes, isn't it a perfect morning? Your white? Oh, I certainly should. One moment—hold the line. Mother's calling." And Laura sat back. "What, mother? Can't hear."

Mrs. Sheridan's voice floated down the stairs. "Tell her to wear that sweet hat she had on last Sunday."

"Mother says you're to wear that sweet hat you had on last Sunday. Good. One o'clock. Bye-bye."

Laura put back the receiver, flung her arms over her head, took a deep breath, stretched and let them fall. "Huh," she sighed, and the moment after the sigh she sat up quickly. She was still, listening. All the doors in the house seemed to be open. The house was alive with soft, quick steps and running voices. The green baize door that led to the kitchen regions swung open and shut with a muffled thud. And now there came a long, chuckling absurd sound. It was the heavy piano being moved on its stiff castors. But the air! If you stopped to notice, was the air always like this? Little faint winds were playing chase in at the tops of the windows, out at the doors. And there were two tiny spots of sun, one on the inkpot, one on a silver photograph frame, playing too. Darling little spots. Especially the one on the inkpot lid. It was quite warm. A warm little silver star. She could have kissed it. ï¿½

The front door bell pealed, and there sounded the rustle of Sadie's print skirt on the stairs. A man's voice murmured; Sadie answered, careless, "I'm sure I don't know. Wait. I'll ask Mrs Sheridan."

"What is it, Sadie?" Laura came into the hall.

"It's the florist, Miss Laura."

It was, indeed. There, just inside the door, stood a wide, shallow tray full of pots of pink lilies. No other kind. Nothing but lilies—canna lilies, big pink flowers, wide open, radiant, almost frighteningly alive on bright crimson stems.

"O-oh, Sadie!" said Laura, and the sound was like a little moan. She crouched down as if to warm herself at that blaze of lilies; she felt they were in her fingers, on her lips, growing in her breast.

"It's some mistake," she said faintly. "Nobody ever ordered so many. Sadie, go and find mother."

But at that moment Mrs. Sheridan joined them.

"It's quite right," she said calmly. "Yes, I ordered them. Aren't they lovely?" She pressed Laura's arm. "I was passing the shop yesterday, and I saw them in the window. And I suddenly thought for once in my life I shall have enough canna lilies. The garden-party will be a good excuse."

"But I thought you said you didn't mean to interfere," said Laura. Sadie had gone. The florist's man was still outside at his van. She put her arm ï¿½ round her mother's neck and gently, very gently, she bit her mother's ear.

"My darling child, you wouldn't like a logical mother, would you? Don't do that. Here's the man."

He carried more lilies still, another whole tray.

"Bank them up, just inside the door, on both sides of the porch, please," said Mrs. Sheridan. "Don't you agree, Laura?"

"Oh, I do, mother."

In the drawing-room Meg, Jose and good little Hans had at last succeeded in moving the piano.

"Now, if we put this chesterfield against the wall and move everything out of the room except the chairs, don't you think?"

"Quite."

"Hans, move these tables into the smoking-room, and bring a sweeper to take these marks off the carpet and—one moment, Hans—" Jose loved giving orders to the servants, and they loved obeying her. She always made them feel they were taking part in some drama. "Tell mother and Miss Laura to come here at once.

"Very good, Miss Jose."

She turned to Meg. "I want to hear what the piano sounds like, just in case I'm asked to sing this afternoon. Let's try over 'This life is Weary.'"

Pom! Ta-ta-ta Tee -ta! The piano burst out so passionately that Jose's face changed. She clasped her hands. She looked mournfully and enigmat- ï¿½ ically at her mother and Laura as they came in.

This Life is Wee -ary,
A Tear—a Sigh.
A Love that Chan -ges,
ï¿½ï¿½This Life is Wee -ary,
A Tear—a Sigh.
A Love that Chan -ges,
And then . . . Good-bye!
But at the word "Good-bye," and although the piano sounded more desperate than ever, her face broke into a brilliant, dreadfully unsympathetic smile.
"Aren't I in good voice, mummy?" she beamed.

This Life is Wee -ary,
Hope comes to Die.
A Dream—a Wa -kening.
But now Sadie interrupted them. "What is it, Sadie?"

"If you please, m'm, cook says have you got the flags for the sandwiches?"

"The flags for the sandwiches, Sadie?" echoed Mrs. Sheridan dreamily. And the children knew by her face that she hadn't got them. "Let me see." And she said to Sadie firmly, "Tell cook I'll let her have them in ten minutes.

Sadie went.

"Now, Laura," said her mother quickly, "come with me into the smoking-room. I've got the ï¿½ names somewhere on the back of an envelope. You'll have to write them out for me. Meg, go upstairs this minute and take that wet thing off your head. Jose, run and finish dressing this instant. Do you hear me, children, or shall I have to tell your father when he comes home tonight? And—and, Jose, pacify cook if you do go into the kitchen, will you? I'm terrified of her this morning."

The envelope was found at last behind the dining-room clock, though how it had got there Mrs. Sheridan could not imagine.

"One of you children must have stolen it out of my bag, because I remember vividly—cream cheese and lemon-curd. Have you done that?"

"Yes."

"Egg and—" Mrs. Sheridan held the envelope away from her. "It looks like mice. It can't be mice, can it?"

"Olive, pet," said Laura, looking over her shoulder.

"Yes, of course, olive. What a horrible combination it sounds. Egg and olive."

They were finished at last, and Laura took them off to the kitchen. She found Jose there pacifying the cook, who did not look at all terrifying.

"I have never seen such exquisite sandwiches," said Jose's rapturous voice. "How many kinds did you say there were, cook? Fifteen?"

"Fifteen, Miss Jose."

"Well, cook, I congratulate you." ï¿½

Cook swept up crusts with the long sandwich knife and smiled broadly.

"Godber's has come," announced Sadie, issuing out of the pantry. She had seen the man pass the window.

That meant the cream puffs had come. Godber's were famous for their cream puffs. Nobody ever thought of making them at home.

"Bring them in and put them on the table, my girl," ordered cook.

Sadie brought them in and went back to the door. Of course Laura and Jose were far too grown-up to really care about such things. All the same, they couldn't help agreeing that the puffs looked very attractive. Very. Cook began arranging them, shaking off the extra icing sugar.

"Don't they carry one back to all one's parties?" said Laura.

"I suppose they do," said practical Jose, who never liked to be carried back. "They look beautifully light and feathery, I must say."

"Have one each, my dears," said cook in her comfortable voice. "Yer ma won't know."

Oh, impossible. Fancy cream puffs so soon after breakfast. The very idea made one shudder. All the same, two minutes later Jose and Laura were licking their fingers with that absorbed inward look that only comes from whipped cream.

"Let's go into the garden, out by the back way," suggested Laura. "I want to see how the men are ï¿½ getting on with the marquee. They're such awfully nice men."

But the back door was blocked by cook, Sadie, Godber's man and Hans.

Something had happened.

"Tuk-tuk-tuk," clucked cook like an agitated hen. Sadie had her hand clapped to her cheek as though she had toothache. Hans's face was screwed up in the effort to understand. Only Godber's man seemed to be enjoying himself; it was his story.

"What's the matter? What's happened?"

"There's been a horrible accident," said Cook. "A man killed."

"A man killed! Where? How? When?"

But Godber's man wasn't going to have his story snatched from under his nose.

"Know those little cottages just below here, miss?" Know them? Of course, she knew them. "Well, there's a young chap living there, name of Scott, a carter. His horse shied at a traction-engine, corner of Hawke Street this morning, and he was thrown out on the back of his head. Killed."

"Dead!" Laura stared at Godber's man.

"Dead when they picked him up," said Godber's man with relish. "They were taking the body home as I come up here." And he said to the cook, "He's left a wife and five little ones."

"Jose, come here." Laura caught hold of her sister's sleeve and dragged her through the kitchen ï¿½ to the other side of the green baize door. There she paused and leaned against it. "Jose!" she said, horrified, "however are we going to stop everything?"

"Stop everything, Laura!" cried Jose in astonishment. "What do you mean?"

"Stop the garden-party, of course." Why did Jose pretend?

But Jose was still more amazed. "Stop the garden-party? My dear Laura, don't be so absurd. Of course we can't do anything of the kind. Nobody expects us to. Don't be so extravagant."

"But we can't possibly have a garden-party with a man dead just outside the front gate."

That really was extravagant, for the little cottages were in a lane to themselves at the very bottom of a steep rise that led up to the house. A broad road ran between. True, they were far too near. They were the greatest possible eyesore, and they had no right to be in that neighbourhood at all. They were little mean dwellings painted a chocolate brown. In the garden patches there was nothing but cabbage stalks, sick hens and tomato cans. The very smoke coming out of their chimneys was poverty-stricken. Little rags and shreds of smoke, so unlike the great silvery plumes that uncurled from the Sheridans' chimneys. Washerwomen lived in the lane and sweeps and a cobbler, and a man whose house-front was studded all over with minute bird-cages. Children swarmed. ï¿½ When the Sheridans were little they were forbidden to set foot there because of the revolting language and of what they might catch. But since they were grown up, Laura and Laurie on their prowls sometimes walked through. It was disgusting and sordid. They came out with a shudder. But still one must go everywhere; one must see everything. So through they went.

"And just think of what the band would sound like to that poor woman," said Laura.

"Oh, Laura!" Jose began to be seriously annoyed. "If you're going to stop a band playing every time someone has an accident, you'll lead a very strenuous life. I'm every bit as sorry about it as you. I feel just as sympathetic." Her eyes hardened. She looked at her sister just as she used to when they were little and fighting together. "You won't bring a drunken workman back to life by being sentimental," she said softly.

"Drunk! Who said he was drunk?" Laura turned furiously on Jose. She said just as they had used to say on those occasions, "I'm going straight up to tell mother."

"Do, dear," cooed Jose.

"Mother, can I come into your room?" Laura turned the big glass door-knob.

"Of course, child. Why, what's the matter? What's given you such a colour?" And Mrs. Sheridan turned round from her dressing-table. She was trying on a new hat. ï¿½

"Mother, a man's been killed," began Laura.

"Not in the garden?" interrupted her mother.

"No, no!"

"Oh, what a fright you gave me!" Mrs. Sheridan sighed with relief, and took off the big hat and held it on her knees.

"But listen, mother," said Laura. Breathless, half-choking, she told the dreadful story. "Of course, we can't have our party, can we?" she pleaded. "The band and everybody arriving. They'd hear us, mother; they're nearly neighbours!"

To Laura's astonishment her mother behaved just like Jose; it was harder to bear because she seemed amused. She refused to take Laura seriously.

"But, dear child, use your common sense. It's only by accident we've heard of it. If someone had died there normally—and I can't understand how they keep alive in those poky little holes-we should still be having our party, shouldn't we?"

Laura had to say "yes" to that, but she felt it was all wrong. She sat down on her mother's sofa and pinched the cushion frill.

"Mother, isn't it terribly heartless of us?" she asked.

"Darling!" Mrs. Sheridan got up and came over to her, carrying the hat. Before Laura could stop her she had popped it on. "My child!" said her mother, "the hat is yours. It's made for you. ï¿½ It's much too young for me. I have never seen you look such a picture. Look at yourself!" And she held up her hand-mirror.

"But, mother," Laura began again. She couldn't look at herself; she turned aside.

This time Mrs. Sheridan lost patience just as Jose had done.

"You are being very absurd, Laura," she said coldly. "People like that don't expect sacrifices from us. And it's not very sympathetic to spoil everybody's enjoyment as you're doing now."

"I don't understand," said Laura, and she walked quickly out of the room into her own bedroom. There, quite by chance, the first thing she saw was this charming girl in the mirror, in her black hat trimmed with gold daisies, and a long black velvet ribbon. Never had she imagined she could look like that. Is mother right? she thought. And now she hoped her mother was right. Am I being extravagant? Perhaps it was extravagant. Just for a moment she had another glimpse of that poor woman and those little children, and the body being carried into the house. But it all seemed blurred, unreal, like a picture in the newspaper. I'll remember it again after the party's over, she decided. And somehow that seemed quite the best plan. . . .

Lunch was over by half-past one. By half-past two they were all ready for the fray. The green-coated band had arrived and was established in a corner of the tennis-court. ï¿½

"My dear!" trilled Kitty Maitland, "aren't they too like frogs for words? You ought to have arranged them round the pond with the conductor in the middle on a leaf."

Laurie arrived and hailed them on his way to dress. At the sight of him Laura remembered the accident again. She wanted to tell him. If Laurie agreed with the others, then it was bound to be all right. And she followed him into the hall.

"Laurie!"

"Hallo!" he was half-way upstairs, but when he turned round and saw Laura he suddenly puffed out his cheeks and goggled his eyes at her. "My word, Laura! You do look stunning," said Laurie. "What an absolutely topping hat!"

Laura said faintly "Is it?" and smiled up at Laurie, and didn't tell him after all.

Soon after that people began coming in streams. The band struck up; the hired waiters ran from the house to the marquee. Wherever you looked there were couples strolling, bending to the flowers, greeting, moving on over the lawn. They were like bright birds that had alighted in the Sheridans' garden for this one afternoon, on their way to—where? Ah, what happiness it is to be with people who all are happy, to press hands, press cheeks, smile into eyes.

"Darling Laura, how well you look!"

"What a becoming hat, child!" ï¿½

"Laura, you look quite Spanish. I've never seen you look so striking."

And Laura, glowing, answered softly, "Have you had tea? Won't you have an ice? The passion-fruit ices really are rather special." She ran to her father and begged him. "Daddy darling, can't the band have something to drink?"

And the perfect afternoon slowly ripened, slowly faded, slowly its petals closed.

"Never a more delightful garden-party . . . " "The greatest success . . . " "Quite the most . . . "

Laura helped her mother with the good-byes. They stood side by side in the porch till it was all over.

"All over, all over, thank heaven," said Mrs. Sheridan. "Round up the others, Laura. Let's go and have some fresh coffee. I'm exhausted. Yes, it's been very successful. But oh, these parties, these parties! Why will you children insist on giving parties!" And they all of them sat down in the deserted marquee.

"Have a sandwich, daddy dear. I wrote the flag."

"Thanks." Mr. Sheridan took a bite and the sandwich was gone. He took another. "I suppose you didn't hear of a beastly accident that happened today?" he said.

"My dear," said Mrs. Sheridan, holding up her ï¿½ hand, "we did. It nearly ruined the party. Laura insisted we should put it off."

"Oh, mother!" Laura didn't want to be teased about it.

"It was a horrible affair all the same," said Mr. Sheridan. "The chap was married too. Lived just below in the lane, and leaves a wife and half a dozen kiddies, so they say."

An awkward little silence fell. Mrs. Sheridan fidgeted with her cup. Really, it was very tactless of father. . . .

Suddenly she looked up. There on the table were all those sandwiches, cakes, puffs, all un-eaten, all going to be wasted. She had one of her brilliant ideas.

"I know," she said. "Let's make up a basket. Let's send that poor creature some of this perfectly good food. At any rate, it will be the greatest treat for the children. Don't you agree? And she's sure to have neighbours calling in and so on. What a point to have it all ready prepared. Laura!" She jumped up. "Get me the big basket out of the stairs cupboard."

"But, mother, do you really think it's a good idea?" said Laura.

Again, how curious, she seemed to be different from them all. To take scraps from their party. Would the poor woman really like that?

"Of course! What's the matter with you to- ï¿½ day? An hour or two ago you were insisting on us being sympathetic, and now—"

Oh well! Laura ran for the basket. It was filled, it was heaped by her mother.

"Take it yourself, darling," said she. "Run down just as you are. No, wait, take the arum lilies too. People of that class are so impressed by arum lilies."

"The stems will ruin her lace frock," said practical Jose.

So they would. Just in time. "Only the basket, then. And, Laura!"—her mother followed her out of the marquee—"don't on any account—"

"What mother?"

No, better not put such ideas into the child's head! "Nothing! Run along."

It was just growing dusky as Laura shut their garden gates. A big dog ran by like a shadow. The road gleamed white, and down below in the hollow the little cottages were in deep shade. How quiet it seemed after the afternoon. Here she was going down the hill to somewhere where a man lay dead, and she couldn't realize it. Why couldn't she? She stopped a minute. And it seemed to her that kisses, voices, tinkling spoons, laughter, the smell of crushed grass were somehow inside her. She had no room for anything else. How strange! She looked up at the pale sky, and all she thought was, "Yes, it was the most successful party."

Now the broad road was crossed. The lane be- ï¿½ gan, smoky and dark. Women in shawls and men's tweed caps hurried by. Men hung over the palings; the children played in the doorways. A low hum came from the mean little cottages. In some of them there was a flicker of light, and a shadow, crab-like, moved across the window. Laura bent her head and hurried on. She wished now she had put on a coat. How her frock shone! And the big hat with the velvet streamer—if only it was another hat! Were the people looking at her? They must be. It was a mistake to have come; she knew all along it was a mistake. Should she go back even now?

No, too late. This was the house. It must be. A dark knot of people stood outside. Beside the gate an old, old woman with a crutch sat in a chair, watching. She had her feet on a newspaper. The voices stopped as Laura drew near. The group parted. It was as though she was expected, as though they had known she was coming here.

Laura was terribly nervous. Tossing the velvet ribbon over her shoulder, she said to a woman standing by, "Is this Mrs. Scott's house?" and the woman, smiling queerly, said, "It is, my lass."

Oh, to be away from this! She actually said, "Help me, God," as she walked up the tiny path and knocked. To be away from those staring eyes, or be covered up in anything, one of those women's shawls even. I'll just leave the basket and go, she decided. I shan't even wait for it to be emptied. ï¿½

Then the door opened. A little woman in black showed in the gloom.

Laura said, "Are you Mrs. Scott?" But to her horror the woman answered, "Walk in, please, miss," and she was shut in the passage.

"No," said Laura, "I don't want to come in. I only want to leave this basket. Mother sent—"

The little woman in the gloomy passage seemed not to have heard her. "Step this way, please, miss," she said in an oily voice, and Laura followed her.

She found herself in a wretched little low kitchen, lighted by a smoky lamp. There was a woman sitting before the fire.

"Em," said the little creature who had let her in. "Em! It's a young lady." She turned to Laura. She said meaningly, "I'm 'er sister, miss. You'll excuse 'er, won't you?"

"Oh, but of course!" said Laura. "Please, please don't disturb her. I—I only want to leave—"

But at that moment the woman at the fire turned round. Her face, puffed up, red, with swollen eyes and swollen lips, looked terrible. She seemed as though she couldn't understand why Laura was there. What did it mean? Why was this stranger standing in the kitchen with a basket? What was it all about? And the poor face puckered up again.

"All right, my dear," said the other. "I'll thenk the young lady."

And again she began, "You'll excuse her, miss, ï¿½ I'm sure," and her face, swollen too, tried an oily smile.

Laura only wanted to get out, to get away. She was back in the passage. The door opened. She walked straight through into the bedroom where the dead man was lying.

"You'd like a look at 'im, wouldn't you?" said Em's sister, and she brushed past Laura over to the bed. "Don't be afraid, my lass,"—and now her voice sounded fond and sly, and fondly she drew down the sheet—" 'e looks a picture. There's nothing to show. Come along, my dear."

Laura came.

There lay a young man, fast asleep—sleeping so soundly, so deeply, that he was far, far away from them both. Oh, so remote, so peaceful. He was dreaming. Never wake him up again. His head was sunk in the pillow, his eyes were closed; they were blind under the closed eyelids. He was given up to his dream. What did garden-parties and baskets and lace frocks matter to him? He was far from all those things. He was wonderful, beautiful. While they were laughing and while the band was playing, this marvel had come to the lane. Happy . . . happy . . . All is well, said that sleeping face. This is just as it should be. I am content.

But all the same you had to cry, and she couldn't go out of the room without saying something to him. Laura gave a loud childish sob. ï¿½

"Forgive my hat," she said.

And this time she didn't wait for Em's sister. She found her way out of the door, down the path, past all those dark people. At the corner of the lane she met Laurie.

He stepped out of the shadow. "Is that you, Laura?"

"Yes."

"Mother was getting anxious. Was it all right?"

"Yes, quite. Oh, Laurie!" She took his arm, she pressed up against him.

"I say, you're not crying, are you?" asked her brother.

Laura shook her head. She was.

Laurie put his arm round her shoulder. "Don't cry," he said in his warm, loving voice. "Was it awful?"

"No," sobbed Laura. "It was simply marvellous. But Laurie—" She stopped, she looked at her brother. "Isn't life," she stammered, "isn't life—" But what life was she couldn't explain. No matter. He quite understood.

"Isn't it, darling?" said Laurie.

THE END




CONTENTS

1.   At the Bay
2.   The Garden Party
3.   The Daughters of the Late Colonel
4.   Mr. and Mrs. Dove
5.   The Young Girl
6.   Life of Ma Parker
7.   Marriage a la Mode
8.   The Voyage
9.   Miss Brill
10.  Her First Ball
11.  The Singing Lesson
12.  The Stranger
13.  Bank Holiday
14.  An Ideal Family
15.  The Lady's-Maid



1.  AT THE BAY.

Chapter 1.I.

Very early morning.  The sun was not yet risen, and the whole of Crescent
Bay was hidden under a white sea-mist.  The big bush-covered hills at the
back were smothered.  You could not see where they ended and the paddocks
and bungalows began.  The sandy road was gone and the paddocks and
bungalows the other side of it; there were no white dunes covered with
reddish grass beyond them; there was nothing to mark which was beach and
where was the sea.  A heavy dew had fallen.  The grass was blue.  Big drops
hung on the bushes and just did not fall; the silvery, fluffy toi-toi was
limp on its long stalks, and all the marigolds and the pinks in the
bungalow gardens were bowed to the earth with wetness.  Drenched were the
cold fuchsias, round pearls of dew lay on the flat nasturtium leaves.  It
looked as though the sea had beaten up softly in the darkness, as though
one immense wave had come rippling, rippling--how far?  Perhaps if you had
waked up in the middle of the night you might have seen a big fish flicking
in at the window and gone again...

Ah-Aah! sounded the sleepy sea.  And from the bush there came the sound of
little streams flowing, quickly, lightly, slipping between the smooth
stones, gushing into ferny basins and out again; and there was the
splashing of big drops on large leaves, and something else--what was it?--a
faint stirring and shaking, the snapping of a twig and then such silence
that it seemed some one was listening.

Round the corner of Crescent Bay, between the piled-up masses of broken
rock, a flock of sheep came pattering.  They were huddled together, a
small, tossing, woolly mass, and their thin, stick-like legs trotted along
quickly as if the cold and the quiet had frightened them.  Behind them an
old sheep-dog, his soaking paws covered with sand, ran along with his nose
to the ground, but carelessly, as if thinking of something else.  And then
in the rocky gateway the shepherd himself appeared.  He was a lean, upright
old man, in a frieze coat that was covered with a web of tiny drops, velvet
trousers tied under the knee, and a wide-awake with a folded blue
handkerchief round the brim.  One hand was crammed into his belt, the other
grasped a beautifully smooth yellow stick.  And as he walked, taking his
time, he kept up a very soft light whistling, an airy, far-away fluting
that sounded mournful and tender.  The old dog cut an ancient caper or two
and then drew up sharp, ashamed of his levity, and walked a few dignified
paces by his master's side.  The sheep ran forward in little pattering
rushes; they began to bleat, and ghostly flocks and herds answered them
from under the sea.  "Baa!  Baaa!"  For a time they seemed to be always on
the same piece of ground.  There ahead was stretched the sandy road with
shallow puddles; the same soaking bushes showed on either side and the same
shadowy palings.  Then something immense came into view; an enormous shock-
haired giant with his arms stretched out.  It was the big gum-tree outside
Mrs. Stubbs' shop, and as they passed by there was a strong whiff of
eucalyptus.  And now big spots of light gleamed in the mist.  The shepherd
stopped whistling; he rubbed his red nose and wet beard on his wet sleeve
and, screwing up his eyes, glanced in the direction of the sea.  The sun
was rising.  It was marvellous how quickly the mist thinned, sped away,
dissolved from the shallow plain, rolled up from the bush and was gone as
if in a hurry to escape; big twists and curls jostled and shouldered each
other as the silvery beams broadened.  The far-away sky--a bright, pure
blue--was reflected in the puddles, and the drops, swimming along the
telegraph poles, flashed into points of light.  Now the leaping, glittering
sea was so bright it made one's eyes ache to look at it.  The shepherd drew
a pipe, the bowl as small as an acorn, out of his breast pocket, fumbled
for a chunk of speckled tobacco, pared off a few shavings and stuffed the
bowl.  He was a grave, fine-looking old man.  As he lit up and the blue
smoke wreathed his head, the dog, watching, looked proud of him.

"Baa!  Baaa!"  The sheep spread out into a fan.  They were just clear of
the summer colony before the first sleeper turned over and lifted a drowsy
head; their cry sounded in the dreams of little children...who lifted their
arms to drag down, to cuddle the darling little woolly lambs of sleep.
Then the first inhabitant appeared; it was the Burnells' cat Florrie,
sitting on the gatepost, far too early as usual, looking for their milk-
girl.  When she saw the old sheep-dog she sprang up quickly, arched her
back, drew in her tabby head, and seemed to give a little fastidious
shiver.  "Ugh!  What a coarse, revolting creature!" said Florrie.  But the
old sheep-dog, not looking up, waggled past, flinging out his legs from
side to side.  Only one of his ears twitched to prove that he saw, and
thought her a silly young female.

The breeze of morning lifted in the bush and the smell of leaves and wet
black earth mingled with the sharp smell of the sea.  Myriads of birds were
singing.  A goldfinch flew over the shepherd's head and, perching on the
tiptop of a spray, it turned to the sun, ruffling its small breast
feathers.  And now they had passed the fisherman's hut, passed the charred-
looking little whare where Leila the milk-girl lived with her old Gran.
The sheep strayed over a yellow swamp and Wag, the sheep-dog, padded after,
rounded them up and headed them for the steeper, narrower rocky pass that
led out of Crescent Bay and towards Daylight Cove.  "Baa!  Baa!"  Faint the
cry came as they rocked along the fast-drying road.  The shepherd put away
his pipe, dropping it into his breast-pocket so that the little bowl hung
over.  And straightway the soft airy whistling began again.  Wag ran out
along a ledge of rock after something that smelled, and ran back again
disgusted.  Then pushing, nudging, hurrying, the sheep rounded the bend and
the shepherd followed after out of sight.


Chapter 1.II.

A few moments later the back door of one of the bungalows opened, and a
figure in a broad-striped bathing suit flung down the paddock, cleared the
stile, rushed through the tussock grass into the hollow, staggered up the
sandy hillock, and raced for dear life over the big porous stones, over the
cold, wet pebbles, on to the hard sand that gleamed like oil.  Splish-
Splosh!  Splish-Splosh!  The water bubbled round his legs as Stanley
Burnell waded out exulting.  First man in as usual!  He'd beaten them all
again.  And he swooped down to souse his head and neck.

"Hail, brother!  All hail, Thou Mighty One!"  A velvety bass voice came
booming over the water.

Great Scott!  Damnation take it!  Stanley lifted up to see a dark head
bobbing far out and an arm lifted.  It was Jonathan Trout--there before
him!  "Glorious morning!" sang the voice.

"Yes, very fine!" said Stanley briefly.  Why the dickens didn't the fellow
stick to his part of the sea?  Why should he come barging over to this
exact spot?  Stanley gave a kick, a lunge and struck out, swimming overarm.
But Jonathan was a match for him.  Up he came, his black hair sleek on his
forehead, his short beard sleek.

"I had an extraordinary dream last night!" he shouted.

What was the matter with the man?  This mania for conversation irritated
Stanley beyond words.  And it was always the same--always some piffle about
a dream he'd had, or some cranky idea he'd got hold of, or some rot he'd
been reading.  Stanley turned over on his back and kicked with his legs
till he was a living waterspout.  But even then..."I dreamed I was hanging
over a terrifically high cliff, shouting to some one below."  You would be!
thought Stanley.  He could stick no more of it.  He stopped splashing.
"Look here, Trout," he said, "I'm in rather a hurry this morning."

"You're WHAT?"  Jonathan was so surprised--or pretended to be--that he sank
under the water, then reappeared again blowing.

"All I mean is," said Stanley, "I've no time to--to--to fool about.  I want
to get this over.  I'm in a hurry.  I've work to do this morning--see?"

Jonathan was gone before Stanley had finished.  "Pass, friend!" said the
bass voice gently, and he slid away through the water with scarcely a
ripple...But curse the fellow!  He'd ruined Stanley's bathe.  What an
unpractical idiot the man was!  Stanley struck out to sea again, and then
as quickly swam in again, and away he rushed up the beach.  He felt
cheated.

Jonathan stayed a little longer in the water.  He floated, gently moving
his hands like fins, and letting the sea rock his long, skinny body.  It
was curious, but in spite of everything he was fond of Stanley Burnell.
True, he had a fiendish desire to tease him sometimes, to poke fun at him,
but at bottom he was sorry for the fellow.  There was something pathetic in
his determination to make a job of everything.  You couldn't help feeling
he'd be caught out one day, and then what an almighty cropper he'd come!
At that moment an immense wave lifted Jonathan, rode past him, and broke
along the beach with a joyful sound.  What a beauty!  And now there came
another.  That was the way to live--carelessly, recklessly, spending
oneself.  He got on to his feet and began to wade towards the shore,
pressing his toes into the firm, wrinkled sand.  To take things easy, not
to fight against the ebb and flow of life, but to give way to it--that was
what was needed.  It was this tension that was all wrong.  To live--to
live!  And the perfect morning, so fresh and fair, basking in the light, as
though laughing at its own beauty, seemed to whisper, "Why not?"

But now he was out of the water Jonathan turned blue with cold.  He ached
all over; it was as though some one was wringing the blood out of him.  And
stalking up the beach, shivering, all his muscles tight, he too felt his
bathe was spoilt.  He'd stayed in too long.


Chapter 1.III.

Beryl was alone in the living-room when Stanley appeared, wearing a blue
serge suit, a stiff collar and a spotted tie.  He looked almost uncannily
clean and brushed; he was going to town for the day.  Dropping into his
chair, he pulled out his watch and put it beside his plate.

"I've just got twenty-five minutes," he said.  "You might go and see if the
porridge is ready, Beryl?"

"Mother's just gone for it," said Beryl.  She sat down at the table and
poured out his tea.

"Thanks!"  Stanley took a sip.  "Hallo!" he said in an astonished voice,
"you've forgotten the sugar."

"Oh, sorry!"  But even then Beryl didn't help him; she pushed the basin
across.  What did this mean?  As Stanley helped himself his blue eyes
widened; they seemed to quiver.  He shot a quick glance at his sister-in-
law and leaned back.

"Nothing wrong, is there?" he asked carelessly, fingering his collar.

Beryl's head was bent; she turned her plate in her fingers.

"Nothing," said her light voice.  Then she too looked up, and smiled at
Stanley.  "Why should there be?"

"O-oh!  No reason at all as far as I know.  I thought you seemed rather--"

At that moment the door opened and the three little girls appeared, each
carrying a porridge plate.  They were dressed alike in blue jerseys and
knickers; their brown legs were bare, and each had her hair plaited and
pinned up in what was called a horse's tail.  Behind them came Mrs.
Fairfield with the tray.

"Carefully, children," she warned.  But they were taking the very greatest
care.  They loved being allowed to carry things.  "Have you said good
morning to your father?"

"Yes, grandma."  They settled themselves on the bench opposite Stanley and
Beryl.

"Good morning, Stanley!"  Old Mrs. Fairfield gave him his plate.

"Morning, mother!  How's the boy?"

"Splendid!  He only woke up once last night.  What a perfect morning!"  The
old woman paused, her hand on the loaf of bread, to gaze out of the open
door into the garden.  The sea sounded.  Through the wide-open window
streamed the sun on to the yellow varnished walls and bare floor.
Everything on the table flashed and glittered.  In the middle there was an
old salad bowl filled with yellow and red nasturtiums.  She smiled, and a
look of deep content shone in her eyes.

"You might cut me a slice of that bread, mother," said Stanley.  "I've only
twelve and a half minutes before the coach passes.  Has anyone given my
shoes to the servant girl?"

"Yes, they're ready for you."  Mrs. Fairfield was quite unruffled.

"Oh, Kezia!  Why are you such a messy child!" cried Beryl despairingly.

"Me, Aunt Beryl?"  Kezia stared at her.  What had she done now?  She had
only dug a river down the middle of her porridge, filled it, and was eating
the banks away.  But she did that every single morning, and no one had said
a word up till now.

"Why can't you eat your food properly like Isabel and Lottie?"  How unfair
grown-ups are!

"But Lottie always makes a floating island, don't you, Lottie?"

"I don't," said Isabel smartly.  "I just sprinkle mine with sugar and put
on the milk and finish it.  Only babies play with their food."

Stanley pushed back his chair and got up.

"Would you get me those shoes, mother?  And, Beryl, if you've finished, I
wish you'd cut down to the gate and stop the coach.  Run in to your mother,
Isabel, and ask her where my bowler hat's been put.  Wait a minute--have
you children been playing with my stick?"

"No, father!"

"But I put it here."  Stanley began to bluster.  "I remember distinctly
putting it in this corner.  Now, who's had it?  There's no time to lose.
Look sharp!  The stick's got to be found."

Even Alice, the servant-girl, was drawn into the chase.  "You haven't been
using it to poke the kitchen fire with by any chance?"

Stanley dashed into the bedroom where Linda was lying.  "Most extraordinary
thing.  I can't keep a single possession to myself.  They've made away with
my stick, now!"

"Stick, dear?  What stick?"  Linda's vagueness on these occasions could not
be real, Stanley decided.  Would nobody sympathize with him?

"Coach!  Coach, Stanley!"  Beryl's voice cried from the gate.

Stanley waved his arm to Linda.  "No time to say good-bye!" he cried.  And
he meant that as a punishment to her.

He snatched his bowler hat, dashed out of the house, and swung down the
garden path.  Yes, the coach was there waiting, and Beryl, leaning over the
open gate, was laughing up at somebody or other just as if nothing had
happened.  The heartlessness of women!  The way they took it for granted it
was your job to slave away for them while they didn't even take the trouble
to see that your walking-stick wasn't lost.  Kelly trailed his whip across
the horses.

"Good-bye, Stanley," called Beryl, sweetly and gaily.  It was easy enough
to say good-bye!  And there she stood, idle, shading her eyes with her
hand.  The worst of it was Stanley had to shout good-bye too, for the sake
of appearances.  Then he saw her turn, give a little skip and run back to
the house.  She was glad to be rid of him!

Yes, she was thankful.  Into the living-room she ran and called "He's
gone!"  Linda cried from her room:  "Beryl!  Has Stanley gone?"  Old Mrs.
Fairfield appeared, carrying the boy in his little flannel coatee.

"Gone?"

"Gone!"

Oh, the relief, the difference it made to have the man out of the house.
Their very voices were changed as they called to one another; they sounded
warm and loving and as if they shared a secret.  Beryl went over to the
table.  "Have another cup of tea, mother.  It's still hot."  She wanted,
somehow, to celebrate the fact that they could do what they liked now.
There was no man to disturb them; the whole perfect day was theirs.

"No, thank you, child," said old Mrs. Fairfield, but the way at that moment
she tossed the boy up and said "a-goos-a-goos-a-ga!" to him meant that she
felt the same.  The little girls ran into the paddock like chickens let out
of a coop.

Even Alice, the servant-girl, washing up the dishes in the kitchen, caught
the infection and used the precious tank water in a perfectly reckless
fashion.

"Oh, these men!" said she, and she plunged the teapot into the bowl and
held it under the water even after it had stopped bubbling, as if it too
was a man and drowning was too good for them.


Chapter 1.IV.

"Wait for me, Isa-bel!  Kezia, wait for me!"

There was poor little Lottie, left behind again, because she found it so
fearfully hard to get over the stile by herself.  When she stood on the
first step her knees began to wobble; she grasped the post.  Then you had
to put one leg over.  But which leg?  She never could decide.  And when she
did finally put one leg over with a sort of stamp of despair--then the
feeling was awful.  She was half in the paddock still and half in the
tussock grass.  She clutched the post desperately and lifted up her voice.
"Wait for me!"

"No, don't you wait for her, Kezia!" said Isabel.  "She's such a little
silly.  She's always making a fuss.  Come on!"  And she tugged Kezia's
jersey.  "You can use my bucket if you come with me," she said kindly.
"It's bigger than yours."  But Kezia couldn't leave Lottie all by herself.
She ran back to her.  By this time Lottie was very red in the face and
breathing heavily.

"Here, put your other foot over," said Kezia.

"Where?"

Lottie looked down at Kezia as if from a mountain height.

"Here where my hand is."  Kezia patted the place.

"Oh, there do you mean!"  Lottie gave a deep sigh and put the second foot
over.

"Now--sort of turn round and sit down and slide," said Kezia.

"But there's nothing to sit down on, Kezia," said Lottie.

She managed it at last, and once it was over she shook herself and began to
beam.

"I'm getting better at climbing over stiles, aren't I, Kezia?"

Lottie's was a very hopeful nature.

The pink and the blue sunbonnet followed Isabel's bright red sunbonnet up
that sliding, slipping hill.  At the top they paused to decide where to go
and to have a good stare at who was there already.  Seen from behind,
standing against the skyline, gesticulating largely with their spades, they
looked like minute puzzled explorers.

The whole family of Samuel Josephs was there already with their lady-help,
who sat on a camp-stool and kept order with a whistle that she wore tied
round her neck, and a small cane with which she directed operations.  The
Samuel Josephs never played by themselves or managed their own game.  If
they did, it ended in the boys pouring water down the girls' necks or the
girls trying to put little black crabs into the boys' pockets.  So Mrs. S.
J. and the poor lady-help drew up what she called a "brogramme" every
morning to keep them "abused and out of bischief."  It was all competitions
or races or round games.  Everything began with a piercing blast of the
lady-help's whistle and ended with another.  There were even prizes--large,
rather dirty paper parcels which the lady-help with a sour little smile
drew out of a bulging string kit.  The Samuel Josephs fought fearfully for
the prizes and cheated and pinched one another's arms--they were all expert
pinchers.  The only time the Burnell children ever played with them Kezia
had got a prize, and when she undid three bits of paper she found a very
small rusty button-hook.  She couldn't understand why they made such a
fuss...

But they never played with the Samuel Josephs now or even went to their
parties.  The Samuel Josephs were always giving children's parties at the
Bay and there was always the same food.  A big washhand basin of very brown
fruit-salad, buns cut into four and a washhand jug full of something the
lady-help called "Limonadear."  And you went away in the evening with half
the frill torn off your frock or something spilled all down the front of
your open-work pinafore, leaving the Samuel Josephs leaping like savages on
their lawn.  No!  They were too awful.

On the other side of the beach, close down to the water, two little boys,
their knickers rolled up, twinkled like spiders.  One was digging, the
other pattered in and out of the water, filling a small bucket.  They were
the Trout boys, Pip and Rags.  But Pip was so busy digging and Rags was so
busy helping that they didn't see their little cousins until they were
quite close.

"Look!" said Pip.  "Look what I've discovered."  And he showed them an old
wet, squashed-looking boot.  The three little girls stared.

"Whatever are you going to do with it?" asked Kezia.

"Keep it, of course!"  Pip was very scornful.  "It's a find--see?"

Yes, Kezia saw that.  All the same...

"There's lots of things buried in the sand," explained Pip.  "They get
chucked up from wrecks.  Treasure.  Why--you might find--"

"But why does Rags have to keep on pouring water in?" asked Lottie.

"Oh, that's to moisten it," said Pip, "to make the work a bit easier.  Keep
it up, Rags."

And good little Rags ran up and down, pouring in the water that turned
brown like cocoa.

"Here, shall I show you what I found yesterday?" said Pip mysteriously, and
he stuck his spade into the sand.  "Promise not to tell."

They promised.

"Say, cross my heart straight dinkum."

The little girls said it.

Pip took something out of his pocket, rubbed it a long time on the front of
his jersey, then breathed on it and rubbed it again.

"Now turn round!" he ordered.

They turned round.

"All look the same way!  Keep still!  Now!"

And his hand opened; he held up to the light something that flashed, that
winked, that was a most lovely green.

"It's a nemeral," said Pip solemnly.

"Is it really, Pip?"  Even Isabel was impressed.

The lovely green thing seemed to dance in Pip's fingers.  Aunt Beryl had a
nemeral in a ring, but it was a very small one.  This one was as big as a
star and far more beautiful.


Chapter 1.V.

As the morning lengthened whole parties appeared over the sand-hills and
came down on the beach to bathe.  It was understood that at eleven o'clock
the women and children of the summer colony had the sea to themselves.
First the women undressed, pulled on their bathing dresses and covered
their heads in hideous caps like sponge bags; then the children were
unbuttoned.  The beach was strewn with little heaps of clothes and shoes;
the big summer hats, with stones on them to keep them from blowing away,
looked like immense shells.  It was strange that even the sea seemed to
sound differently when all those leaping, laughing figures ran into the
waves.  Old Mrs. Fairfield, in a lilac cotton dress and a black hat tied
under the chin, gathered her little brood and got them ready.  The little
Trout boys whipped their shirts over their heads, and away the five sped,
while their grandma sat with one hand in her knitting-bag ready to draw out
the ball of wool when she was satisfied they were safely in.

The firm compact little girls were not half so brave as the tender,
delicate-looking little boys.  Pip and Rags, shivering, crouching down,
slapping the water, never hesitated.  But Isabel, who could swim twelve
strokes, and Kezia, who could nearly swim eight, only followed on the
strict understanding they were not to be splashed.  As for Lottie, she
didn't follow at all.  She liked to be left to go in her own way, please.
And that way was to sit down at the edge of the water, her legs straight,
her knees pressed together, and to make vague motions with her arms as if
she expected to be wafted out to sea.  But when a bigger wave than usual,
an old whiskery one, came lolloping along in her direction, she scrambled
to her feet with a face of horror and flew up the beach again.

"Here, mother, keep those for me, will you?"

Two rings and a thin gold chain were dropped into Mrs Fairfield's lap.

"Yes, dear.  But aren't you going to bathe here?"

"No-o," Beryl drawled.  She sounded vague.  "I'm undressing farther along.
I'm going to bathe with Mrs. Harry Kember."

"Very well."  But Mrs. Fairfield's lips set.  She disapproved of Mrs Harry
Kember.  Beryl knew it.

Poor old mother, she smiled, as she skimmed over the stones.  Poor old
mother!  Old!  Oh, what joy, what bliss it was to be young...

"You look very pleased," said Mrs. Harry Kember.  She sat hunched up on the
stones, her arms round her knees, smoking.

"It's such a lovely day," said Beryl, smiling down at her.

"Oh my dear!"  Mrs. Harry Kember's voice sounded as though she knew better
than that.  But then her voice always sounded as though she knew something
better about you than you did yourself.  She was a long, strange-looking
woman with narrow hands and feet.  Her face, too, was long and narrow and
exhausted-looking; even her fair curled fringe looked burnt out and
withered.  She was the only woman at the Bay who smoked, and she smoked
incessantly, keeping the cigarette between her lips while she talked, and
only taking it out when the ash was so long you could not understand why it
did not fall.  When she was not playing bridge--she played bridge every day
of her life--she spent her time lying in the full glare of the sun.  She
could stand any amount of it; she never had enough.  All the same, it did
not seem to warm her.  Parched, withered, cold, she lay stretched on the
stones like a piece of tossed-up driftwood.  The women at the Bay thought
she was very, very fast.  Her lack of vanity, her slang, the way she
treated men as though she was one of them, and the fact that she didn't
care twopence about her house and called the servant Gladys "Glad-eyes,"
was disgraceful.  Standing on the veranda steps Mrs. Kember would call in
her indifferent, tired voice, "I say, Glad-eyes, you might heave me a
handkerchief if I've got one, will you?"  And Glad-eyes, a red bow in her
hair instead of a cap, and white shoes, came running with an impudent
smile.  It was an absolute scandal!  True, she had no children, and her
husband...Here the voices were always raised; they became fervent.  How can
he have married her?  How can he, how can he?  It must have been money, of
course, but even then!

Mrs. Kember's husband was at least ten years younger than she was, and so
incredibly handsome that he looked like a mask or a most perfect
illustration in an American novel rather than a man.  Black hair, dark blue
eyes, red lips, a slow sleepy smile, a fine tennis player, a perfect
dancer, and with it all a mystery.  Harry Kember was like a man walking in
his sleep.  Men couldn't stand him, they couldn't get a word out of the
chap; he ignored his wife just as she ignored him.  How did he live?  Of
course there were stories, but such stories!  They simply couldn't be told.
The women he'd been seen with, the places he'd been seen in...but nothing
was ever certain, nothing definite.  Some of the women at the Bay privately
thought he'd commit a murder one day.  Yes, even while they talked to Mrs.
Kember and took in the awful concoction she was wearing, they saw her,
stretched as she lay on the beach; but cold, bloody, and still with a
cigarette stuck in the corner of her mouth.

Mrs. Kember rose, yawned, unsnapped her belt buckle, and tugged at the tape
of her blouse.  And Beryl stepped out of her skirt and shed her jersey, and
stood up in her short white petticoat, and her camisole with ribbon bows on
the shoulders.

"Mercy on us," said Mrs. Harry Kember, "what a little beauty you are!"

"Don't!" said Beryl softly; but, drawing off one stocking and then the
other, she felt a little beauty.

"My dear--why not?" said Mrs. Harry Kember, stamping on her own petticoat.
Really--her underclothes!  A pair of blue cotton knickers and a linen
bodice that reminded one somehow of a pillow-case..."And you don't wear
stays, do you?"  She touched Beryl's waist, and Beryl sprang away with a
small affected cry.  Then "Never!" she said firmly.

"Lucky little creature," sighed Mrs. Kember, unfastening her own.

Beryl turned her back and began the complicated movements of some one who
is trying to take off her clothes and to pull on her bathing-dress all at
one and the same time.

"Oh, my dear--don't mind me," said Mrs. Harry Kember.  "Why be shy?  I
shan't eat you.  I shan't be shocked like those other ninnies."  And she
gave her strange neighing laugh and grimaced at the other women.

But Beryl was shy.  She never undressed in front of anybody.  Was that
silly?  Mrs. Harry Kember made her feel it was silly, even something to be
ashamed of.  Why be shy indeed!  She glanced quickly at her friend standing
so boldly in her torn chemise and lighting a fresh cigarette; and a quick,
bold, evil feeling started up in her breast.  Laughing recklessly, she drew
on the limp, sandy-feeling bathing-dress that was not quite dry and
fastened the twisted buttons.

"That's better," said Mrs. Harry Kember.  They began to go down the beach
together.  "Really, it's a sin for you to wear clothes, my dear.
Somebody's got to tell you some day."

The water was quite warm.  It was that marvellous transparent blue, flecked
with silver, but the sand at the bottom looked gold; when you kicked with
your toes there rose a little puff of gold-dust.  Now the waves just
reached her breast.  Beryl stood, her arms outstretched, gazing out, and as
each wave came she gave the slightest little jump, so that it seemed it was
the wave which lifted her so gently.

"I believe in pretty girls having a good time," said Mrs. Harry Kember.
"Why not?  Don't you make a mistake, my dear.  Enjoy yourself."  And
suddenly she turned turtle, disappeared, and swam away quickly, quickly,
like a rat.  Then she flicked round and began swimming back.  She was going
to say something else.  Beryl felt that she was being poisoned by this cold
woman, but she longed to hear.  But oh, how strange, how horrible!  As Mrs.
Harry Kember came up close she looked, in her black waterproof bathing-cap,
with her sleepy face lifted above the water, just her chin touching, like a
horrible caricature of her husband.


Chapter 1.VI.

In a steamer chair, under a manuka tree that grew in the middle of the
front grass patch, Linda Burnell dreamed the morning away.  She did
nothing.  She looked up at the dark, close, dry leaves of the manuka, at
the chinks of blue between, and now and again a tiny yellowish flower
dropped on her.  Pretty--yes, if you held one of those flowers on the palm
of your hand and looked at it closely, it was an exquisite small thing.
Each pale yellow petal shone as if each was the careful work of a loving
hand.  The tiny tongue in the centre gave it the shape of a bell.  And when
you turned it over the outside was a deep bronze colour.  But as soon as
they flowered, they fell and were scattered.  You brushed them off your
frock as you talked; the horrid little things got caught in one's hair.
Why, then, flower at all?  Who takes the trouble--or the joy--to make all
these things that are wasted, wasted...It was uncanny.

On the grass beside her, lying between two pillows, was the boy.  Sound
asleep he lay, his head turned away from his mother.  His fine dark hair
looked more like a shadow than like real hair, but his ear was a bright,
deep coral.  Linda clasped her hands above her head and crossed her feet.
It was very pleasant to know that all these bungalows were empty, that
everybody was down on the beach, out of sight, out of hearing.  She had the
garden to herself; she was alone.

Dazzling white the picotees shone; the golden-eyed marigold glittered; the
nasturtiums wreathed the veranda poles in green and gold flame.  If only
one had time to look at these flowers long enough, time to get over the
sense of novelty and strangeness, time to know them!  But as soon as one
paused to part the petals, to discover the under-side of the leaf, along
came Life and one was swept away.  And, lying in her cane chair, Linda felt
so light; she felt like a leaf.  Along came Life like a wind and she was
seized and shaken; she had to go.  Oh dear, would it always be so?  Was
there no escape?

...Now she sat on the veranda of their Tasmanian home, leaning against her
father's knee.  And he promised, "As soon as you and I are old enough,
Linny, we'll cut off somewhere, we'll escape.  Two boys together.  I have a
fancy I'd like to sail up a river in China."  Linda saw that river, very
wide, covered with little rafts and boats.  She saw the yellow hats of the
boatmen and she heard their high, thin voices as they called...

"Yes, papa."

But just then a very broad young man with bright ginger hair walked slowly
past their house, and slowly, solemnly even, uncovered.  Linda's father
pulled her ear teasingly, in the way he had.

"Linny's beau," he whispered.

"Oh, papa, fancy being married to Stanley Burnell!"

Well, she was married to him.  And what was more she loved him.  Not the
Stanley whom every one saw, not the everyday one; but a timid, sensitive,
innocent Stanley who knelt down every night to say his prayers, and who
longed to be good.  Stanley was simple.  If he believed in people--as he
believed in her, for instance--it was with his whole heart.  He could not
be disloyal; he could not tell a lie.  And how terribly he suffered if he
thought any one--she--was not being dead straight, dead sincere with him!
"This is too subtle for me!"  He flung out the words, but his open,
quivering, distraught look was like the look of a trapped beast.

But the trouble was--here Linda felt almost inclined to laugh, though
Heaven knows it was no laughing matter--she saw her Stanley so seldom.
There were glimpses, moments, breathing spaces of calm, but all the rest of
the time it was like living in a house that couldn't be cured of the habit
of catching on fire, on a ship that got wrecked every day.  And it was
always Stanley who was in the thick of the danger.  Her whole time was
spent in rescuing him, and restoring him, and calming him down, and
listening to his story.  And what was left of her time was spent in the
dread of having children.

Linda frowned; she sat up quickly in her steamer chair and clasped her
ankles.  Yes, that was her real grudge against life; that was what she
could not understand.  That was the question she asked and asked, and
listened in vain for the answer.  It was all very well to say it was the
common lot of women to bear children.  It wasn't true.  She, for one, could
prove that wrong.  She was broken, made weak, her courage was gone, through
child-bearing.  And what made it doubly hard to bear was, she did not love
her children.  It was useless pretending.  Even if she had had the strength
she never would have nursed and played with the little girls.  No, it was
as though a cold breath had chilled her through and through on each of
those awful journeys; she had no warmth left to give them.  As to the boy--
well, thank Heaven, mother had taken him; he was mother's, or Beryl's, or
anybody's who wanted him.  She had hardly held him in her arms.  She was so
indifferent about him that as he lay there...Linda glanced down.

The boy had turned over.  He lay facing her, and he was no longer asleep.
His dark-blue, baby eyes were open; he looked as though he was peeping at
his mother.  And suddenly his face dimpled; it broke into a wide, toothless
smile, a perfect beam, no less.

"I'm here!" that happy smile seemed to say.  "Why don't you like me?"

There was something so quaint, so unexpected about that smile that Linda
smiled herself.  But she checked herself and said to the boy coldly, "I
don't like babies."

"Don't like babies?"  The boy couldn't believe her.  "Don't like me?  " He
waved his arms foolishly at his mother.

Linda dropped off her chair on to the grass.

"Why do you keep on smiling?" she said severely.  "If you knew what I was
thinking about, you wouldn't."

But he only squeezed up his eyes, slyly, and rolled his head on the pillow.
He didn't believe a word she said.

"We know all about that!" smiled the boy.

Linda was so astonished at the confidence of this little creature...Ah no,
be sincere.  That was not what she felt; it was something far different, it
was something so new, so...The tears danced in her eyes; she breathed in a
small whisper to the boy, "Hallo, my funny!"

But by now the boy had forgotten his mother.  He was serious again.
Something pink, something soft waved in front of him.  He made a grab at it
and it immediately disappeared.  But when he lay back, another, like the
first, appeared.  This time he determined to catch it.  He made a
tremendous effort and rolled right over.


Chapter 1.VII.

The tide was out; the beach was deserted; lazily flopped the warm sea.  The
sun beat down, beat down hot and fiery on the fine sand, baking the grey
and blue and black and white-veined pebbles.  It sucked up the little drop
of water that lay in the hollow of the curved shells; it bleached the pink
convolvulus that threaded through and through the sand-hills.  Nothing
seemed to move but the small sand-hoppers.  Pit-pit-pit!  They were never
still.

Over there on the weed-hung rocks that looked at low tide like shaggy
beasts come down to the water to drink, the sunlight seemed to spin like a
silver coin dropped into each of the small rock pools.  They danced, they
quivered, and minute ripples laved the porous shores.  Looking down,
bending  over, each pool was like a lake with pink and blue houses
clustered on the shores; and oh! the vast mountainous country behind those
houses--the ravines, the passes, the dangerous creeks and fearful tracks
that led to the water's edge.  Underneath waved the sea-forest--pink
thread-like trees, velvet anemones, and orange berry-spotted weeds.  Now a
stone on the bottom moved, rocked, and there was a glimpse of a black
feeler; now a thread-like creature wavered by and was lost.  Something was
happening to the pink, waving trees; they were changing to a cold moonlight
blue.  And now there sounded the faintest "plop."  Who made that sound?
What was going on down there?  And how strong, how damp the seaweed smelt
in the hot sun...

The green blinds were drawn in the bungalows of the summer colony.  Over
the verandas, prone on the paddock, flung over the fences, there were
exhausted-looking bathing-dresses and rough striped towels.  Each back
window seemed to have a pair of sand-shoes on the sill and some lumps of
rock or a bucket or a collection of pawa shells.  The bush quivered in a
haze of heat; the sandy road was empty except for the Trouts' dog Snooker,
who lay stretched in the very middle of it.  His blue eye was turned up,
his legs stuck out stiffly, and he gave an occasional desperate-sounding
puff, as much as to say he had decided to make an end of it and was only
waiting for some kind cart to come along.

"What are you looking at, my grandma?  Why do you keep stopping and sort of
staring at the wall?"

Kezia and her grandmother were taking their siesta together.  The little
girl, wearing only her short drawers and her under-bodice, her arms and
legs bare, lay on one of the puffed-up pillows of her grandma's bed, and
the old woman, in a white ruffled dressing-gown, sat in a rocker at the
window, with a long piece of pink knitting in her lap.  This room that they
shared, like the other rooms of the bungalow, was of light varnished wood
and the floor was bare.  The furniture was of the shabbiest, the simplest.
The dressing-table, for instance, was a packing-case in a sprigged muslin
petticoat, and the mirror above was very strange; it was as though a little
piece of forked lightning was imprisoned in it.  On the table there stood a
jar of sea-pinks, pressed so tightly together they looked more like a
velvet pincushion, and a special shell which Kezia had given her grandma
for a pin-tray, and another even more special which she had thought would
make a very nice place for a watch to curl up in.

"Tell me, grandma," said Kezia.

The old woman sighed, whipped the wool twice round her thumb, and drew the
bone needle through.  She was casting on.

"I was thinking of your Uncle William, darling," she said quietly.

"My Australian Uncle William?" said Kezia.  She had another.

"Yes, of course."

"The one I never saw?"

"That was the one."

"Well, what happened to him?"  Kezia knew perfectly well, but she wanted to
be told again.

"He went to the mines, and he got a sunstroke there and died," said old
Mrs. Fairfield.

Kezia blinked and considered the picture again...a little man fallen over
like a tin soldier by the side of a big black hole.

"Does it make you sad to think about him, grandma?"  She hated her grandma
to be sad.

It was the old woman's turn to consider.  Did it make her sad?  To look
back, back.  To stare down the years, as Kezia had seen her doing.  To look
after them as a woman does, long after they were out of sight.  Did it make
her sad?  No, life was like that.

"No, Kezia."

"But why?" asked Kezia.  She lifted one bare arm and began to draw things
in the air.  "Why did Uncle William have to die?  He wasn't old."

Mrs. Fairfield began counting the stitches in threes.  "It just happened,"
she said in an absorbed voice.

"Does everybody have to die?" asked Kezia.

"Everybody!"

"Me?"  Kezia sounded fearfully incredulous.

"Some day, my darling."

"But, grandma."  Kezia waved her left leg and waggled the toes.  They felt
sandy.  "What if I just won't?"

The old woman sighed again and drew a long thread from the ball.

"We're not asked, Kezia," she said sadly.  "It happens to all of us sooner
or later."

Kezia lay still thinking this over.  She didn't want to die.  It meant she
would have to leave here, leave everywhere, for ever, leave--leave her
grandma.  She rolled over quickly.

"Grandma," she said in a startled voice.

"What, my pet!"

"You're not to die."  Kezia was very decided.

"Ah, Kezia"--her grandma looked up and smiled and shook her head--"don't
let's talk about it."

"But you're not to.  You couldn't leave me.  You couldn't not be there."
This was awful.  "Promise me you won't ever do it, grandma," pleaded Kezia.

The old woman went on knitting.

"Promise me!  Say never!"

But still her grandma was silent.

Kezia rolled off her bed; she couldn't bear it any longer, and lightly she
leapt on to her grandma's knees, clasped her hands round the old woman's
throat and began kissing her, under the chin, behind the ear, and blowing
down her neck.

"Say never...say never...say never--" She gasped between the kisses.  And
then she began, very softly and lightly, to tickle her grandma.

"Kezia!"  The old woman dropped her knitting.  She swung back in the
rocker.  She began to tickle Kezia.  "Say never, say never, say never,"
gurgled Kezia, while they lay there laughing in each other's arms.  "Come,
that's enough, my squirrel!  That's enough, my wild pony!" said old Mrs.
Fairfield, setting her cap straight.  "Pick up my knitting."

Both of them had forgotten what the "never" was about.


Chapter 1.VIII.

The sun was still full on the garden when the back door of the Burnells'
shut with a bang, and a very gay figure walked down the path to the gate.
It was Alice, the servant-girl, dressed for her afternoon out.  She wore a
white cotton dress with such large red spots on it and so many that they
made you shudder, white shoes and a leghorn turned up under the brim with
poppies.  Of course she wore gloves, white ones, stained at the fastenings
with iron-mould, and in one hand she carried a very dashed-looking sunshade
which she referred to as her "perishall."

Beryl, sitting in the window, fanning her freshly-washed hair, thought she
had never seen such a guy.  If Alice had only blacked her face with a piece
of cork before she started out, the picture would have been complete.  And
where did a girl like that go to in a place like this?  The heart-shaped
Fijian fan beat scornfully at that lovely bright mane.  She supposed Alice
had picked up some horrible common larrikin and they'd go off into the bush
together.  Pity to have made herself so conspicuous; they'd have hard work
to hide with Alice in that rig-out.

But no, Beryl was unfair.  Alice was going to tea with Mrs Stubbs, who'd
sent her an "invite" by the little boy who called for orders.  She had
taken ever such a liking to Mrs. Stubbs ever since the first time she went
to the shop to get something for her mosquitoes.

"Dear heart!"  Mrs. Stubbs had clapped her hand to her side.  "I never seen
anyone so eaten.  You might have been attacked by canningbals."

Alice did wish there'd been a bit of life on the road though.  Made her
feel so queer, having nobody behind her.  Made her feel all weak in the
spine.  She couldn't believe that some one wasn't watching her.  And yet it
was silly to turn round; it gave you away.  She pulled up her gloves,
hummed to herself and said to the distant gum-tree, "Shan't be long now."
But that was hardly company.

Mrs. Stubbs's shop was perched on a little hillock just off the road.  It
had two big windows for eyes, a broad veranda for a hat, and the sign on
the roof, scrawled MRS. STUBBS'S, was like a little card stuck rakishly in
the hat crown.

On the veranda there hung a long string of bathing-dresses, clinging
together as though they'd just been rescued from the sea rather than
waiting to go in, and beside them there hung a cluster of sandshoes so
extraordinarily mixed that to get at one pair you had to tear apart and
forcibly separate at least fifty.  Even then it was the rarest thing to
find the left that belonged to the right.  So many people had lost patience
and gone off with one shoe that fitted and one that was a little too
big...Mrs. Stubbs prided herself on keeping something of everything.  The
two windows, arranged in the form of precarious pyramids, were crammed so
tight, piled so high, that it seemed only a conjurer could prevent them
from toppling over.  In the left-hand corner of one window, glued to the
pane by four gelatine lozenges, there was--and there had been from time
immemorial--a notice.

LOST!  HANSOME GOLE BROOCH
SOLID GOLD
ON OR NEAR BEACH
REWARD OFFERED

Alice pressed open the door.  The bell jangled, the red serge curtains
parted, and Mrs. Stubbs appeared.  With her broad smile and the long bacon
knife in her hand, she looked like a friendly brigand.  Alice was welcomed
so warmly that she found it quite difficult to keep up her "manners."  They
consisted of persistent little coughs and hems, pulls at her gloves, tweaks
at her skirt, and a curious difficulty in seeing what was set before her or
understanding what was said.

Tea was laid on the parlour table--ham, sardines, a whole pound of butter,
and such a large johnny cake that it looked like an advertisement for
somebody's baking-powder.  But the Primus stove roared so loudly that it
was useless to try to talk above it.  Alice sat down on the edge of a
basket-chair while Mrs. Stubbs pumped the stove still higher.  Suddenly
Mrs. Stubbs whipped the cushion off a chair and disclosed a large brown-
paper parcel.

"I've just had some new photers taken, my dear," she shouted cheerfully to
Alice.  "Tell me what you think of them."

In a very dainty, refined way Alice wet her finger and put the tissue back
from the first one.  Life!  How many there were!  There were three dozzing
at least.  And she held it up to the light.

Mrs. Stubbs sat in an arm-chair, leaning very much to one side.  There was
a look of mild astonishment on her large face, and well there might be.
For though the arm-chair stood on a carpet, to the left of it, miraculously
skirting the carpet-border, there was a dashing water-fall.  On her right
stood a Grecian pillar with a giant fern-tree on either side of it, and in
the background towered a gaunt mountain, pale with snow.

"It is a nice style, isn't it?" shouted Mrs. Stubbs; and Alice had just
screamed "Sweetly" when the roaring of the Primus stove died down, fizzled
out, ceased, and she said "Pretty" in a silence that was frightening.

"Draw up your chair, my dear," said Mrs. Stubbs, beginning to pour out.
"Yes," she said thoughtfully, as she handed the tea, "but I don't care
about the size.  I'm having an enlargemint.  All very well for Christmas
cards, but I never was the one for small photers myself.  You get no
comfort out of them.  To say the truth, I find them dis'eartening."

Alice quite saw what she meant.

"Size," said Mrs. Stubbs.  "Give me size.  That was what my poor dear
husband was always saying.  He couldn't stand anything small.  Gave him the
creeps.  And, strange as it may seem, my dear"--here Mrs. Stubbs creaked
and seemed to expand herself at the memory--"it was dropsy that carried him
off at the larst.  Many's the time they drawn one and a half pints from 'im
at the 'ospital...It seemed like a judgmint."

Alice burned to know exactly what it was that was drawn from him.  She
ventured, "I suppose it was water."

But Mrs. Stubbs fixed Alice with her eyes and replied meaningly, "It was
liquid, my dear."

Liquid!  Alice jumped away from the word like a cat and came back to it,
nosing and wary.

"That's 'im!" said Mrs. Stubbs, and she pointed dramatically to the life-
size head and shoulders of a burly man with a dead white rose in the
buttonhole of his coat that made you think of a curl of cold mutting fat.
Just below, in silver letters on a red cardboard ground, were the words,
"Be not afraid, it is I."

"It's ever such a fine face," said Alice faintly.

The pale-blue bow on the top of Mrs. Stubbs's fair frizzy hair quivered.
She arched her plump neck.  What a neck she had!  It was bright pink where
it began and then it changed to warm apricot, and that faded to the colour
of a brown egg and then to a deep creamy.

"All the same, my dear," she said surprisingly, "freedom's best!"  Her
soft, fat chuckle sounded like a purr.  "Freedom's best," said Mrs. Stubbs
again.

Freedom!  Alice gave a loud, silly little titter.  She felt awkward.  Her
mind flew back to her own kitching.  Ever so queer!  She wanted to be back
in it again.


Chapter 1.IX.

A strange company assembled in the Burnells' washhouse after tea.  Round
the table there sat a bull, a rooster, a donkey that kept forgetting it was
a donkey, a sheep and a bee.  The washhouse was the perfect place for such
a meeting because they could make as much noise as they liked, and nobody
ever interrupted.  It was a small tin shed standing apart from the
bungalow.  Against the wall there was a deep trough and in the corner a
copper with a basket of clothes-pegs on top of it.  The little window, spun
over with cobwebs, had a piece of candle and a mouse-trap on the dusty
sill.  There were clotheslines criss-crossed overhead and, hanging from a
peg on the wall, a very big, a huge, rusty horseshoe.  The table was in the
middle with a form at either side.

"You can't be a bee, Kezia.  A bee's not an animal.  It's a ninseck."

"Oh, but I do want to be a bee frightfully," wailed Kezia...A tiny bee, all
yellow-furry, with striped legs.  She drew her legs up under her and leaned
over the table.  She felt she was a bee.

"A ninseck must be an animal," she said stoutly.  "It makes a noise.  It's
not like a fish."

"I'm a bull, I'm a bull!" cried Pip.  And he gave such a tremendous bellow-
-how did he make that noise?--that Lottie looked quite alarmed.

"I'll be a sheep," said little Rags.  "A whole lot of sheep went past this
morning."

"How do you know?"

"Dad heard them.  Baa!"  He sounded like the little lamb that trots behind
and seems to wait to be carried.

"Cock-a-doodle-do!" shrilled Isabel.  With her red cheeks and bright eyes
she looked like a rooster.

"What'll I be?" Lottie asked everybody, and she sat there smiling, waiting
for them to decide for her.  It had to be an easy one.

"Be a donkey, Lottie."  It was Kezia's suggestion.  "Hee-haw!  You can't
forget that."

"Hee-haw!" said Lottie solemnly.  "When do I have to say it?"

"I'll explain, I'll explain," said the bull.  It was he who had the cards.
He waved them round his head.  "All be quiet!  All listen!"  And he waited
for them.  "Look here, Lottie."  He turned up a card.  "It's got two spots
on it--see?  Now, if you put that card in the middle and somebody else has
one with two spots as well, you say 'Hee-haw,' and the card's yours."

"Mine?"  Lottie was round-eyed.  "To keep?"

"No, silly.  Just for the game, see?  Just while we're playing."  The bull
was very cross with her.

"Oh, Lottie, you are a little silly," said the proud rooster.

Lottie looked at both of them.  Then she hung her head; her lip quivered.
"I don't want to play," she whispered.  The others glanced at one another
like conspirators.  All of them knew what that meant.  She would go away
and be discovered somewhere standing with her pinny thrown over her head,
in a corner, or against a wall, or even behind a chair.

"Yes, you do, Lottie.  It's quite easy," said Kezia.

And Isabel, repentant, said exactly like a grown-up, "Watch me, Lottie, and
you'll soon learn."

"Cheer up, Lot," said Pip.  "There, I know what I'll do.  I'll give you the
first one.  It's mine, really, but I'll give it to you.  Here you are."
And he slammed the card down in front of Lottie.

Lottie revived at that.  But now she was in another difficulty.  "I haven't
got a hanky," she said; "I want one badly, too."

"Here, Lottie, you can use mine."  Rags dipped into his sailor blouse and
brought up a very wet-looking one, knotted together.  "Be very careful," he
warned her.  "Only use that corner.  Don't undo it.  I've got a little
starfish inside I'm going to try and tame."

"Oh, come on, you girls," said the bull.  "And mind--you're not to look at
your cards.  You've got to keep your hands under the table till I say
'Go.'"

Smack went the cards round the table.  They tried with all their might to
see, but Pip was too quick for them.  It was very exciting, sitting there
in the washhouse; it was all they could do not to burst into a little
chorus of animals before Pip had finished dealing.

"Now, Lottie, you begin."

Timidly Lottie stretched out a hand, took the top card off her pack, had a
good look at it--it was plain she was counting the spots--and put it down.

"No, Lottie, you can't do that.  You mustn't look first.  You must turn it
the other way over."

"But then everybody will see it the same time as me," said Lottie.

The game proceeded.  Mooe-ooo-er!  The bull was terrible.  He charged over
the table and seemed to eat the cards up.

Bss-ss! said the bee.

Cock-a-doodle-do!  Isabel stood up in her excitement and moved her elbows
like wings.

Baa!  Little Rags put down the King of Diamonds and Lottie put down the one
they called the King of Spain.  She had hardly any cards left.

"Why don't you call out, Lottie?"

"I've forgotten what I am," said the donkey woefully.

"Well, change!  Be a dog instead!  Bow-wow!"

"Oh yes.  That's much easier."  Lottie smiled again.  But when she and
Kezia both had a one Kezia waited on purpose.  The others made signs to
Lottie and pointed.  Lottie turned very red; she looked bewildered, and at
last she said, "Hee-haw!  Ke-zia."

"Ss!  Wait a minute!"  They were in the very thick of it when the bull
stopped them, holding up his hand.  "What's that?  What's that noise?"

"What noise?  What do you mean?" asked the rooster.

"Ss!  Shut up!  Listen!"  They were mouse-still.  "I thought I heard a--a
sort of knocking," said the bull.

"What was it like?" asked the sheep faintly.

No answer.

The bee gave a shudder.  "Whatever did we shut the door for?" she said
softly.  Oh, why, why had they shut the door?

While they were playing, the day had faded; the gorgeous sunset had blazed
and died.  And now the quick dark came racing over the sea, over the sand-
hills, up the paddock.  You were frightened to look in the corners of the
washhouse, and yet you had to look with all your might.  And somewhere, far
away, grandma was lighting a lamp.  The blinds were being pulled down; the
kitchen fire leapt in the tins on the mantelpiece.

"It would be awful now," said the bull, "if a spider was to fall from the
ceiling on to the table, wouldn't it?"

"Spiders don't fall from ceilings."

"Yes, they do.  Our Min told us she'd seen a spider as big as a saucer,
with long hairs on it like a gooseberry."

Quickly all the little heads were jerked up; all the little bodies drew
together, pressed together.

"Why doesn't somebody come and call us?" cried the rooster.

Oh, those grown-ups, laughing and snug, sitting in the lamp-light, drinking
out of cups!  They'd forgotten about them.  No, not really forgotten.  That
was what their smile meant.  They had decided to leave them there all by
themselves.

Suddenly Lottie gave such a piercing scream that all of them jumped off the
forms, all of them screamed too.  "A face--a face looking!" shrieked
Lottie.

It was true, it was real.  Pressed against the window was a pale face,
black eyes, a black beard.

"Grandma!  Mother!  Somebody!"

But they had not got to the door, tumbling over one another, before it
opened for Uncle Jonathan.  He had come to take the little boys home.


Chapter 1.X.

He had meant to be there before, but in the front garden he had come upon
Linda walking up and down the grass, stopping to pick off a dead pink or
give a top-heavy carnation something to lean against, or to take a deep
breath of something, and then walking on again, with her little air of
remoteness.  Over her white frock she wore a yellow, pink-fringed shawl
from the Chinaman's shop.

"Hallo, Jonathan!" called Linda.  And Jonathan whipped off his shabby
panama, pressed it against his breast, dropped on one knee, and kissed
Linda's hand.

"Greeting, my Fair One!  Greeting, my Celestial Peach Blossom!" boomed the
bass voice gently.  "Where are the other noble dames?"

"Beryl's out playing bridge and mother's giving the boy his bath...Have you
come to borrow something?"

The Trouts were for ever running out of things and sending across to the
Burnells' at the last moment.

But Jonathan only answered, "A little love, a little kindness;" and he
walked by his sister-in-law's side.

Linda dropped into Beryl's hammock under the manuka-tree, and Jonathan
stretched himself on the grass beside her, pulled a long stalk and began
chewing it.  They knew each other well.  The voices of children cried from
the other gardens.  A fisherman's light cart shook along the sandy road,
and from far away they heard a dog barking; it was muffled as though the
dog had its head in a sack.  If you listened you could just hear the soft
swish of the sea at full tide sweeping the pebbles.  The sun was sinking.

"And so you go back to the office on Monday, do you, Jonathan?" asked
Linda.

"On Monday the cage door opens and clangs to upon the victim for another
eleven months and a week," answered Jonathan.

Linda swung a little.  "It must be awful," she said slowly.

"Would ye have me laugh, my fair sister?  Would ye have me weep?"

Linda was so accustomed to Jonathan's way of talking that she paid no
attention to it.

"I suppose," she said vaguely, "one gets used to it.  One gets used to
anything."

"Does one?  Hum!"  The "Hum" was so deep it seemed to boom from underneath
the ground.  "I wonder how it's done," brooded Jonathan; "I've never
managed it."

Looking at him as he lay there, Linda thought again how attractive he was.
It was strange to think that he was only an ordinary clerk, that Stanley
earned twice as much money as he.  What was the matter with Jonathan?  He
had no ambition; she supposed that was it.  And yet one felt he was gifted,
exceptional.  He was passionately fond of music; every spare penny he had
went on books.  He was always full of new ideas, schemes, plans.  But
nothing came of it all.  The new fire blazed in Jonathan; you almost heard
it roaring softly as he explained, described and dilated on the new thing;
but a moment later it had fallen in and there was nothing but ashes, and
Jonathan went about with a look like hunger in his black eyes.  At these
times he exaggerated his absurd manner of speaking, and he sang in church--
he was the leader of the choir--with such fearful dramatic intensity that
the meanest hymn put on an unholy splendour.

"It seems to me just as imbecile, just as infernal, to have to go to the
office on Monday," said Jonathan, "as it always has done and always will
do.  To spend all the best years of one's life sitting on a stool from nine
to five, scratching in somebody's ledger!  It's a queer use to make of
one's...one and only life, isn't it?  Or do I fondly dream?"  He rolled
over on the grass and looked up at Linda.  "Tell me, what is the difference
between my life and that of an ordinary prisoner.  The only difference I
can see is that I put myself in jail and nobody's ever going to let me out.
That's a more intolerable situation than the other.  For if I'd been--
pushed in, against my will--kicking, even--once the door was locked, or at
any rate in five years or so, I might have accepted the fact and begun to
take an interest in the flight of flies or counting the warder's steps
along the passage with particular attention to variations of tread and so
on.  But as it is, I'm like an insect that's flown into a room of its own
accord.  I dash against the walls, dash against the windows, flop against
the ceiling, do everything on God's earth, in fact, except fly out again.
And all the while I'm thinking, like that moth, or that butterfly, or
whatever it is, 'The shortness of life!  The shortness of life!'  I've only
one night or one day, and there's this vast dangerous garden, waiting out
there, undiscovered, unexplored."

"But, if you feel like that, why--" began Linda quickly.

"Ah!" cried Jonathan.  And that "ah!" was somehow almost exultant.  "There
you have me.  Why?  Why indeed?  There's the maddening, mysterious
question.  Why don't I fly out again?  There's the window or the door or
whatever it was I came in by.  It's not hopelessly shut--is it?  Why don't
I find it and be off?  Answer me that, little sister."  But he gave her no
time to answer.

"I'm exactly like that insect again.  For some reason"--Jonathan paused
between the words--"it's not allowed, it's forbidden, it's against the
insect law, to stop banging and flopping and crawling up the pane even for
an instant.  Why don't I leave the office?  Why don't I seriously consider,
this moment, for instance, what it is that prevents me leaving?  It's not
as though I'm tremendously tied.  I've two boys to provide for, but, after
all, they're boys.  I could cut off to sea, or get a job up-country, or--"
Suddenly he smiled at Linda and said in a changed voice, as if he were
confiding a secret, "Weak...weak.  No stamina.  No anchor.  No guiding
principle, let us call it."  But then the dark velvety voice rolled out:"

"Would ye hear the story
 How it unfolds itself..."

and they were silent.

The sun had set.  In the western sky there were great masses of crushed-up
rose-coloured clouds.  Broad beams of light shone through the clouds and
beyond them as if they would cover the whole sky.  Overhead the blue faded;
it turned a pale gold, and the bush outlined against it gleamed dark and
brilliant like metal.  Sometimes when those beams of light show in the sky
they are very awful.  They remind you that up there sits Jehovah, the
jealous God, the Almighty, Whose eye is upon you, ever watchful, never
weary.  You remember that at His coming the whole earth will shake into one
ruined graveyard; the cold, bright angels will drive you this way and that,
and there will be no time to explain what could be explained so
simply...But to-night it seemed to Linda there was something infinitely
joyful and loving in those silver beams.  And now no sound came from the
sea.  It breathed softly as if it would draw that tender, joyful beauty
into its own bosom.

"It's all wrong, it's all wrong," came the shadowy voice of Jonathan.
"It's not the scene, it's not the setting for...three stools, three desks,
three inkpots and a wire blind."

Linda knew that he would never change, but she said, "Is it too late, even
now?"

"I'm old--I'm old," intoned Jonathan.  He bent towards her, he passed his
hand over his head.  "Look!"  His black hair was speckled all over with
silver, like the breast plumage of a black fowl.

Linda was surprised.  She had no idea that he was grey.  And yet, as he
stood up beside her and sighed and stretched, she saw him, for the first
time, not resolute, not gallant, not careless, but touched already with
age.  He looked very tall on the darkening grass, and the thought crossed
her mind, "He is like a weed."

Jonathan stooped again and kissed her fingers.

"Heaven reward thy sweet patience, lady mine," he murmured.  "I must go
seek those heirs to my fame and fortune..."  He was gone.


Chapter 1.XI.

Light shone in the windows of the bungalow.  Two square patches of gold
fell upon the pinks and the peaked marigolds.  Florrie, the cat, came out
on to the veranda, and sat on the top step, her white paws close together,
her tail curled round.  She looked content, as though she had been waiting
for this moment all day.

"Thank goodness, it's getting late," said Florrie.  "Thank goodness, the
long day is over."  Her greengage eyes opened.

Presently there sounded the rumble of the coach, the crack of Kelly's whip.
It came near enough for one to hear the voices of the men from town,
talking loudly together.  It stopped at the Burnells' gate.

Stanley was half-way up the path before he saw Linda.  "Is that you,
darling?"

"Yes, Stanley."

He leapt across the flower-bed and seized her in his arms.  She was
enfolded in that familiar, eager, strong embrace.

"Forgive me, darling, forgive me," stammered Stanley, and he put his hand
under her chin and lifted her face to him.

"Forgive you?" smiled Linda.  "But whatever for?"

"Good God!  You can't have forgotten," cried Stanley Burnell.  "I've
thought of nothing else all day.  I've had the hell of a day.  I made up my
mind to dash out and telegraph, and then I thought the wire mightn't reach
you before I did.  I've been in tortures, Linda."

"But, Stanley," said Linda, "what must I forgive you for?"

"Linda!"--Stanley was very hurt--"didn't you realize--you must have
realized--I went away without saying good-bye to you this morning?  I can't
imagine how I can have done such a thing.  My confounded temper, of course.
But--well"--and he sighed and took her in his arms again--"I've suffered
for it enough to-day."

"What's that you've got in your hand?" asked Linda.  "New gloves?  Let me
see."

"Oh, just a cheap pair of wash-leather ones," said Stanley humbly.  "I
noticed Bell was wearing some in the coach this morning, so, as I was
passing the shop, I dashed in and got myself a pair.  What are you smiling
at?  You don't think it was wrong of me, do you?"

"On the con-trary, darling," said Linda, "I think it was most sensible."

She pulled one of the large, pale gloves on her own fingers and looked at
her hand, turning it this way and that.  She was still smiling.

Stanley wanted to say, "I was thinking of you the whole time I bought
them."  It was true, but for some reason he couldn't say it.  "Let's go
in," said he.


Chapter 1.XII.

Why does one feel so different at night?  Why is it so exciting to be awake
when everybody else is asleep?  Late--it is very late!  And yet every
moment you feel more and more wakeful, as though you were slowly, almost
with every breath, waking up into a new, wonderful, far more thrilling and
exciting world than the daylight one.  And what is this queer sensation
that you're a conspirator?  Lightly, stealthily you move about your room.
You take something off the dressing-table and put it down again without a
sound.  And everything, even the bed-post, knows you, responds, shares your
secret...

You're not very fond of your room by day.  You never think about it.
You're in and out, the door opens and slams, the cupboard creaks.  You sit
down on the side of your bed, change your shoes and dash out again.  A dive
down to the glass, two pins in your hair, powder your nose and off again.
But now--it's suddenly dear to you.  It's a darling little funny room.
It's yours.  Oh, what a joy it is to own things!  Mine--my own!

"My very own for ever?"

"Yes."  Their lips met.

No, of course, that had nothing to do with it.  That was all nonsense and
rubbish.  But, in spite of herself, Beryl saw so plainly two people
standing in the middle of her room.  Her arms were round his neck; he held
her.  And now he whispered, "My beauty, my little beauty!"  She jumped off
her bed, ran over to the window and kneeled on the window-seat, with her
elbows on the sill.  But the beautiful night, the garden, every bush, every
leaf, even the white palings, even the stars, were conspirators too.  So
bright was the moon that the flowers were bright as by day; the shadow of
the nasturtiums, exquisite lily-like leaves and wide-open flowers, lay
across the silvery veranda.  The manuka-tree, bent by the southerly winds,
was like a bird on one leg stretching out a wing.

But when Beryl looked at the bush, it seemed to her the bush was sad.

"We are dumb trees, reaching up in the night, imploring we know not what,"
said the sorrowful bush.

It is true when you are by yourself and you think about life, it is always
sad.  All that excitement and so on has a way of suddenly leaving you, and
it's as though, in the silence, somebody called your name, and you heard
your name for the first time.  "Beryl!"

"Yes, I'm here.  I'm Beryl.  Who wants me?"

"Beryl!"

"Let me come."

It is lonely living by oneself.  Of course, there are relations, friends,
heaps of them; but that's not what she means.  She wants some one who will
find the Beryl they none of them know, who will expect her to be that Beryl
always.  She wants a lover.

"Take me away from all these other people, my love.  Let us go far away.
Let us live our life, all new, all ours, from the very beginning.  Let us
make our fire.  Let us sit down to eat together.  Let us have long talks at
night."

And the thought was almost, "Save me, my love.  Save me!"

..."Oh, go on!  Don't be a prude, my dear.  You enjoy yourself while you're
young.  That's my advice."  And a high rush of silly laughter joined Mrs.
Harry Kember's loud, indifferent neigh.

You see, it's so frightfully difficult when you've nobody.  You're so at
the mercy of things.  You can't just be rude.  And you've always this
horror of seeming inexperienced and stuffy like the other ninnies at the
Bay.  And--and it's fascinating to know you've power over people.  Yes,
that is fascinating...

Oh why, oh why doesn't "he" come soon?

If I go on living here, thought Beryl, anything may happen to me.

"But how do you know he is coming at all?" mocked a small voice within her.

But Beryl dismissed it.  She couldn't be left.  Other people, perhaps, but
not she.  It wasn't possible to think that Beryl Fairfield never married,
that lovely fascinating girl.

"Do you remember Beryl Fairfield?"

"Remember her!  As if I could forget her!  It was one summer at the Bay
that I saw her.  She was standing on the beach in a blue"--no, pink--
"muslin frock, holding on a big cream"--no, black--"straw hat.  But it's
years ago now."

"She's as lovely as ever, more so if anything."

Beryl smiled, bit her lip, and gazed over the garden.  As she gazed, she
saw somebody, a man, leave the road, step along the paddock beside their
palings as if he was coming straight towards her.  Her heart beat.  Who was
it?  Who could it be?  It couldn't be a burglar, certainly not a burglar,
for he was smoking and he strolled lightly.  Beryl's heart leapt; it seemed
to turn right over, and then to stop.  She recognized him.

"Good evening, Miss Beryl," said the voice softly.

"Good evening."

"Won't you come for a little walk?" it drawled.

Come for a walk--at that time of night!  "I couldn't.  Everybody's in bed.
Everybody's asleep."

"Oh," said the voice lightly, and a whiff of sweet smoke reached her.
"What does everybody matter?  Do come!  It's such a fine night.  There's
not a soul about."

Beryl shook her head.  But already something stirred in her, something
reared its head.

The voice said, "Frightened?"  It mocked, "Poor little girl!"

"Not in the least," said she.  As she spoke that weak thing within her
seemed to uncoil, to grow suddenly tremendously strong; she longed to go!

And just as if this was quite understood by the other, the voice said,
gently and softly, but finally, "Come along!"

Beryl stepped over her low window, crossed the veranda, ran down the grass
to the gate.  He was there before her.

"That's right," breathed the voice, and it teased, "You're not frightened,
are you?  You're not frightened?"

She was; now she was here she was terrified, and it seemed to her
everything was different.  The moonlight stared and glittered; the shadows
were like bars of iron.  Her hand was taken.

"Not in the least," she said lightly.  "Why should I be?"

Her hand was pulled gently, tugged.  She held back.

"No, I'm not coming any farther," said Beryl.

"Oh, rot!"  Harry Kember didn't believe her.  "Come along!  We'll just go
as far as that fuchsia bush.  Come along!"

The fuchsia bush was tall.  It fell over the fence in a shower.  There was
a little pit of darkness beneath.

"No, really, I don't want to," said Beryl.

For a moment Harry Kember didn't answer.  Then he came close to her, turned
to her, smiled and said quickly, "Don't be silly!  Don't be silly!"

His smile was something she'd never seen before.  Was he drunk?  That
bright, blind, terrifying smile froze her with horror.  What was she doing?
How had she got here? the stern garden asked her as the gate pushed open,
and quick as a cat Harry Kember came through and snatched her to him.

"Cold little devil!  Cold little devil!" said the hateful voice.

But Beryl was strong.  She slipped, ducked, wrenched free.

"You are vile, vile," said she.

"Then why in God's name did you come?" stammered Harry Kember.

Nobody answered him.


Chapter 1.XIII.

A cloud, small, serene, floated across the moon.  In that moment of
darkness the sea sounded deep, troubled.  Then the cloud sailed away, and
the sound of the sea was a vague murmur, as though it waked out of a dark
dream.  All was still.



2.  THE GARDEN PARTY.

And after all the weather was ideal.  They could not have had a more
perfect day for a garden-party if they had ordered it.  Windless, warm, the
sky without a cloud.  Only the blue was veiled with a haze of light gold,
as it is sometimes in early summer.  The gardener had been up since dawn,
mowing the lawns and sweeping them, until the grass and the dark flat
rosettes where the daisy plants had been seemed to shine.  As for the
roses, you could not help feeling they understood that roses are the only
flowers that impress people at garden-parties; the only flowers that
everybody is certain of knowing.  Hundreds, yes, literally hundreds, had
come out in a single night; the green bushes bowed down as though they had
been visited by archangels.

Breakfast was not yet over before the men came to put up the marquee.

"Where do you want the marquee put, mother?"

"My dear child, it's no use asking me.  I'm determined to leave everything
to you children this year.  Forget I am your mother.  Treat me as an
honoured guest."

But Meg could not possibly go and supervise the men.  She had washed her
hair before breakfast, and she sat drinking her coffee in a green turban,
with a dark wet curl stamped on each cheek.  Jose, the butterfly, always
came down in a silk petticoat and a kimono jacket.

"You'll have to go, Laura; you're the artistic one."

Away Laura flew, still holding her piece of bread-and-butter.  It's so
delicious to have an excuse for eating out of doors, and besides, she loved
having to arrange things; she always felt she could do it so much better
than anybody else.

Four men in their shirt-sleeves stood grouped together on the garden path.
They carried staves covered with rolls of canvas, and they had big tool-
bags slung on their backs.  They looked impressive.  Laura wished now that
she had not got the bread-and-butter, but there was nowhere to put it, and
she couldn't possibly throw it away.  She blushed and tried to look severe
and even a little bit short-sighted as she came up to them.

"Good morning," she said, copying her mother's voice.  But that sounded so
fearfully affected that she was ashamed, and stammered like a little girl,
"Oh--er--have you come--is it about the marquee?"

"That's right, miss," said the tallest of the men, a lanky, freckled
fellow, and he shifted his tool-bag, knocked back his straw hat and smiled
down at her.  "That's about it."

His smile was so easy, so friendly that Laura recovered.  What nice eyes he
had, small, but such a dark blue!  And now she looked at the others, they
were smiling too.  "Cheer up, we won't bite," their smile seemed to say.
How very nice workmen were!  And what a beautiful morning!  She mustn't
mention the morning; she must be business-like.  The marquee.

"Well, what about the lily-lawn?  Would that do?"

And she pointed to the lily-lawn with the hand that didn't hold the bread-
and-butter.  They turned, they stared in the direction.  A little fat chap
thrust out his under-lip, and the tall fellow frowned.

"I don't fancy it," said he.  "Not conspicuous enough.  You see, with a
thing like a marquee," and he turned to Laura in his easy way, "you want to
put it somewhere where it'll give you a bang slap in the eye, if you follow
me."

Laura's upbringing made her wonder for a moment whether it was quite
respectful of a workman to talk to her of bangs slap in the eye.  But she
did quite follow him.

"A corner of the tennis-court," she suggested.  "But the band's going to be
in one corner."

"H'm, going to have a band, are you?" said another of the workmen.  He was
pale.  He had a haggard look as his dark eyes scanned the tennis-court.
What was he thinking?

"Only a very small band," said Laura gently.  Perhaps he wouldn't mind so
much if the band was quite small.  But the tall fellow interrupted.

"Look here, miss, that's the place.  Against those trees.  Over there.
That'll do fine."

Against the karakas.  Then the karaka-trees would be hidden.  And they were
so lovely, with their broad, gleaming leaves, and their clusters of yellow
fruit.  They were like trees you imagined growing on a desert island,
proud, solitary, lifting their leaves and fruits to the sun in a kind of
silent splendour.  Must they be hidden by a marquee?

They must.  Already the men had shouldered their staves and were making for
the place.  Only the tall fellow was left.  He bent down, pinched a sprig
of lavender, put his thumb and forefinger to his nose and snuffed up the
smell.  When Laura saw that gesture she forgot all about the karakas in her
wonder at him caring for things like that--caring for the smell of
lavender.  How many men that she knew would have done such a thing?  Oh,
how extraordinarily nice workmen were, she thought.  Why couldn't she have
workmen for her friends rather than the silly boys she danced with and who
came to Sunday night supper?  She would get on much better with men like
these.

It's all the fault, she decided, as the tall fellow drew something on the
back of an envelope, something that was to be looped up or left to hang, of
these absurd class distinctions.  Well, for her part, she didn't feel them.
Not a bit, not an atom...And now there came the chock-chock of wooden
hammers.  Some one whistled, some one sang out, "Are you right there,
matey?"  "Matey!"  The friendliness of it, the--the--Just to prove how
happy she was, just to show the tall fellow how at home she felt, and how
she despised stupid conventions, Laura took a big bite of her bread-and-
butter as she stared at the little drawing.  She felt just like a work-
girl.

"Laura, Laura, where are you?  Telephone, Laura!" a voice cried from the
house.

"Coming!"  Away she skimmed, over the lawn, up the path, up the steps,
across the veranda, and into the porch.  In the hall her father and Laurie
were brushing their hats ready to go to the office.

"I say, Laura," said Laurie very fast, "you might just give a squiz at my
coat before this afternoon.  See if it wants pressing."

"I will," said she.  Suddenly she couldn't stop herself.  She ran at Laurie
and gave him a small, quick squeeze.  "Oh, I do love parties, don't you?"
gasped Laura.

"Ra-ther," said Laurie's warm, boyish voice, and he squeezed his sister
too, and gave her a gentle push.  "Dash off to the telephone, old girl."

The telephone.  "Yes, yes; oh yes.  Kitty?  Good morning, dear.  Come to
lunch?  Do, dear.  Delighted of course.  It will only be a very scratch
meal--just the sandwich crusts and broken meringue-shells and what's left
over.  Yes, isn't it a perfect morning?  Your white?  Oh, I certainly
should.  One moment--hold the line.  Mother's calling."  And Laura sat
back.  "What, mother?  Can't hear."

Mrs. Sheridan's voice floated down the stairs.  "Tell her to wear that
sweet hat she had on last Sunday."

"Mother says you're to wear that sweet hat you had on last Sunday.  Good.
One o'clock.  Bye-bye."

Laura put back the receiver, flung her arms over her head, took a deep
breath, stretched and let them fall.  "Huh," she sighed, and the moment
after the sigh she sat up quickly.  She was still, listening.  All the
doors in the house seemed to be open.  The house was alive with soft, quick
steps and running voices.  The green baize door that led to the kitchen
regions swung open and shut with a muffled thud.  And now there came a
long, chuckling absurd sound.  It was the heavy piano being moved on its
stiff castors.  But the air!  If you stopped to notice, was the air always
like this?  Little faint winds were playing chase, in at the tops of the
windows, out at the doors.  And there were two tiny spots of sun, one on
the inkpot, one on a silver photograph frame, playing too.  Darling little
spots.  Especially the one on the inkpot lid.  It was quite warm.  A warm
little silver star.  She could have kissed it.

The front door bell pealed, and there sounded the rustle of Sadie's print
skirt on the stairs.  A man's voice murmured; Sadie answered, careless,
"I'm sure I don't know.  Wait.  I'll ask Mrs Sheridan."

"What is it, Sadie?"  Laura came into the hall.

"It's the florist, Miss Laura."

It was, indeed.  There, just inside the door, stood a wide, shallow tray
full of pots of pink lilies.  No other kind.  Nothing but lilies--canna
lilies, big pink flowers, wide open, radiant, almost frighteningly alive on
bright crimson stems.

"O-oh, Sadie!" said Laura, and the sound was like a little moan.  She
crouched down as if to warm herself at that blaze of lilies; she felt they
were in her fingers, on her lips, growing in her breast.

"It's some mistake," she said faintly.  "Nobody ever ordered so many.
Sadie, go and find mother."

But at that moment Mrs. Sheridan joined them.

"It's quite right," she said calmly.  "Yes, I ordered them.  Aren't they
lovely?"  She pressed Laura's arm.  "I was passing the shop yesterday, and
I saw them in the window.  And I suddenly thought for once in my life I
shall have enough canna lilies.  The garden-party will be a good excuse."

"But I thought you said you didn't mean to interfere," said Laura.  Sadie
had gone.  The florist's man was still outside at his van.  She put her arm
round her mother's neck and gently, very gently, she bit her mother's ear.

"My darling child, you wouldn't like a logical mother, would you?  Don't do
that.  Here's the man."

He carried more lilies still, another whole tray.

"Bank them up, just inside the door, on both sides of the porch, please,"
said Mrs. Sheridan.  "Don't you agree, Laura?"

"Oh, I do, mother."

In the drawing-room Meg, Jose and good little Hans had at last succeeded in
moving the piano.

"Now, if we put this chesterfield against the wall and move everything out
of the room except the chairs, don't you think?"

"Quite."

"Hans, move these tables into the smoking-room, and bring a sweeper to take
these marks off the carpet and--one moment, Hans--" Jose loved giving
orders to the servants, and they loved obeying her.  She always made them
feel they were taking part in some drama.  "Tell mother and Miss Laura to
come here at once.

"Very good, Miss Jose."

She turned to Meg.  "I want to hear what the piano sounds like, just in
case I'm asked to sing this afternoon.  Let's try over 'This life is
Weary.'"

Pom!  Ta-ta-ta Tee-ta!  The piano burst out so passionately that Jose's
face changed.  She clasped her hands.  She looked mournfully and
enigmatically at her mother and Laura as they came in.

"This Life is Wee-ary,
 A Tear--a Sigh.
 A Love that Chan-ges,
   This Life is Wee-ary,
 A Tear--a Sigh.
 A Love that Chan-ges,
 And then ...Good-bye!"

But at the word "Good-bye," and although the piano sounded more desperate
than ever, her face broke into a brilliant, dreadfully unsympathetic smile.

"Aren't I in good voice, mummy?" she beamed.

"This Life is Wee-ary,
 Hope comes to Die.
 A Dream--a Wa-kening."

But now Sadie interrupted them.  "What is it, Sadie?"

"If you please, m'm, cook says have you got the flags for the sandwiches?"

"The flags for the sandwiches, Sadie?" echoed Mrs. Sheridan dreamily.  And
the children knew by her face that she hadn't got them.  "Let me see."  And
she said to Sadie firmly, "Tell cook I'll let her have them in ten minutes.

Sadie went.

"Now, Laura," said her mother quickly, "come with me into the smoking-room.
I've got the names somewhere on the back of an envelope.  You'll have to
write them out for me.  Meg, go upstairs this minute and take that wet
thing off your head.  Jose, run and finish dressing this instant.  Do you
hear me, children, or shall I have to tell your father when he comes home
to-night?  And--and, Jose, pacify cook if you do go into the kitchen, will
you?  I'm terrified of her this morning."

The envelope was found at last behind the dining-room clock, though how it
had got there Mrs. Sheridan could not imagine.

"One of you children must have stolen it out of my bag, because I remember
vividly--cream cheese and lemon-curd.  Have you done that?"

"Yes."

"Egg and--" Mrs. Sheridan held the envelope away from her.  "It looks like
mice.  It can't be mice, can it?"

"Olive, pet," said Laura, looking over her shoulder.

"Yes, of course, olive.  What a horrible combination it sounds.  Egg and
olive."

They were finished at last, and Laura took them off to the kitchen.  She
found Jose there pacifying the cook, who did not look at all terrifying.

"I have never seen such exquisite sandwiches," said Jose's rapturous voice.
"How many kinds did you say there were, cook?  Fifteen?"

"Fifteen, Miss Jose."

"Well, cook, I congratulate you."

Cook swept up crusts with the long sandwich knife, and smiled broadly.

"Godber's has come," announced Sadie, issuing out of the pantry.  She had
seen the man pass the window.

That meant the cream puffs had come.  Godber's were famous for their cream
puffs.  Nobody ever thought of making them at home.

"Bring them in and put them on the table, my girl," ordered cook.

Sadie brought them in and went back to the door.  Of course Laura and Jose
were far too grown-up to really care about such things.  All the same, they
couldn't help agreeing that the puffs looked very attractive.  Very.  Cook
began arranging them, shaking off the extra icing sugar.

"Don't they carry one back to all one's parties?" said Laura.

"I suppose they do," said practical Jose, who never liked to be carried
back.  "They look beautifully light and feathery, I must say."

"Have one each, my dears," said cook in her comfortable voice.  "Yer ma
won't know."

Oh, impossible.  Fancy cream puffs so soon after breakfast.  The very idea
made one shudder.  All the same, two minutes later Jose and Laura were
licking their fingers with that absorbed inward look that only comes from
whipped cream.

"Let's go into the garden, out by the back way," suggested Laura.  "I want
to see how the men are getting on with the marquee.  They're such awfully
nice men."

But the back door was blocked by cook, Sadie, Godber's man and Hans.

Something had happened.

"Tuk-tuk-tuk," clucked cook like an agitated hen.  Sadie had her hand
clapped to her cheek as though she had toothache.  Hans's face was screwed
up in the effort to understand.  Only Godber's man seemed to be enjoying
himself; it was his story.

"What's the matter?  What's happened?"

"There's been a horrible accident," said Cook.  "A man killed."

"A man killed!  Where?  How?  When?"

But Godber's man wasn't going to have his story snatched from under his
very nose.

"Know those little cottages just below here, miss?"  Know them?  Of course,
she knew them.  "Well, there's a young chap living there, name of Scott, a
carter.  His horse shied at a traction-engine, corner of Hawke Street this
morning, and he was thrown out on the back of his head.  Killed."

"Dead!"  Laura stared at Godber's man.

"Dead when they picked him up," said Godber's man with relish.  "They were
taking the body home as I come up here."  And he said to the cook, "He's
left a wife and five little ones."

"Jose, come here."  Laura caught hold of her sister's sleeve and dragged
her through the kitchen to the other side of the green baize door.  There
she paused and leaned against it.  "Jose!" she said, horrified, "however
are we going to stop everything?"

"Stop everything, Laura!" cried Jose in astonishment.  "What do you mean?"

"Stop the garden-party, of course."  Why did Jose pretend?

But Jose was still more amazed.  "Stop the garden-party?  My dear Laura,
don't be so absurd.  Of course we can't do anything of the kind.  Nobody
expects us to.  Don't be so extravagant."

"But we can't possibly have a garden-party with a man dead just outside the
front gate."

That really was extravagant, for the little cottages were in a lane to
themselves at the very bottom of a steep rise that led up to the house.  A
broad road ran between.  True, they were far too near.  They were the
greatest possible eyesore, and they had no right to be in that
neighbourhood at all.  They were little mean dwellings painted a chocolate
brown.  In the garden patches there was nothing but cabbage stalks, sick
hens and tomato cans.  The very smoke coming out of their chimneys was
poverty-stricken.  Little rags and shreds of smoke, so unlike the great
silvery plumes that uncurled from the Sheridans' chimneys.  Washerwomen
lived in the lane and sweeps and a cobbler, and a man whose house-front was
studded all over with minute bird-cages.  Children swarmed.  When the
Sheridans were little they were forbidden to set foot there because of the
revolting language and of what they might catch.  But since they were grown
up, Laura and Laurie on their prowls sometimes walked through.  It was
disgusting and sordid.  They came out with a shudder.  But still one must
go everywhere; one must see everything.  So through they went.

"And just think of what the band would sound like to that poor woman," said
Laura.

"Oh, Laura!"  Jose began to be seriously annoyed.  "If you're going to stop
a band playing every time some one has an accident, you'll lead a very
strenuous life.  I'm every bit as sorry about it as you.  I feel just as
sympathetic."  Her eyes hardened.  She looked at her sister just as she
used to when they were little and fighting together.  "You won't bring a
drunken workman back to life by being sentimental," she said softly.

"Drunk!  Who said he was drunk?"  Laura turned furiously on Jose.  She
said, just as they had used to say on those occasions, "I'm going straight
up to tell mother."

"Do, dear," cooed Jose.

"Mother, can I come into your room?"  Laura turned the big glass door-knob.

"Of course, child.  Why, what's the matter?  What's given you such a
colour?"  And Mrs. Sheridan turned round from her dressing-table.  She was
trying on a new hat.

"Mother, a man's been killed," began Laura.

"Not in the garden?" interrupted her mother.

"No, no!"

"Oh, what a fright you gave me!"  Mrs. Sheridan sighed with relief, and
took off the big hat and held it on her knees.

"But listen, mother," said Laura.  Breathless, half-choking, she told the
dreadful story.  "Of course, we can't have our party, can we?" she pleaded.
"The band and everybody arriving.  They'd hear us, mother; they're nearly
neighbours!"

To Laura's astonishment her mother behaved just like Jose; it was harder to
bear because she seemed amused.  She refused to take Laura seriously.

"But, my dear child, use your common sense.  It's only by accident we've
heard of it.  If some one had died there normally--and I can't understand
how they keep alive in those poky little holes--we should still be having
our party, shouldn't we?"

Laura had to say "yes" to that, but she felt it was all wrong.  She sat
down on her mother's sofa and pinched the cushion frill.

"Mother, isn't it terribly heartless of us?" she asked.

"Darling!"  Mrs. Sheridan got up and came over to her, carrying the hat.
Before Laura could stop her she had popped it on.  "My child!" said her
mother, "the hat is yours.  It's made for you.  It's much too young for me.
I have never seen you look such a picture.  Look at yourself!"  And she
held up her hand-mirror.

"But, mother," Laura began again.  She couldn't look at herself; she turned
aside.

This time Mrs. Sheridan lost patience just as Jose had done.

"You are being very absurd, Laura," she said coldly.  "People like that
don't expect sacrifices from us.  And it's not very sympathetic to spoil
everybody's enjoyment as you're doing now."

"I don't understand," said Laura, and she walked quickly out of the room
into her own bedroom.  There, quite by chance, the first thing she saw was
this charming girl in the mirror, in her black hat trimmed with gold
daisies, and a long black velvet ribbon.  Never had she imagined she could
look like that.  Is mother right? she thought.  And now she hoped her
mother was right.  Am I being extravagant?  Perhaps it was extravagant.
Just for a moment she had another glimpse of that poor woman and those
little children, and the body being carried into the house.  But it all
seemed blurred, unreal, like a picture in the newspaper.  I'll remember it
again after the party's over, she decided.  And somehow that seemed quite
the best plan...

Lunch was over by half-past one.  By half-past two they were all ready for
the fray.  The green-coated band had arrived and was established in a
corner of the tennis-court.

"My dear!" trilled Kitty Maitland, "aren't they too like frogs for words?
You ought to have arranged them round the pond with the conductor in the
middle on a leaf."

Laurie arrived and hailed them on his way to dress.  At the sight of him
Laura remembered the accident again.  She wanted to tell him.  If Laurie
agreed with the others, then it was bound to be all right.  And she
followed him into the hall.

"Laurie!"

"Hallo!"  He was half-way upstairs, but when he turned round and saw Laura
he suddenly puffed out his cheeks and goggled his eyes at her.  "My word,
Laura!  You do look stunning," said Laurie.  "What an absolutely topping
hat!"

Laura said faintly "Is it?" and smiled up at Laurie, and didn't tell him
after all.

Soon after that people began coming in streams.  The band struck up; the
hired waiters ran from the house to the marquee.  Wherever you looked there
were couples strolling, bending to the flowers, greeting, moving on over
the lawn.  They were like bright birds that had alighted in the Sheridans'
garden for this one afternoon, on their way to--where?  Ah, what happiness
it is to be with people who all are happy, to press hands, press cheeks,
smile into eyes.

"Darling Laura, how well you look!"

"What a becoming hat, child!"

"Laura, you look quite Spanish.  I've never seen you look so striking."

And Laura, glowing, answered softly, "Have you had tea?  Won't you have an
ice?  The passion-fruit ices really are rather special."  She ran to her
father and begged him.  "Daddy darling, can't the band have something to
drink?"

And the perfect afternoon slowly ripened, slowly faded, slowly its petals
closed.

"Never a more delightful garden-party ..."  "The greatest success ..."
"Quite the most ..."

Laura helped her mother with the good-byes.  They stood side by side in the
porch till it was all over.

"All over, all over, thank heaven," said Mrs. Sheridan.  "Round up the
others, Laura.  Let's go and have some fresh coffee.  I'm exhausted.  Yes,
it's been very successful.  But oh, these parties, these parties!  Why will
you children insist on giving parties!"  And they all of them sat down in
the deserted marquee.

"Have a sandwich, daddy dear.  I wrote the flag."

"Thanks."  Mr. Sheridan took a bite and the sandwich was gone.  He took
another.  "I suppose you didn't hear of a beastly accident that happened
to-day?" he said.

"My dear," said Mrs. Sheridan, holding up her hand, "we did.  It nearly
ruined the party.  Laura insisted we should put it off."

"Oh, mother!"  Laura didn't want to be teased about it.

"It was a horrible affair all the same," said Mr. Sheridan.  "The chap was
married too.  Lived just below in the lane, and leaves a wife and half a
dozen kiddies, so they say."

An awkward little silence fell.  Mrs. Sheridan fidgeted with her cup.
Really, it was very tactless of father...

Suddenly she looked up.  There on the table were all those sandwiches,
cakes, puffs, all uneaten, all going to be wasted.  She had one of her
brilliant ideas.

"I know," she said.  "Let's make up a basket.  Let's send that poor
creature some of this perfectly good food.  At any rate, it will be the
greatest treat for the children.  Don't you agree?  And she's sure to have
neighbours calling in and so on.  What a point to have it all ready
prepared.  Laura!"  She jumped up.  "Get me the big basket out of the
stairs cupboard."

"But, mother, do you really think it's a good idea?" said Laura.

Again, how curious, she seemed to be different from them all.  To take
scraps from their party.  Would the poor woman really like that?

"Of course!  What's the matter with you to-day?  An hour or two ago you
were insisting on us being sympathetic, and now--"

Oh well!  Laura ran for the basket.  It was filled, it was heaped by her
mother.

"Take it yourself, darling," said she.  "Run down just as you are.  No,
wait, take the arum lilies too.  People of that class are so impressed by
arum lilies."

"The stems will ruin her lace frock," said practical Jose.

So they would.  Just in time.  "Only the basket, then.  And, Laura!"--her
mother followed her out of the marquee--"don't on any account--"

"What mother?"

No, better not put such ideas into the child's head!  "Nothing!  Run
along."

It was just growing dusky as Laura shut their garden gates.  A big dog ran
by like a shadow.  The road gleamed white, and down below in the hollow the
little cottages were in deep shade.  How quiet it seemed after the
afternoon.  Here she was going down the hill to somewhere where a man lay
dead, and she couldn't realize it.  Why couldn't she?  She stopped a
minute.  And it seemed to her that kisses, voices, tinkling spoons,
laughter, the smell of crushed grass were somehow inside her.  She had no
room for anything else.  How strange!  She looked up at the pale sky, and
all she thought was, "Yes, it was the most successful party."

Now the broad road was crossed.  The lane began, smoky and dark.  Women in
shawls and men's tweed caps hurried by.  Men hung over the palings; the
children played in the doorways.  A low hum came from the mean little
cottages.  In some of them there was a flicker of light, and a shadow,
crab-like, moved across the window.  Laura bent her head and hurried on.
She wished now she had put on a coat.  How her frock shone!  And the big
hat with the velvet streamer--if only it was another hat!  Were the people
looking at her?  They must be.  It was a mistake to have come; she knew all
along it was a mistake.  Should she go back even now?

No, too late.  This was the house.  It must be.  A dark knot of people
stood outside.  Beside the gate an old, old woman with a crutch sat in a
chair, watching.  She had her feet on a newspaper.  The voices stopped as
Laura drew near.  The group parted.  It was as though she was expected, as
though they had known she was coming here.

Laura was terribly nervous.  Tossing the velvet ribbon over her shoulder,
she said to a woman standing by, "Is this Mrs. Scott's house?" and the
woman, smiling queerly, said, "It is, my lass."

Oh, to be away from this!  She actually said, "Help me, God," as she walked
up the tiny path and knocked.  To be away from those staring eyes, or to be
covered up in anything, one of those women's shawls even.  I'll just leave
the basket and go, she decided.  I shan't even wait for it to be emptied.

Then the door opened.  A little woman in black showed in the gloom.

Laura said, "Are you Mrs. Scott?"  But to her horror the woman answered,
"Walk in please, miss," and she was shut in the passage.

"No," said Laura, "I don't want to come in.  I only want to leave this
basket.  Mother sent--"

The little woman in the gloomy passage seemed not to have heard her.  "Step
this way, please, miss," she said in an oily voice, and Laura followed her.

She found herself in a wretched little low kitchen, lighted by a smoky
lamp.  There was a woman sitting before the fire.

"Em," said the little creature who had let her in.  "Em!  It's a young
lady."  She turned to Laura.  She said meaningly, "I'm 'er sister, miss.
You'll excuse 'er, won't you?"

"Oh, but of course!" said Laura.  "Please, please don't disturb her.  I--I
only want to leave--"

But at that moment the woman at the fire turned round.  Her face, puffed
up, red, with swollen eyes and swollen lips, looked terrible.  She seemed
as though she couldn't understand why Laura was there.  What did it mean?
Why was this stranger standing in the kitchen with a basket?  What was it
all about?  And the poor face puckered up again.

"All right, my dear," said the other.  "I'll thenk the young lady."

And again she began, "You'll excuse her, miss, I'm sure," and her face,
swollen too, tried an oily smile.

Laura only wanted to get out, to get away.  She was back in the passage.
The door opened.  She walked straight through into the bedroom, where the
dead man was lying.

"You'd like a look at 'im, wouldn't you?" said Em's sister, and she brushed
past Laura over to the bed.  "Don't be afraid, my lass,"--and now her voice
sounded fond and sly, and fondly she drew down the sheet--"'e looks a
picture.  There's nothing to show.  Come along, my dear."

Laura came.

There lay a young man, fast asleep--sleeping so soundly, so deeply, that he
was far, far away from them both.  Oh, so remote, so peaceful.  He was
dreaming.  Never wake him up again.  His head was sunk in the pillow, his
eyes were closed; they were blind under the closed eyelids.  He was given
up to his dream.  What did garden-parties and baskets and lace frocks
matter to him?  He was far from all those things.  He was wonderful,
beautiful.  While they were laughing and while the band was playing, this
marvel had come to the lane.  Happy...happy...All is well, said that
sleeping face.  This is just as it should be.  I am content.

But all the same you had to cry, and she couldn't go out of the room
without saying something to him.  Laura gave a loud childish sob.

"Forgive my hat," she said.

And this time she didn't wait for Em's sister.  She found her way out of
the door, down the path, past all those dark people.  At the corner of the
lane she met Laurie.

He stepped out of the shadow.  "Is that you, Laura?"

"Yes."

"Mother was getting anxious.  Was it all right?"

"Yes, quite.  Oh, Laurie!"  She took his arm, she pressed up against him.

"I say, you're not crying, are you?" asked her brother.

Laura shook her head.  She was.

Laurie put his arm round her shoulder.  "Don't cry," he said in his warm,
loving voice.  "Was it awful?"

"No," sobbed Laura.  "It was simply marvellous.  But Laurie--"  She
stopped, she looked at her brother.  "Isn't life," she stammered, "isn't
life--"  But what life was she couldn't explain.  No matter.  He quite
understood.

"Isn't it, darling?" said Laurie.



3.  THE DAUGHTERS OF THE LATE COLONEL.

Chapter 3.I.

The week after was one of the busiest weeks of their lives.  Even when they
went to bed it was only their bodies that lay down and rested; their minds
went on, thinking things out, talking things over, wondering, deciding,
trying to remember where...

Constantia lay like a statue, her hands by her sides, her feet just
overlapping each other, the sheet up to her chin.  She stared at the
ceiling.

"Do you think father would mind if we gave his top-hat to the porter?"

"The porter?" snapped Josephine.  "Why ever the porter?  What a very
extraordinary idea!"

"Because," said Constantia slowly, "he must often have to go to funerals.
And I noticed at--at the cemetery that he only had a bowler."  She paused.
"I thought then how very much he'd appreciate a top-hat.  We ought to give
him a present, too.  He was always very nice to father."

"But," cried Josephine, flouncing on her pillow and staring across the dark
at Constantia, "father's head!"  And suddenly, for one awful moment, she
nearly giggled.  Not, of course, that she felt in the least like giggling.
It must have been habit.  Years ago, when they had stayed awake at night
talking, their beds had simply heaved.  And now the porter's head,
disappearing, popped out, like a candle, under father's hat...The giggle
mounted, mounted; she clenched her hands; she fought it down; she frowned
fiercely at the dark and said "Remember" terribly sternly.

"We can decide to-morrow," she said.

Constantia had noticed nothing; she sighed.

"Do you think we ought to have our dressing-gowns dyed as well?"

"Black?" almost shrieked Josephine.

"Well, what else?" said Constantia.  "I was thinking--it doesn't seem quite
sincere, in a way, to wear black out of doors and when we're fully dressed,
and then when we're at home--"

"But nobody sees us," said Josephine.  She gave the bedclothes such a
twitch that both her feet became uncovered, and she had to creep up the
pillows to get them well under again.

"Kate does," said Constantia.  "And the postman very well might."

Josephine thought of her dark-red slippers, which matched her dressing-
gown, and of Constantia's favourite indefinite green ones which went with
hers.  Black!  Two black dressing-gowns and two pairs of black woolly
slippers, creeping off to the bathroom like black cats.

"I don't think it's absolutely necessary," said she.

Silence.  Then Constantia said, "We shall have to post the papers with the
notice in them to-morrow to catch the Ceylon mail...How many letters have
we had up till now?"

"Twenty-three."

Josephine had replied to them all, and twenty-three times when she came to
"We miss our dear father so much" she had broken down and had to use her
handkerchief, and on some of them even to soak up a very light-blue tear
with an edge of blotting-paper.  Strange!  She couldn't have put it on--but
twenty-three times.  Even now, though, when she said over to herself sadly
"We miss our dear father so much," she could have cried if she'd wanted to.

"Have you got enough stamps?" came from Constantia.

"Oh, how can I tell?" said Josephine crossly.  "What's the good of asking
me that now?"

"I was just wondering," said Constantia mildly.

Silence again.  There came a little rustle, a scurry, a hop.

"A mouse," said Constantia.

"It can't be a mouse because there aren't any crumbs," said Josephine.

"But it doesn't know there aren't," said Constantia.

A spasm of pity squeezed her heart.  Poor little thing!  She wished she'd
left a tiny piece of biscuit on the dressing-table.  It was awful to think
of it not finding anything.  What would it do?

"I can't think how they manage to live at all," she said slowly.

"Who?" demanded Josephine.

And Constantia said more loudly than she meant to, "Mice."

Josephine was furious.  "Oh, what nonsense, Con!" she said.  "What have
mice got to do with it?  You're asleep."

"I don't think I am," said Constantia.  She shut her eyes to make sure.
She was.

Josephine arched her spine, pulled up her knees, folded her arms so that
her fists came under her ears, and pressed her cheek hard against the
pillow.


Chapter 3.II.

Another thing which complicated matters was they had Nurse Andrews staying
on with them that week.  It was their own fault; they had asked her.  It
was Josephine's idea.  On the morning--well, on the last morning, when the
doctor had gone, Josephine had said to Constantia, "Don't you think it
would be rather nice if we asked Nurse Andrews to stay on for a week as our
guest?"

"Very nice," said Constantia.

"I thought," went on Josephine quickly, "I should just say this afternoon,
after I've paid her, 'My sister and I would be very pleased, after all
you've done for us, Nurse Andrews, if you would stay on for a week as our
guest.'  I'd have to put that in about being our guest in case--"

"Oh, but she could hardly expect to be paid!" cried Constantia.

"One never knows," said Josephine sagely.

Nurse Andrews had, of course, jumped at the idea.  But it was a bother.  It
meant they had to have regular sit-down meals at the proper times, whereas
if they'd been alone they could just have asked Kate if she wouldn't have
minded bringing them a tray wherever they were.  And meal-times now that
the strain was over were rather a trial.

Nurse Andrews was simply fearful about butter.  Really they couldn't help
feeling that about butter, at least, she took advantage of their kindness.
And she had that maddening habit of asking for just an inch more of bread
to finish what she had on her plate, and then, at the last mouthful,
absent-mindedly--of course it wasn't absent-mindedly--taking another
helping.  Josephine got very red when this happened, and she fastened her
small, bead-like eyes on the tablecloth as if she saw a minute strange
insect creeping through the web of it.  But Constantia's long, pale face
lengthened and set, and she gazed away--away--far over the desert, to where
that line of camels unwound like a thread of wool...

"When I was with Lady Tukes," said Nurse Andrews, "she had such a dainty
little contrayvance for the buttah.  It was a silvah Cupid balanced on
the--on the bordah of a glass dish, holding a tayny fork.  And when you
wanted some buttah you simply pressed his foot and he bent down and speared
you a piece.  It was quite a gayme."

Josephine could hardly bear that.  But "I think those things are very
extravagant" was all she said.

"But whey?" asked Nurse Andrews, beaming through her eyeglasses.  "No one,
surely, would take more buttah than one wanted--would one?"

"Ring, Con," cried Josephine.  She couldn't trust herself to reply.

And proud young Kate, the enchanted princess, came in to see what the old
tabbies wanted now.  She snatched away their plates of mock something or
other and slapped down a white, terrified blancmange.

"Jam, please, Kate," said Josephine kindly.

Kate knelt and burst open the sideboard, lifted the lid of the jam-pot, saw
it was empty, put it on the table, and stalked off.

"I'm afraid," said Nurse Andrews a moment later, "there isn't any."

"Oh, what a bother!" said Josephine.  She bit her lip.  "What had we better
do?"

Constantia looked dubious.  "We can't disturb Kate again," she said softly.

Nurse Andrews waited, smiling at them both.  Her eyes wandered, spying at
everything behind her eyeglasses.  Constantia in despair went back to her
camels.  Josephine frowned heavily--concentrated.  If it hadn't been for
this idiotic woman she and Con would, of course, have eaten their
blancmange without.  Suddenly the idea came.

"I know," she said.  "Marmalade.  There's some marmalade in the sideboard.
Get it, Con."

"I hope," laughed Nurse Andrews--and her laugh was like a spoon tinkling
against a medicine-glass--"I hope it's not very bittah marmalayde."


Chapter 3.III.

But, after all, it was not long now, and then she'd be gone for good.  And
there was no getting over the fact that she had been very kind to father.
She had nursed him day and night at the end.  Indeed, both Constantia and
Josephine felt privately she had rather overdone the not leaving him at the
very last.  For when they had gone in to say good-bye Nurse Andrews had sat
beside his bed the whole time, holding his wrist and pretending to look at
her watch.  It couldn't have been necessary.  It was so tactless, too.
Supposing father had wanted to say something--something private to them.
Not that he had.  Oh, far from it!  He lay there, purple, a dark, angry
purple in the face, and never even looked at them when they came in.  Then,
as they were standing there, wondering what to do, he had suddenly opened
one eye.  Oh, what a difference it would have made, what a difference to
their memory of him, how much easier to tell people about it, if he had
only opened both!  But no--one eye only.  It glared at them a moment and
then...went out.


Chapter 3.IV.

It had made it very awkward for them when Mr. Farolles, of St. John's,
called the same afternoon.

"The end was quite peaceful, I trust?" were the first words he said as he
glided towards them through the dark drawing-room.

"Quite," said Josephine faintly.  They both hung their heads.  Both of them
felt certain that eye wasn't at all a peaceful eye.

"Won't you sit down?" said Josephine.

"Thank you, Miss Pinner," said Mr. Farolles gratefully.  He folded his
coat-tails and began to lower himself into father's arm-chair, but just as
he touched it he almost sprang up and slid into the next chair instead.

He coughed.  Josephine clasped her hands; Constantia looked vague.

"I want you to feel, Miss Pinner," said Mr. Farolles, "and you, Miss
Constantia, that I'm trying to be helpful.  I want to be helpful to you
both, if you will let me.  These are the times," said Mr Farolles, very
simply and earnestly, "when God means us to be helpful to one another."

"Thank you very much, Mr. Farolles," said Josephine and Constantia.

"Not at all," said Mr. Farolles gently.  He drew his kid gloves through his
fingers and leaned forward.  "And if either of you would like a little
Communion, either or both of you, here and now, you have only to tell me.
A little Communion is often very help--a great comfort," he added tenderly.

But the idea of a little Communion terrified them.  What!  In the drawing-
room by themselves--with no--no altar or anything!  The piano would be much
too high, thought Constantia, and Mr. Farolles could not possibly lean over
it with the chalice.  And Kate would be sure to come bursting in and
interrupt them, thought Josephine.  And supposing the bell rang in the
middle?  It might be somebody important--about their mourning.  Would they
get up reverently and go out, or would they have to wait...in torture?

"Perhaps you will send round a note by your good Kate if you would care for
it later," said Mr. Farolles.

"Oh yes, thank you very much!" they both said.

Mr. Farolles got up and took his black straw hat from the round table.

"And about the funeral," he said softly.  "I may arrange that--as your dear
father's old friend and yours, Miss Pinner--and Miss Constantia?"

Josephine and Constantia got up too.

"I should like it to be quite simple," said Josephine firmly, "and not too
expensive.  At the same time, I should like--"

"A good one that will last," thought dreamy Constantia, as if Josephine
were buying a nightgown.  But, of course, Josephine didn't say that.  "One
suitable to our father's position."  She was very nervous.

"I'll run round to our good friend Mr. Knight," said Mr. Farolles
soothingly.  "I will ask him to come and see you.  I am sure you will find
him very helpful indeed."


Chapter 3.V.

Well, at any rate, all that part of it was over, though neither of them
could possibly believe that father was never coming back.  Josephine had
had a moment of absolute terror at the cemetery, while the coffin was
lowered, to think that she and Constantia had done this thing without
asking his permission.  What would father say when he found out?  For he
was bound to find out sooner or later.  He always did.  "Buried.  You two
girls had me buried!"  She heard his stick thumping.  Oh, what would they
say?  What possible excuse could they make?  It sounded such an appallingly
heartless thing to do.  Such a wicked advantage to take of a person because
he happened to be helpless at the moment.  The other people seemed to treat
it all as a matter of course.  They were strangers; they couldn't be
expected to understand that father was the very last person for such a
thing to happen to.  No, the entire blame for it all would fall on her and
Constantia.  And the expense, she thought, stepping into the tight-buttoned
cab.  When she had to show him the bills.  What would he say then?

She heard him absolutely roaring.  "And do you expect me to pay for this
gimcrack excursion of yours?"

"Oh," groaned poor Josephine aloud, "we shouldn't have done it, Con!"

And Constantia, pale as a lemon in all that blackness, said in a frightened
whisper, "Done what, Jug?"

"Let them bu-bury father like that," said Josephine, breaking down and
crying into her new, queer-smelling mourning handkerchief.

"But what else could we have done?" asked Constantia wonderingly.  "We
couldn't have kept him, Jug--we couldn't have kept him unburied.  At any
rate, not in a flat that size."

Josephine blew her nose; the cab was dreadfully stuffy.

"I don't know," she said forlornly.  "It is all so dreadful.  I feel we
ought to have tried to, just for a time at least.  To make perfectly sure.
One thing's certain"--and her tears sprang out again--"father will never
forgive us for this--never!"


Chapter 3.VI.

Father would never forgive them.  That was what they felt more than ever
when, two mornings later, they went into his room to go through his things.
They had discussed it quite calmly.  It was even down on Josephine's list
of things to be done.  "Go through father's things and settle about them."
But that was a very different matter from saying after breakfast:

"Well, are you ready, Con?"

"Yes, Jug--when you are."

"Then I think we'd better get it over."

It was dark in the hall.  It had been a rule for years never to disturb
father in the morning, whatever happened.  And now they were going to open
the door without knocking even...Constantia's eyes were enormous at the
idea; Josephine felt weak in the knees.

"You--you go first," she gasped, pushing Constantia.

But Constantia said, as she always had said on those occasions, "No, Jug,
that's not fair.  You're the eldest."

Josephine was just going to say--what at other times she wouldn't have
owned to for the world--what she kept for her very last weapon, "But you're
the tallest," when they noticed that the kitchen door was open, and there
stood Kate...

"Very stiff," said Josephine, grasping the doorhandle and doing her best to
turn it.  As if anything ever deceived Kate!

It couldn't be helped.  That girl was...Then the door was shut behind them,
but--but they weren't in father's room at all.  They might have suddenly
walked through the wall by mistake into a different flat altogether.  Was
the door just behind them?  They were too frightened to look.  Josephine
knew that if it was it was holding itself tight shut; Constantia felt that,
like the doors in dreams, it hadn't any handle at all.  It was the coldness
which made it so awful.  Or the whiteness--which?  Everything was covered.
The blinds were down, a cloth hung over the mirror, a sheet hid the bed; a
huge fan of white paper filled the fireplace.  Constantia timidly put out
her hand; she almost expected a snowflake to fall.  Josephine felt a queer
tingling in her nose, as if her nose was freezing.  Then a cab klop-klopped
over the cobbles below, and the quiet seemed to shake into little pieces.

"I had better pull up a blind," said Josephine bravely.

"Yes, it might be a good idea," whispered Constantia.

They only gave the blind a touch, but it flew up and the cord flew after,
rolling round the blind-stick, and the little tassel tapped as if trying to
get free.  That was too much for Constantia.

"Don't you think--don't you think we might put it off for another day?" she
whispered.

"Why?" snapped Josephine, feeling, as usual, much better now that she knew
for certain that Constantia was terrified.  "It's got to be done.  But I do
wish you wouldn't whisper, Con."

"I didn't know I was whispering," whispered Constantia.

"And why do you keep staring at the bed?" said Josephine, raising her voice
almost defiantly.  "There's nothing on the bed."

"Oh, Jug, don't say so!" said poor Connie.  "At any rate, not so loudly."

Josephine felt herself that she had gone too far.  She took a wide swerve
over to the chest of drawers, put out her hand, but quickly drew it back
again.

"Connie!" she gasped, and she wheeled round and leaned with her back
against the chest of drawers.

"Oh, Jug--what?"

Josephine could only glare.  She had the most extraordinary feeling that
she had just escaped something simply awful.  But how could she explain to
Constantia that father was in the chest of drawers?  He was in the top
drawer with his handkerchiefs and neckties, or in the next with his shirts
and pyjamas, or in the lowest of all with his suits.  He was watching
there, hidden away--just behind the door-handle--ready to spring.

She pulled a funny old-fashioned face at Constantia, just as she used to in
the old days when she was going to cry.

"I can't open," she nearly wailed.

"No, don't, Jug," whispered Constantia earnestly.  "It's much better not
to.  Don't let's open anything.  At any rate, not for a long time."

"But--but it seems so weak," said Josephine, breaking down.

"But why not be weak for once, Jug?" argued Constantia, whispering quite
fiercely.  "If it is weak."  And her pale stare flew from the locked
writing-table--so safe--to the huge glittering wardrobe, and she began to
breathe in a queer, panting away.  "Why shouldn't we be weak for once in
our lives, Jug?  It's quite excusable.  Let's be weak--be weak, Jug.  It's
much nicer to be weak than to be strong."

And then she did one of those amazingly bold things that she'd done about
twice before in their lives:  she marched over to the wardrobe, turned the
key, and took it out of the lock.  Took it out of the lock and held it up
to Josephine, showing Josephine by her extraordinary smile that she knew
what she'd done--she'd risked deliberately father being in there among his
overcoats.

If the huge wardrobe had lurched forward, had crashed down on Constantia,
Josephine wouldn't have been surprised.  On the contrary, she would have
thought it the only suitable thing to happen.  But nothing happened.  Only
the room seemed quieter than ever, and the bigger flakes of cold air fell
on Josephine's shoulders and knees.  She began to shiver.

"Come, Jug," said Constantia, still with that awful callous smile, and
Josephine followed just as she had that last time, when Constantia had
pushed Benny into the round pond.


Chapter 3.VII.

But the strain told on them when they were back in the dining-room.  They
sat down, very shaky, and looked at each other.

"I don't feel I can settle to anything," said Josephine, "until I've had
something.  Do you think we could ask Kate for two cups of hot water?"

"I really don't see why we shouldn't," said Constantia carefully.  She was
quite normal again.  "I won't ring.  I'll go to the kitchen door and ask
her."

"Yes, do," said Josephine, sinking down into a chair.  "Tell her, just two
cups, Con, nothing else--on a tray."

"She needn't even put the jug on, need she?" said Constantia, as though
Kate might very well complain if the jug had been there.

"Oh no, certainly not!  The jug's not at all necessary.  She can pour it
direct out of the kettle," cried Josephine, feeling that would be a labour-
saving indeed.

Their cold lips quivered at the greenish brims.  Josephine curved her small
red hands round the cup; Constantia sat up and blew on the wavy steam,
making it flutter from one side to the other.

"Speaking of Benny," said Josephine.

And though Benny hadn't been mentioned Constantia immediately looked as
though he had.

"He'll expect us to send him something of father's, of course.  But it's so
difficult to know what to send to Ceylon."

"You mean things get unstuck so on the voyage," murmured Constantia.

"No, lost," said Josephine sharply.  "You know there's no post.  Only
runners."

Both paused to watch a black man in white linen drawers running through the
pale fields for dear life, with a large brown-paper parcel in his hands.
Josephine's black man was tiny; he scurried along glistening like an ant.
But there was something blind and tireless about Constantia's tall, thin
fellow, which made him, she decided, a very unpleasant person indeed...On
the veranda, dressed all in white and wearing a cork helmet, stood Benny.
His right hand shook up and down, as father's did when he was impatient.
And behind him, not in the least interested, sat Hilda, the unknown sister-
in-law.  She swung in a cane rocker and flicked over the leaves of the
"Tatler."

"I think his watch would be the most suitable present," said Josephine.

Constantia looked up; she seemed surprised.

"Oh, would you trust a gold watch to a native?"

"But of course, I'd disguise it," said Josephine.  "No one would know it
was a watch."  She liked the idea of having to make a parcel such a curious
shape that no one could possibly guess what it was.  She even thought for a
moment of hiding the watch in a narrow cardboard corset-box that she'd kept
by her for a long time, waiting for it to come in for something.  It was
such beautiful, firm cardboard.  But, no, it wouldn't be appropriate for
this occasion.  It had lettering on it:  "Medium Women's 28.  Extra Firm
Busks."  It would be almost too much of a surprise for Benny to open that
and find father's watch inside.

"And of course it isn't as though it would be going--ticking, I mean," said
Constantia, who was still thinking of the native love of jewellery.  "At
least," she added, "it would be very strange if after all that time it
was."


Chapter 3.VIII.

Josephine made no reply.  She had flown off on one of her tangents.  She
had suddenly thought of Cyril.  Wasn't it more usual for the only grandson
to have the watch?  And then dear Cyril was so appreciative, and a gold
watch meant so much to a young man.  Benny, in all probability, had quite
got out of the habit of watches; men so seldom wore waistcoats in those hot
climates.  Whereas Cyril in London wore them from year's end to year's end.
And it would be so nice for her and Constantia, when he came to tea, to
know it was there.  "I see you've got on grandfather's watch, Cyril."  It
would be somehow so satisfactory.

Dear boy!  What a blow his sweet, sympathetic little note had been!  Of
course they quite understood; but it was most unfortunate.

"It would have been such a point, having him," said Josephine.

"And he would have enjoyed it so," said Constantia, not thinking what she
was saying.

However, as soon as he got back he was coming to tea with his aunties.
Cyril to tea was one of their rare treats.

"Now, Cyril, you mustn't be frightened of our cakes.  Your Auntie Con and I
bought them at Buszard's this morning.  We know what a man's appetite is.
So don't be ashamed of making a good tea."

Josephine cut recklessly into the rich dark cake that stood for her winter
gloves or the soling and heeling of Constantia's only respectable shoes.
But Cyril was most unmanlike in appetite.

"I say, Aunt Josephine, I simply can't.  I've only just had lunch, you
know."

"Oh, Cyril, that can't be true!  It's after four," cried Josephine.
Constantia sat with her knife poised over the chocolate-roll.

"It is, all the same," said Cyril.  "I had to meet a man at Victoria, and
he kept me hanging about till...there was only time to get lunch and to
come on here.  And he gave me--phew"--Cyril put his hand to his forehead--
"a terrific blow-out," he said.

It was disappointing--to-day of all days.  But still he couldn't be
expected to know.

"But you'll have a meringue, won't you, Cyril?" said Aunt Josephine.
"These meringues were bought specially for you.  Your dear father was so
fond of them.  We were sure you are, too."

"I am, Aunt Josephine," cried Cyril ardently.  "Do you mind if I take half
to begin with?"

"Not at all, dear boy; but we mustn't let you off with that."

"Is your dear father still so fond of meringues?" asked Auntie Con gently.
She winced faintly as she broke through the shell of hers.

"Well, I don't quite know, Auntie Con," said Cyril breezily.

At that they both looked up.

"Don't know?" almost snapped Josephine.  "Don't know a thing like that
about your own father, Cyril?"

"Surely," said Auntie Con softly.

Cyril tried to laugh it off.  "Oh, well," he said, "it's such a long time
since--"  He faltered.  He stopped.  Their faces were too much for him.

"Even so," said Josephine.

And Auntie Con looked.

Cyril put down his teacup.  "Wait a bit," he cried.  "Wait a bit, Aunt
Josephine.  What am I thinking of?"

He looked up.  They were beginning to brighten.  Cyril slapped his knee.

"Of course," he said, "it was meringues.  How could I have forgotten?  Yes,
Aunt Josephine, you're perfectly right.  Father's most frightfully keen on
meringues."

They didn't only beam.  Aunt Josephine went scarlet with pleasure; Auntie
Con gave a deep, deep sigh.

"And now, Cyril, you must come and see father," said Josephine.  "He knows
you were coming to-day."

"Right," said Cyril, very firmly and heartily.  He got up from his chair;
suddenly he glanced at the clock.

"I say, Auntie Con, isn't your clock a bit slow?  I've got to meet a man
at--at Paddington just after five.  I'm afraid I shan't be able to stay
very long with grandfather."

"Oh, he won't expect you to stay very long!" said Aunt Josephine.

Constantia was still gazing at the clock.  She couldn't make up her mind if
it was fast or slow.  It was one or the other, she felt almost certain of
that.  At any rate, it had been.

Cyril still lingered.  "Aren't you coming along, Auntie Con?"

"Of course," said Josephine, "we shall all go.  Come on, Con."


Chapter 3.IX.

They knocked at the door, and Cyril followed his aunts into grandfather's
hot, sweetish room.

"Come on," said Grandfather Pinner.  "Don't hang about.  What is it?
What've you been up to?"

He was sitting in front of a roaring fire, clasping his stick.  He had a
thick rug over his knees.  On his lap there lay a beautiful pale yellow
silk handkerchief.

"It's Cyril, father," said Josephine shyly.  And she took Cyril's hand and
led him forward.

"Good afternoon, grandfather," said Cyril, trying to take his hand out of
Aunt Josephine's.  Grandfather Pinner shot his eyes at Cyril in the way he
was famous for.  Where was Auntie Con?  She stood on the other side of Aunt
Josephine; her long arms hung down in front of her; her hands were clasped.
She never took her eyes off grandfather.

"Well," said Grandfather Pinner, beginning to thump, "what have you got to
tell me?"

What had he, what had he got to tell him?  Cyril felt himself smiling like
a perfect imbecile.  The room was stifling, too.

But Aunt Josephine came to his rescue.  She cried brightly, "Cyril says his
father is still very fond of meringues, father dear."

"Eh?" said Grandfather Pinner, curving his hand like a purple meringue-
shell over one ear.

Josephine repeated, "Cyril says his father is still very fond of
meringues."

"Can't hear," said old Colonel Pinner.  And he waved Josephine away with
his stick, then pointed with his stick to Cyril.  "Tell me what she's
trying to say," he said.

(My God!) "Must I?" said Cyril, blushing and staring at Aunt Josephine.

"Do, dear," she smiled.  "It will please him so much."

"Come on, out with it!" cried Colonel Pinner testily, beginning to thump
again.

And Cyril leaned forward and yelled, "Father's still very fond of
meringues."

At that Grandfather Pinner jumped as though he had been shot.

"Don't shout!" he cried.  "What's the matter with the boy?  Meringues!
What about 'em?"

"Oh, Aunt Josephine, must we go on?" groaned Cyril desperately.

"It's quite all right, dear boy," said Aunt Josephine, as though he and she
were at the dentist's together.  "He'll understand in a minute."  And she
whispered to Cyril, "He's getting a bit deaf, you know."  Then she leaned
forward and really bawled at Grandfather Pinner, "Cyril only wanted to tell
you, father dear, that his father is still very fond of meringues."

Colonel Pinner heard that time, heard and brooded, looking Cyril up and
down.

"What an esstrordinary thing!" said old Grandfather Pinner.  "What an
esstrordinary thing to come all this way here to tell me!"

And Cyril felt it was.

"Yes, I shall send Cyril the watch," said Josephine.

"That would be very nice," said Constantia.  "I seem to remember last time
he came there was some little trouble about the time."


Chapter 3.X.

They were interrupted by Kate bursting through the door in her usual
fashion, as though she had discovered some secret panel in the wall.

"Fried or boiled?" asked the bold voice.

Fried or boiled?  Josephine and Constantia were quite bewildered for the
moment.  They could hardly take it in.

"Fried or boiled what, Kate?" asked Josephine, trying to begin to
concentrate.

Kate gave a loud sniff.  "Fish."

"Well, why didn't you say so immediately?"  Josephine reproached her
gently.  "How could you expect us to understand, Kate?  There are a great
many things in this world you know, which are fried or boiled."  And after
such a display of courage she said quite brightly to Constantia, "Which do
you prefer, Con?"

"I think it might be nice to have it fried," said Constantia.  "On the
other hand, of course, boiled fish is very nice.  I think I prefer both
equally well...Unless you...In that case--"

"I shall fry it," said Kate, and she bounced back, leaving their door open
and slamming the door of her kitchen.

Josephine gazed at Constantia; she raised her pale eyebrows until they
rippled away into her pale hair.  She got up.  She said in a very lofty,
imposing way, "Do you mind following me into the drawing-room, Constantia?
I've got something of great importance to discuss with you."

For it was always to the drawing-room they retired when they wanted to talk
over Kate.

Josephine closed the door meaningly.  "Sit down, Constantia," she said,
still very grand.  She might have been receiving Constantia for the first
time.  And Con looked round vaguely for a chair, as though she felt indeed
quite a stranger.

"Now the question is," said Josephine, bending forward, "whether we shall
keep her or not."

"That is the question," agreed Constantia.

"And this time," said Josephine firmly, "we must come to a definite
decision."

Constantia looked for a moment as though she might begin going over all the
other times, but she pulled herself together and said, "Yes, Jug."

"You see, Con," explained Josephine, "everything is so changed now."
Constantia looked up quickly.  "I mean," went on Josephine, "we're not
dependent on Kate as we were."  And she blushed faintly.  "There's not
father to cook for."

"That is perfectly true," agreed Constantia.  "Father certainly doesn't
want any cooking now, whatever else--"

Josephine broke in sharply, "You're not sleepy, are you, Con?"

"Sleepy, Jug?"  Constantia was wide-eyed.

"Well, concentrate more," said Josephine sharply, and she returned to the
subject.  "What it comes to is, if we did"--and this she barely breathed,
glancing at the door--"give Kate notice"--she raised her voice again--"we
could manage our own food."

"Why not?" cried Constantia.  She couldn't help smiling.  The idea was so
exciting.  She clasped her hands.  "What should we live on, Jug?"

"Oh, eggs in various forms!" said Jug, lofty again.  "And, besides, there
are all the cooked foods."

"But I've always heard," said Constantia, "they are considered so very
expensive."

"Not if one buys them in moderation," said Josephine.  But she tore herself
away from this fascinating bypath and dragged Constantia after her.

"What we've got to decide now, however, is whether we really do trust Kate
or not."

Constantia leaned back.  Her flat little laugh flew from her lips.

"Isn't it curious, Jug," said she, "that just on this one subject I've
never been able to quite make up my mind?"


Chapter 3.XI.

She never had.  The whole difficulty was to prove anything.  How did one
prove things, how could one?  Suppose Kate had stood in front of her and
deliberately made a face.  Mightn't she very well have been in pain?
Wasn't it impossible, at any rate, to ask Kate if she was making a face at
her?  If Kate answered "No"--and, of course, she would say "No"--what a
position!  How undignified!  Then again Constantia suspected, she was
almost certain that Kate went to her chest of drawers when she and
Josephine were out, not to take things but to spy.  Many times she had come
back to find her amethyst cross in the most unlikely places, under her lace
ties or on top of her evening Bertha.  More than once she had laid a trap
for Kate.  She had arranged things in a special order and then called
Josephine to witness.

"You see, Jug?"

"Quite, Con."

"Now we shall be able to tell."

But, oh dear, when she did go to look, she was as far off from a proof as
ever!  If anything was displaced, it might so very well have happened as
she closed the drawer; a jolt might have done it so easily.

"You come, Jug, and decide.  I really can't.  It's too difficult."

But after a pause and a long glare Josephine would sigh, "Now you've put
the doubt into my mind, Con, I'm sure I can't tell myself."

"Well, we can't postpone it again," said Josephine.  "If we postpone it
this time--"


Chapter 3.XII.

But at that moment in the street below a barrel-organ struck up.  Josephine
and Constantia sprang to their feet together.

"Run, Con," said Josephine.  "Run quickly.  There's sixpence on the--"

Then they remembered.  It didn't matter.  They would never have to stop the
organ-grinder again.  Never again would she and Constantia be told to make
that monkey take his noise somewhere else.  Never would sound that loud,
strange bellow when father thought they were not hurrying enough.  The
organ-grinder might play there all day and the stick would not thump.

"It never will thump again,
 It never will thump again,

played the barrel-organ.

What was Constantia thinking?  She had such a strange smile; she looked
different.  She couldn't be going to cry.

"Jug, Jug," said Constantia softly, pressing her hands together.  "Do you
know what day it is?  It's Saturday.  It's a week to-day, a whole week."

"A week since father died,
 A week since father died,"

cried the barrel-organ.  And Josephine, too, forgot to be practical and
sensible; she smiled faintly, strangely.  On the Indian carpet there fell a
square of sunlight, pale red; it came and went and came--and stayed,
deepened--until it shone almost golden.

"The sun's out," said Josephine, as though it really mattered.

A perfect fountain of bubbling notes shook from the barrel-organ, round,
bright notes, carelessly scattered.

Constantia lifted her big, cold hands as if to catch them, and then her
hands fell again.  She walked over to the mantelpiece to her favourite
Buddha.  And the stone and gilt image, whose smile always gave her such a
queer feeling, almost a pain and yet a pleasant pain, seemed to-day to be
more than smiling.  He knew something; he had a secret.  "I know something
that you don't know," said her Buddha.  Oh, what was it, what could it be?
And yet she had always felt there was...something.

The sunlight pressed through the windows, thieved its way in, flashed its
light over the furniture and the photographs.  Josephine watched it.  When
it came to mother's photograph, the enlargement over the piano, it lingered
as though puzzled to find so little remained of mother, except the earrings
shaped like tiny pagodas and a black feather boa.  Why did the photographs
of dead people always fade so? wondered Josephine.  As soon as a person was
dead their photograph died too.  But, of course, this one of mother was
very old.  It was thirty-five years old.  Josephine remembered standing on
a chair and pointing out that feather boa to Constantia and telling her
that it was a snake that had killed their mother in Ceylon...Would
everything have been different if mother hadn't died?  She didn't see why.
Aunt Florence had lived with them until they had left school, and they had
moved three times and had their yearly holiday and...and there'd been
changes of servants, of course.

Some little sparrows, young sparrows they sounded, chirped on the window-
ledge.  "Yeep--eyeep--yeep."  But Josephine felt they were not sparrows,
not on the window-ledge.  It was inside her, that queer little crying
noise.  "Yeep--eyeep--yeep."  Ah, what was it crying, so weak and forlorn?

If mother had lived, might they have married?  But there had been nobody
for them to marry.  There had been father's Anglo-Indian friends before he
quarrelled with them.  But after that she and Constantia never met a single
man except clergymen.  How did one meet men?  Or even if they'd met them,
how could they have got to know men well enough to be more than strangers?
One read of people having adventures, being followed, and so on.  But
nobody had ever followed Constantia and her.  Oh yes, there had been one
year at Eastbourne a mysterious man at their boarding-house who had put a
note on the jug of hot water outside their bedroom door!  But by the time
Connie had found it the steam had made the writing too faint to read; they
couldn't even make out to which of them it was addressed.  And he had left
next day.  And that was all.  The rest had been looking after father, and
at the same time keeping out of father's way.  But now?  But now?  The
thieving sun touched Josephine gently.  She lifted her face.  She was drawn
over to the window by gentle beams...

Until the barrel-organ stopped playing Constantia stayed before the Buddha,
wondering, but not as usual, not vaguely.  This time her wonder was like
longing.  She remembered the times she had come in here, crept out of bed
in her nightgown when the moon was full, and lain on the floor with her
arms outstretched, as though she was crucified.  Why?  The big, pale moon
had made her do it.  The horrible dancing figures on the carved screen had
leered at her and she hadn't minded.  She remembered too how, whenever they
were at the seaside, she had gone off by herself and got as close to the
sea as she could, and sung something, something she had made up, while she
gazed all over that restless water.  There had been this other life,
running out, bringing things home in bags, getting things on approval,
discussing them with Jug, and taking them back to get more things on
approval, and arranging father's trays and trying not to annoy father.  But
it all seemed to have happened in a kind of tunnel.  It wasn't real.  It
was only when she came out of the tunnel into the moonlight or by the sea
or into a thunderstorm that she really felt herself.  What did it mean?
What was it she was always wanting?  What did it all lead to?  Now?  Now?

She turned away from the Buddha with one of her vague gestures.  She went
over to where Josephine was standing.  She wanted to say something to
Josephine, something frightfully important, about--about the future and
what...

"Don't you think perhaps--" she began.

But Josephine interrupted her.  "I was wondering if now--" she murmured.
They stopped; they waited for each other.

"Go on, Con," said Josephine.

"No, no, Jug; after you," said Constantia.

"No, say what you were going to say.  You began," said Josephine.

"I...I'd rather hear what you were going to say first," said Constantia.

"Don't be absurd, Con."

"Really, Jug."

"Connie!"

"Oh, Jug!"

A pause.  Then Constantia said faintly, "I can't say what I was going to
say, Jug, because I've forgotten what it was...that I was going to say."

Josephine was silent for a moment.  She stared at a big cloud where the sun
had been.  Then she replied shortly, "I've forgotten too."



4.  MR. AND MRS. DOVE.

Of course he knew--no man better--that he hadn't a ghost of a chance, he
hadn't an earthly.  The very idea of such a thing was preposterous.  So
preposterous that he'd perfectly understand it if her father--well,
whatever her father chose to do he'd perfectly understand.  In fact,
nothing short of desperation, nothing short of the fact that this was
positively his last day in England for God knows how long, would have
screwed him up to it.  And even now...He chose a tie out of the chest of
drawers, a blue and cream check tie, and sat on the side of his bed.
Supposing she replied, "What impertinence!" would he be surprised?  Not in
the least, he decided, turning up his soft collar and turning it down over
the tie.  He expected her to say something like that.  He didn't see, if he
looked at the affair dead soberly, what else she could say.

Here he was!  And nervously he tied a bow in front of the mirror, jammed
his hair down with both hands, pulled out the flaps of his jacket pockets.
Making between 500 and 600 pounds a year on a fruit farm in--of all places-
-Rhodesia.  No capital.  Not a penny coming to him.  No chance of his
income increasing for at least four years.  As for looks and all that sort
of thing, he was completely out of the running.  He couldn't even boast of
top-hole health, for the East Africa business had knocked him out so
thoroughly that he'd had to take six months' leave.  He was still fearfully
pale--worse even than usual this afternoon, he thought, bending forward and
peering into the mirror.  Good heavens!  What had happened?  His hair
looked almost bright green.  Dash it all, he hadn't green hair at all
events.  That was a bit too steep.  And then the green light trembled in
the glass; it was the shadow from the tree outside.  Reggie turned away,
took out his cigarette case, but remembering how the mater hated him to
smoke in his bedroom, put it back again and drifted over to the chest of
drawers.  No, he was dashed if he could think of one blessed thing in his
favour, while she...Ah!...He stopped dead, folded his arms, and leaned hard
against the chest of drawers.

And in spite of her position, her father's wealth, the fact that she was an
only child and far and away the most popular girl in the neighbourhood; in
spite of her beauty and her cleverness--cleverness!--it was a great deal
more than that, there was really nothing she couldn't do; he fully
believed, had it been necessary, she would have been a genius at anything--
in spite of the fact that her parents adored her, and she them, and they'd
as soon let her go all that way as...In spite of every single thing you
could think of, so terrific was his love that he couldn't help hoping.
Well, was it hope?  Or was this queer, timid longing to have the chance of
looking after her, of making it his job to see that she had everything she
wanted, and that nothing came near her that wasn't perfect--just love?  How
he loved her!  He squeezed hard against the chest of drawers and murmured
to it, "I love her, I love her!"  And just for the moment he was with her
on the way to Umtali.  It was night.  She sat in a corner asleep.  Her soft
chin was tucked into her soft collar, her gold-brown lashes lay on her
cheeks.  He doted on her delicate little nose, her perfect lips, her ear
like a baby's, and the gold-brown curl that half covered it.  They were
passing through the jungle.  It was warm and dark and far away.  Then she
woke up and said, "Have I been asleep?" and he answered, "Yes.  Are you all
right?  Here, let me--"  And he leaned forward to...He bent over her.  This
was such bliss that he could dream no further.  But it gave him the courage
to bound downstairs, to snatch his straw hat from the hall, and to say as
he closed the front door, "Well, I can only try my luck, that's all."

But his luck gave him a nasty jar, to say the least, almost immediately.
Promenading up and down the garden path with Chinny and Biddy, the ancient
Pekes, was the mater.  Of course Reginald was fond of the mater and all
that.  She--she meant well, she had no end of grit, and so on.  But there
was no denying it, she was rather a grim parent.  And there had been
moments, many of them, in Reggie's life, before Uncle Alick died and left
him the fruit farm, when he was convinced that to be a widow's only son was
about the worst punishment a chap could have.  And what made it rougher
than ever was that she was positively all that he had.  She wasn't only a
combined parent, as it were, but she had quarrelled with all her own and
the governor's relations before Reggie had won his first trouser pockets.
So that whenever Reggie was homesick out there, sitting on his dark veranda
by starlight, while the gramophone cried, "Dear, what is Life but Love?"
his only vision was of the mater, tall and stout, rustling down the garden
path, with Chinny and Biddy at her heels...

The mater, with her scissors outspread to snap the head of a dead something
or other, stopped at the sight of Reggie.

"You are not going out, Reginald?" she asked, seeing that he was.

"I'll be back for tea, mater," said Reggie weakly, plunging his hands into
his jacket pockets.

Snip.  Off came a head.  Reggie almost jumped.

"I should have thought you could have spared your mother your last
afternoon," said she.

Silence.  The Pekes stared.  They understood every word of the mater's.
Biddy lay down with her tongue poked out; she was so fat and glossy she
looked like a lump of half-melted toffee.  But Chinny's porcelain eyes
gloomed at Reginald, and he sniffed faintly, as though the whole world were
one unpleasant smell.  Snip, went the scissors again.  Poor little beggars;
they were getting it!

"And where are you going, if your mother may ask?" asked the mater.

It was over at last, but Reggie did not slow down until he was out of sight
of the house and half-way to Colonel Proctor's.  Then only he noticed what
a top-hole afternoon it was.  It had been raining all the morning, late
summer rain, warm, heavy, quick, and now the sky was clear, except for a
long tail of little clouds, like duckings, sailing over the forest.  There
was just enough wind to shake the last drops off the trees; one warm star
splashed on his hand.  Ping!--another drummed on his hat.  The empty road
gleamed, the hedges smelled of briar, and how big and bright the hollyhocks
glowed in the cottage gardens.  And here was Colonel Proctor's--here it was
already.  His hand was on the gate, his elbow jogged the syringa bushes,
and petals and pollen scattered over his coat sleeve.  But wait a bit.
This was too quick altogether.  He'd meant to think the whole thing out
again.  Here, steady.  But he was walking up the path, with the huge rose
bushes on either side.  It can't be done like this.  But his hand had
grasped the bell, given it a pull, and started it pealing wildly, as if
he'd come to say the house was on fire.  The housemaid must have been in
the hall, too, for the front door flashed open, and Reggie was shut in the
empty drawing-room before that confounded bell had stopped ringing.
Strangely enough, when it did, the big room, shadowy, with some one's
parasol lying on top of the grand piano, bucked him up--or rather, excited
him.  It was so quiet, and yet in one moment the door would open, and his
fate be decided.  The feeling was not unlike that of being at the
dentist's; he was almost reckless.  But at the same time, to his immense
surprise, Reggie heard himself saying, "Lord, Thou knowest, Thou hast not
done much for me..."  That pulled him up; that made him realize again how
dead serious it was.  Too late.  The door handle turned.  Anne came in,
crossed the shadowy space between them, gave him her hand, and said, in her
small, soft voice, "I'm so sorry, father is out.  And mother is having a
day in town, hat-hunting.  There's only me to entertain you, Reggie."

Reggie gasped, pressed his own hat to his jacket buttons, and stammered
out, "As a matter of fact, I've only come...to say good-bye."

"Oh!" cried Anne softly--she stepped back from him and her grey eyes
danced--"what a very short visit!"

Then, watching him, her chin tilted, she laughed outright, a long, soft
peal, and walked away from him over to the piano, and leaned against it,
playing with the tassel of the parasol.

"I'm so sorry," she said, "to be laughing like this.  I don't know why I
do.  It's just a bad ha--habit."  And suddenly she stamped her grey shoe,
and took a pocket-handkerchief out of her white woolly jacket.  "I really
must conquer it, it's too absurd," said she.

"Good heavens, Anne," cried Reggie, "I love to hear you laughing!  I can't
imagine anything more--"

But the truth was, and they both knew it, she wasn't always laughing; it
wasn't really a habit.  Only ever since the day they'd met, ever since that
very first moment, for some strange reason that Reggie wished to God he
understood, Anne had laughed at him.  Why?  It didn't matter where they
were or what they were talking about.  They might begin by being as serious
as possible, dead serious--at any rate, as far as he was concerned--but
then suddenly, in the middle of a sentence, Anne would glance at him, and a
little quick quiver passed over her face.  Her lips parted, her eyes
danced, and she began laughing.

Another queer thing about it was, Reggie had an idea she didn't herself
know why she laughed.  He had seen her turn away, frown, suck in her
cheeks, press her hands together.  But it was no use.  The long, soft peal
sounded, even while she cried, "I don't know why I'm laughing."  It was a
mystery...

Now she tucked the handkerchief away.

"Do sit down," said she.  "And smoke, won't you?  There are cigarettes in
that little box beside you.  I'll have one too."  He lighted a match for
her, and as she bent forward he saw the tiny flame glow in the pearl ring
she wore.  "It is to-morrow that you're going, isn't it?" said Anne.

"Yes, to-morrow as ever was," said Reggie, and he blew a little fan of
smoke.  Why on earth was he so nervous?  Nervous wasn't the word for it.

"It's--it's frightfully hard to believe," he added.

"Yes--isn't it?" said Anne softly, and she leaned forward and rolled the
point of her cigarette round the green ash-tray.  How beautiful she looked
like that!--simply beautiful--and she was so small in that immense chair.
Reginald's heart swelled with tenderness, but it was her voice, her soft
voice, that made him tremble.  "I feel you've been here for years," she
said.

Reginald took a deep breath of his cigarette.  "It's ghastly, this idea of
going back," be said.

"Coo-roo-coo-coo-coo," sounded from the quiet.

"But you're fond of being out there, aren't you?" said Anne.  She hooked
her finger through her pearl necklace.  "Father was saying only the other
night how lucky he thought you were to have a life of your own."  And she
looked up at him.  Reginald's smile was rather wan.  "I don't feel
fearfully lucky," he said lightly.

"Roo-coo-coo-coo," came again.  And Anne murmured, "You mean it's lonely."

"Oh, it isn't the loneliness I care about," said Reginald, and he stumped
his cigarette savagely on the green ash-tray.  "I could stand any amount of
it, used to like it even.  It's the idea of--"  Suddenly, to his horror, he
felt himself blushing.

"Roo-coo-coo-coo!  Roo-coo-coo-coo!"

Anne jumped up.  "Come and say good-bye to my doves," she said.  "They've
been moved to the side veranda.  You do like doves, don't you, Reggie?"

"Awfully," said Reggie, so fervently that as he opened the French window
for her and stood to one side, Anne ran forward and laughed at the doves
instead.

To and fro, to and fro over the fine red sand on the floor of the dove
house, walked the two doves.  One was always in front of the other.  One
ran forward, uttering a little cry, and the other followed, solemnly bowing
and bowing.  "You see," explained Anne, "the one in front, she's Mrs. Dove.
She looks at Mr. Dove and gives that little laugh and runs forward, and he
follows her, bowing and bowing.  And that makes her laugh again.  Away she
runs, and after her," cried Anne, and she sat back on her heels, "comes
poor Mr. Dove, bowing and bowing...and that's their whole life.  They never
do anything else, you know."  She got up and took some yellow grains out of
a bag on the roof of the dove house.  "When you think of them, out in
Rhodesia, Reggie, you can be sure that is what they will be doing..."

Reggie gave no sign of having seen the doves or of having heard a word.
For the moment he was conscious only of the immense effort it took to tear
his secret out of himself and offer it to Anne.  "Anne, do you think you
could ever care for me?"  It was done.  It was over.  And in the little
pause that followed Reginald saw the garden open to the light, the blue
quivering sky, the flutter of leaves on the veranda poles, and Anne turning
over the grains of maize on her palm with one finger.  Then slowly she shut
her hand, and the new world faded as she murmured slowly, "No, never in
that way."  But he had scarcely time to feel anything before she walked
quickly away, and he followed her down the steps, along the garden path,
under the pink rose arches, across the lawn.  There, with the gay
herbaceous border behind her, Anne faced Reginald.  "It isn't that I'm not
awfully fond of you," she said.  "I am.  But"--her eyes widened--"not in
the way"--a quiver passed over her face--"one ought to be fond of--"  Her
lips parted, and she couldn't stop herself.  She began laughing.  "There,
you see, you see," she cried, "it's your check t-tie.  Even at this moment,
when one would think one really would be solemn, your tie reminds me
fearfully of the bow-tie that cats wear in pictures!  Oh, please forgive me
for being so horrid, please!"

Reggie caught hold of her little warm hand.  "There's no question of
forgiving you," he said quickly.  "How could there be?  And I do believe I
know why I make you laugh.  It's because you're so far above me in every
way that I am somehow ridiculous.  I see that, Anne.  But if I were to--"

"No, no."  Anne squeezed his hand hard.  "It's not that.  That's all wrong.
I'm not far above you at all.  You're much better than I am.  You're
marvellously unselfish and...and kind and simple.  I'm none of those
things.  You don't know me.  I'm the most awful character," said Anne.
"Please don't interrupt.  And besides, that's not the point.  The point
is"--she shook her head--"I couldn't possibly marry a man I laughed at.
Surely you see that.  The man I marry--" breathed Anne softly.  She broke
off.  She drew her hand away, and looking at Reggie she smiled strangely,
dreamily.  "The man I marry--"

And it seemed to Reggie that a tall, handsome, brilliant stranger stepped
in front of him and took his place--the kind of man that Anne and he had
seen often at the theatre, walking on to the stage from nowhere, without a
word catching the heroine in his arms, and after one long, tremendous look,
carrying her off to anywhere...

Reggie bowed to his vision.  "Yes, I see," he said huskily.

"Do you?" said Anne.  "Oh, I do hope you do.  Because I feel so horrid
about it.  It's so hard to explain.  You know I've never--"  She stopped.
Reggie looked at her.  She was smiling.  "Isn't it funny?" she said.  "I
can say anything to you.  I always have been able to from the very
beginning."

He tried to smile, to say "I'm glad."  She went on.  "I've never known any
one I like as much as I like you.  I've never felt so happy with any one.
But I'm sure it's not what people and what books mean when they talk about
love.  Do you understand?  Oh, if you only knew how horrid I feel.  But
we'd be like...like Mr. and Mrs. Dove."

That did it.  That seemed to Reginald final, and so terribly true that he
could hardly bear it.  "Don't drive it home," he said, and he turned away
from Anne and looked across the lawn.  There was the gardener's cottage,
with the dark ilex-tree beside it.  A wet, blue thumb of transparent smoke
hung above the chimney.  It didn't look real.  How his throat ached!  Could
he speak?  He had a shot.  "I must be getting along home," he croaked, and
he began walking across the lawn.  But Anne ran after him.  "No, don't.
You can't go yet," she said imploringly.  "You can't possibly go away
feeling like that."  And she stared up at him frowning, biting her lip.

"Oh, that's all right," said Reggie, giving himself a shake.  "I'll...
I'll--"  And he waved his hand as much to say "get over it."

"But this is awful," said Anne.  She clasped her hands and stood in front
of him.  "Surely you do see how fatal it would be for us to marry, don't
you?"

"Oh, quite, quite," said Reggie, looking at her with haggard eyes.

"How wrong, how wicked, feeling as I do.  I mean, it's all very well for
Mr. and Mrs. Dove.  But imagine that in real life--imagine it!"

"Oh, absolutely," said Reggie, and he started to walk on.  But again Anne
stopped him.  She tugged at his sleeve, and to his astonishment, this time,
instead of laughing, she looked like a little girl who was going to cry.

"Then why, if you understand, are you so un-unhappy?" she wailed.  "Why do
you mind so fearfully?  Why do you look so aw-awful?"

Reggie gulped, and again he waved something away.  "I can't help it," he
said, "I've had a blow.  If I cut off now, I'll be able to--"

"How can you talk of cutting off now?" said Anne scornfully.  She stamped
her foot at Reggie; she was crimson.  "How can you be so cruel?  I can't
let you go until I know for certain that you are just as happy as you were
before you asked me to marry you.  Surely you must see that, it's so
simple."

But it did not seem at all simple to Reginald.  It seemed impossibly
difficult.

"Even if I can't marry you, how can I know that you're all that way away,
with only that awful mother to write to, and that you're miserable, and
that it's all my fault?"

"It's not your fault.  Don't think that.  It's just fate."  Reggie took her
hand off his sleeve and kissed it.  "Don't pity me, dear little Anne," he
said gently.  And this time he nearly ran, under the pink arches, along the
garden path.

"Roo-coo-coo-coo!  Roo-coo-coo-coo!" sounded from the veranda.  "Reggie,
Reggie," from the garden.

He stopped, he turned.  But when she saw his timid, puzzled look, she gave
a little laugh.

"Come back, Mr. Dove," said Anne.  And Reginald came slowly across the
lawn.



5.  THE YOUNG GIRL.

In her blue dress, with her cheeks lightly flushed, her blue, blue eyes,
and her gold curls pinned up as though for the first time--pinned up to be
out of the way for her flight--Mrs. Raddick's daughter might have just
dropped from this radiant heaven.  Mrs. Raddick's timid, faintly
astonished, but deeply admiring glance looked as if she believed it, too;
but the daughter didn't appear any too pleased--why should she?--to have
alighted on the steps of the Casino.  Indeed, she was bored--bored as
though Heaven had been full of casinos with snuffy old saints for croupiers
and crowns to play with.

"You don't mind taking Hennie?" said Mrs. Raddick.  "Sure you don't?
There's the car, and you'll have tea and we'll be back here on this step--
right here--in an hour.  You see, I want her to go in.  She's not been
before, and it's worth seeing.  I feel it wouldn't be fair to her."

"Oh, shut up, mother," said she wearily.  "Come along.  Don't talk so much.
And your bag's open; you'll be losing all your money again."

"I'm sorry, darling," said Mrs. Raddick.

"Oh, do come in!  I want to make money," said the impatient voice.  "It's
all jolly well for you--but I'm broke!"

"Here--take fifty francs, darling, take a hundred!"  I saw Mrs. Raddick
pressing notes into her hand as they passed through the swing doors.

Hennie and I stood on the steps a minute, watching the people.  He had a
very broad, delighted smile.

"I say," he cried, "there's an English bulldog.  Are they allowed to take
dogs in there?"

"No, they're not."

"He's a ripping chap, isn't he?  I wish I had one.  They're such fun.  They
frighten people so, and they're never fierce with their--the people they
belong to."  Suddenly he squeezed my arm.  "I say, do look at that old
woman.  Who is she?  Why does she look like that?  Is she a gambler?"

The ancient, withered creature, wearing a green satin dress, a black velvet
cloak and a white hat with purple feathers, jerked slowly, slowly up the
steps as though she were being drawn up on wires.  She stared in front of
her, she was laughing and nodding and cackling to herself; her claws
clutched round what looked like a dirty boot-bag.

But just at that moment there was Mrs. Raddick again with--her--and another
lady hovering in the background.  Mrs. Raddick rushed at me.  She was
brightly flushed, gay, a different creature.  She was like a woman who is
saying "good-bye" to her friends on the station platform, with not a minute
to spare before the train starts.

"Oh, you're here, still.  Isn't that lucky!  You've not gone.  Isn't that
fine!  I've had the most dreadful time with--her," and she waved to her
daughter, who stood absolutely still, disdainful, looking down, twiddling
her foot on the step, miles away.  "They won't let her in.  I swore she was
twenty-one.  But they won't believe me.  I showed the man my purse; I
didn't dare to do more.  But it was no use.  He simply scoffed...And now
I've just met Mrs. MacEwen from New York, and she just won thirteen
thousand in the Salle Privee--and she wants me to go back with her while
the luck lasts.  Of course I can't leave--her.  But if you'd--"

At that "she" looked up; she simply withered her mother.  "Why can't you
leave me?" she said furiously.  "What utter rot!  How dare you make a scene
like this?  This is the last time I'll come out with you.  You really are
too awful for words."  She looked her mother up and down.  "Calm yourself,"
she said superbly.

Mrs. Raddick was desperate, just desperate.  She was "wild" to go back with
Mrs. MacEwen, but at the same time ...

I seized my courage.  "Would you--do you care to come to tea with--us?"

"Yes, yes, she'll be delighted.  That's just what I wanted, isn't it,
darling?  Mrs. MacEwen...I'll be back here in an hour...or less...I'll--"

Mrs. R. dashed up the steps.  I saw her bag was open again.

So we three were left.  But really it wasn't my fault.  Hennie looked
crushed to the earth, too.  When the car was there she wrapped her dark
coat round her--to escape contamination.  Even her little feet looked as
though they scorned to carry her down the steps to us.

"I am so awfully sorry," I murmured as the car started.

"Oh, I don't mind," said she.  "I don't want to look twenty-one.  Who
would--if they were seventeen!  It's"--and she gave a faint shudder--"the
stupidity I loathe, and being stared at by old fat men.  Beasts!"

Hennie gave her a quick look and then peered out of the window.

We drew up before an immense palace of pink-and-white marble with orange-
trees outside the doors in gold-and-black tubs.

"Would you care to go in?" I suggested.

She hesitated, glanced, bit her lip, and resigned herself.  "Oh well, there
seems nowhere else," said she.  "Get out, Hennie."

I went first--to find the table, of course--she followed.  But the worst of
it was having her little brother, who was only twelve, with us.  That was
the last, final straw--having that child, trailing at her heels.

There was one table.  It had pink carnations and pink plates with little
blue tea-napkins for sails.

"Shall we sit here?"

She put her hand wearily on the back of a white wicker chair.

"We may as well.  Why not?" said she.

Hennie squeezed past her and wriggled on to a stool at the end.  He felt
awfully out of it.  She didn't even take her gloves off.  She lowered her
eyes and drummed on the table.  When a faint violin sounded she winced and
bit her lip again.  Silence.

The waitress appeared.  I hardly dared to ask her.  "Tea--coffee?  China
tea--or iced tea with lemon?"

Really she didn't mind.  It was all the same to her.  She didn't really
want anything.  Hennie whispered, "Chocolate!"

But just as the waitress turned away she cried out carelessly, "Oh, you may
as well bring me a chocolate, too."

While we waited she took out a little, gold powder-box with a mirror in the
lid, shook the poor little puff as though she loathed it, and dabbed her
lovely nose.

"Hennie," she said, "take those flowers away."  She pointed with her puff
to the carnations, and I heard her murmur, "I can't bear flowers on a
table."  They had evidently been giving her intense pain, for she
positively closed her eyes as I moved them away.

The waitress came back with the chocolate and the tea.  She put the big,
frothing cups before them and pushed across my clear glass.  Hennie buried
his nose, emerged, with, for one dreadful moment, a little trembling blob
of cream on the tip.  But he hastily wiped it off like a little gentleman.
I wondered if I should dare draw her attention to her cup.  She didn't
notice it--didn't see it--until suddenly, quite by chance, she took a sip.
I watched anxiously; she faintly shuddered.

"Dreadfully sweet!" said she.

A tiny boy with a head like a raisin and a chocolate body came round with a
tray of pastries--row upon row of little freaks, little inspirations,
little melting dreams.  He offered them to her.  "Oh, I'm not at all
hungry.  Take them away."

He offered them to Hennie.  Hennie gave me a swift look--it must have been
satisfactory--for he took a chocolate cream, a coffee eclair, a meringue
stuffed with chestnut and a tiny horn filled with fresh strawberries.  She
could hardly bear to watch him.  But just as the boy swerved away she held
up her plate.

"Oh well, give me one," said she.

The silver tongs dropped one, two, three--and a cherry tartlet.  "I don't
know why you're giving me all these," she said, and nearly smiled.  "I
shan't eat them; I couldn't!"

I felt much more comfortable.  I sipped my tea, leaned back, and even asked
if I might smoke.  At that she paused, the fork in her hand, opened her
eyes, and really did smile.  "Of course," said she.  "I always expect
people to."

But at that moment a tragedy happened to Hennie.  He speared his pastry
horn too hard, and it flew in two, and one half spilled on the table.
Ghastly affair!  He turned crimson.  Even his ears flared, and one ashamed
hand crept across the table to take what was left of the body away.

"You utter little beast!" said she.

Good heavens!  I had to fly to the rescue.  I cried hastily, "Will you be
abroad long?"

But she had already forgotten Hennie.  I was forgotten, too.  She was
trying to remember something...She was miles away.

"I--don't--know," she said slowly, from that far place.

"I suppose you prefer it to London.  It's more--more--"

When I didn't go on she came back and looked at me, very puzzled.
"More--?"

"Enfin--gayer," I cried, waving my cigarette.

But that took a whole cake to consider.  Even then, "Oh well, that
depends!" was all she could safely say.

Hennie had finished.  He was still very warm.

I seized the butterfly list off the table.  "I say--what about an ice,
Hennie?  What about tangerine and ginger?  No, something cooler.  What
about a fresh pineapple cream?"

Hennie strongly approved.  The waitress had her eye on us.  The order was
taken when she looked up from her crumbs.

"Did you say tangerine and ginger?  I like ginger.  You can bring me one."
And then quickly, "I wish that orchestra wouldn't play things from the year
One.  We were dancing to that all last Christmas.  It's too sickening!"

But it was a charming air.  Now that I noticed it, it warmed me.

"I think this is rather a nice place, don't you, Hennie?" I said.

Hennie said:  "Ripping!"  He meant to say it very low, but it came out very
high in a kind of squeak.

Nice?  This place?  Nice?  For the first time she stared about her, trying
to see what there was...She blinked; her lovely eyes wondered.  A very
good-looking elderly man stared back at her through a monocle on a black
ribbon.  But him she simply couldn't see.  There was a hole in the air
where he was.  She looked through and through him.

Finally the little flat spoons lay still on the glass plates.  Hennie
looked rather exhausted, but she pulled on her white gloves again.  She had
some trouble with her diamond wrist-watch; it got in her way.  She tugged
at it--tried to break the stupid little thing--it wouldn't break.  Finally,
she had to drag her glove over.  I saw, after that, she couldn't stand this
place a moment longer, and, indeed, she jumped up and turned away while I
went through the vulgar act of paying for the tea.

And then we were outside again.  It had grown dusky.  The sky was sprinkled
with small stars; the big lamps glowed.  While we waited for the car to
come up she stood on the step, just as before, twiddling her foot, looking
down.

Hennie bounded forward to open the door and she got in and sank back with--
oh--such a sigh!

"Tell him," she gasped, "to drive as fast as he can."

Hennie grinned at his friend the chauffeur.  "Allie veet!" said he.  Then
he composed himself and sat on the small seat facing us.

The gold powder-box came out again.  Again the poor little puff was shaken;
again there was that swift, deadly-secret glance between her and the
mirror.

We tore through the black-and-gold town like a pair of scissors tearing
through brocade.  Hennie had great difficulty not to look as though he were
hanging on to something.

And when we reached the Casino, of course Mrs. Raddick wasn't there.  There
wasn't a sign of her on the steps--not a sign.

"Will you stay in the car while I go and look?"

But no--she wouldn't do that.  Good heavens, no!  Hennie could stay.  She
couldn't bear sitting in a car.  She'd wait on the steps.

"But I scarcely like to leave you," I murmured.  "I'd very much rather not
leave you here."

At that she threw back her coat; she turned and faced me; her lips parted.
"Good heavens--why!  I--I don't mind it a bit.  I--I like waiting."  And
suddenly her cheeks crimsoned, her eyes grew dark--for a moment I thought
she was going to cry.  "L--let me, please," she stammered, in a warm, eager
voice.  "I like it.  I love waiting!  Really--really I do!  I'm always
waiting--in all kinds of places..."

Her dark coat fell open, and her white throat--all her soft young body in
the blue dress--was like a flower that is just emerging from its dark bud.



6.  LIFE OF MA PARKER.

When the literary gentleman, whose flat old Ma Parker cleaned every
Tuesday, opened the door to her that morning, he asked after her grandson.
Ma Parker stood on the doormat inside the dark little hall, and she
stretched out her hand to help her gentleman shut the door before she
replied.  "We buried 'im yesterday, sir," she said quietly.

"Oh, dear me!  I'm sorry to hear that," said the literary gentleman in a
shocked tone.  He was in the middle of his breakfast.  He wore a very
shabby dressing-gown and carried a crumpled newspaper in one hand.  But he
felt awkward.  He could hardly go back to the warm sitting-room without
saying something--something more.  Then because these people set such store
by funerals he said kindly, "I hope the funeral went off all right."

"Beg parding, sir?" said old Ma Parker huskily.

Poor old bird!  She did look dashed.  "I hope the funeral was a--a--
success," said he.  Ma Parker gave no answer.  She bent her head and
hobbled off to the kitchen, clasping the old fish bag that held her
cleaning things and an apron and a pair of felt shoes.  The literary
gentleman raised his eyebrows and went back to his breakfast.

"Overcome, I suppose," he said aloud, helping himself to the marmalade.

Ma Parker drew the two jetty spears out of her toque and hung it behind the
door.  She unhooked her worn jacket and hung that up too.  Then she tied
her apron and sat down to take off her boots.  To take off her boots or to
put them on was an agony to her, but it had been an agony for years.  In
fact, she was so accustomed to the pain that her face was drawn and screwed
up ready for the twinge before she'd so much as untied the laces.  That
over, she sat back with a sigh and softly rubbed her knees...

"Gran!  Gran!"  Her little grandson stood on her lap in his button boots.
He'd just come in from playing in the street.

"Look what a state you've made your gran's skirt into--you wicked boy!"

But he put his arms round her neck and rubbed his cheek against hers.

"Gran, gi' us a penny!" he coaxed.

"Be off with you; Gran ain't got no pennies."

"Yes, you 'ave."

"No, I ain't."

"Yes, you 'ave.  Gi' us one!"

Already she was feeling for the old, squashed, black leather purse.

"Well, what'll you give your gran?"

He gave a shy little laugh and pressed closer.  She felt his eyelid
quivering against her cheek.  "I ain't got nothing," he murmured...

The old woman sprang up, seized the iron kettle off the gas stove and took
it over to the sink.  The noise of the water drumming in the kettle
deadened her pain, it seemed.  She filled the pail, too, and the washing-up
bowl.

It would take a whole book to describe the state of that kitchen.  During
the week the literary gentleman "did" for himself.  That is to say, he
emptied the tea leaves now and again into a jam jar set aside for that
purpose, and if he ran out of clean forks he wiped over one or two on the
roller towel.  Otherwise, as he explained to his friends, his "system" was
quite simple, and he couldn't understand why people made all this fuss
about housekeeping.

"You simply dirty everything you've got, get a hag in once a week to clean
up, and the thing's done."

The result looked like a gigantic dustbin.  Even the floor was littered
with toast crusts, envelopes, cigarette ends.  But Ma Parker bore him no
grudge.  She pitied the poor young gentleman for having no one to look
after him.  Out of the smudgy little window you could see an immense
expanse of sad-looking sky, and whenever there were clouds they looked very
worn, old clouds, frayed at the edges, with holes in them, or dark stains
like tea.

While the water was heating, Ma Parker began sweeping the floor.  "Yes,"
she thought, as the broom knocked, "what with one thing and another I've
had my share.  I've had a hard life."

Even the neighbours said that of her.  Many a time, hobbling home with her
fish bag she heard them, waiting at the corner, or leaning over the area
railings, say among themselves, "She's had a hard life, has Ma Parker."
And it was so true she wasn't in the least proud of it.  It was just as if
you were to say she lived in the basement-back at Number 27.  A hard
life!...

At sixteen she'd left Stratford and come up to London as kitching-maid.
Yes, she was born in Stratford-on-Avon.  Shakespeare, sir?  No, people were
always arsking her about him.  But she'd never heard his name until she saw
it on the theatres.

Nothing remained of Stratford except that "sitting in the fire-place of a
evening you could see the stars through the chimley," and "Mother always
'ad 'er side of bacon, 'anging from the ceiling."  And there was something-
-a bush, there was--at the front door, that smelt ever so nice.  But the
bush was very vague.  She'd only remembered it once or twice in the
hospital, when she'd been taken bad.

That was a dreadful place--her first place.  She was never allowed out.
She never went upstairs except for prayers morning and evening.  It was a
fair cellar.  And the cook was a cruel woman.  She used to snatch away her
letters from home before she'd read them, and throw them in the range
because they made her dreamy...And the beedles!  Would you believe it?--
until she came to London she'd never seen a black beedle.  Here Ma always
gave a little laugh, as though--not to have seen a black beedle!  Well!  It
was as if to say you'd never seen your own feet.

When that family was sold up she went as "help" to a doctor's house, and
after two years there, on the run from morning till night, she married her
husband.  He was a baker.

"A baker, Mrs. Parker!" the literary gentleman would say.  For occasionally
he laid aside his tomes and lent an ear, at least, to this product called
Life.  "It must be rather nice to be married to a baker!"

Mrs. Parker didn't look so sure.

"Such a clean trade," said the gentleman.

Mrs. Parker didn't look convinced.

"And didn't you like handing the new loaves to the customers?"

"Well, sir," said Mrs. Parker, "I wasn't in the shop above a great deal.
We had thirteen little ones and buried seven of them.  If it wasn't the
'ospital it was the infirmary, you might say!"

"You might, indeed, Mrs. Parker!"  said the gentleman, shuddering, and
taking up his pen again.

Yes, seven had gone, and while the six were still small her husband was
taken ill with consumption.  It was flour on the lungs, the doctor told her
at the time...Her husband sat up in bed with his shirt pulled over his
head, and the doctor's finger drew a circle on his back.

"Now, if we were to cut him open here, Mrs. Parker," said the doctor,
"you'd find his lungs chock-a-block with white powder.  Breathe, my good
fellow!"  And Mrs. Parker never knew for certain whether she saw or whether
she fancied she saw a great fan of white dust come out of her poor dead
husband's lips...

But the struggle she'd had to bring up those six little children and keep
herself to herself.  Terrible it had been!  Then, just when they were old
enough to go to school her husband's sister came to stop with them to help
things along, and she hadn't been there more than two months when she fell
down a flight of steps and hurt her spine.  And for five years Ma Parker
had another baby--and such a one for crying!--to look after.  Then young
Maudie went wrong and took her sister Alice with her; the two boys
emigrimated, and young Jim went to India with the army, and Ethel, the
youngest, married a good-for-nothing little waiter who died of ulcers the
year little Lennie was born.  And now little Lennie--my grandson...

The piles of dirty cups, dirty dishes, were washed and dried.  The ink-
black knives were cleaned with a piece of potato and finished off with a
piece of cork.  The table was scrubbed, and the dresser and the sink that
had sardine tails swimming in it...

He'd never been a strong child--never from the first.  He'd been one of
those fair babies that everybody took for a girl.  Silvery fair curls he
had, blue eyes, and a little freckle like a diamond on one side of his
nose.  The trouble she and Ethel had had to rear that child!  The things
out of the newspapers they tried him with!  Every Sunday morning Ethel
would read aloud while Ma Parker did her washing.

"Dear Sir,--Just a line to let you know my little Myrtil was laid out for
dead...After four bottils...gained 8 lbs. in 9 weeks, and is still putting
it on."

And then the egg-cup of ink would come off the dresser and the letter would
be written, and Ma would buy a postal order on her way to work next
morning.  But it was no use.  Nothing made little Lennie put it on.  Taking
him to the cemetery, even, never gave him a colour; a nice shake-up in the
bus never improved his appetite.

But he was gran's boy from the first...

"Whose boy are you?" said old Ma Parker, straightening up from the stove
and going over to the smudgy window.  And a little voice, so warm, so
close, it half stifled her--it seemed to be in her breast under her heart--
laughed out, and said, "I'm gran's boy!"

At that moment there was a sound of steps, and the literary gentleman
appeared, dressed for walking.

"Oh, Mrs. Parker, I'm going out."

"Very good, sir."

"And you'll find your half-crown in the tray of the inkstand."

"Thank you, sir."

"Oh, by the way, Mrs. Parker," said the literary gentleman quickly, "you
didn't throw away any cocoa last time you were here--did you?"

"No, sir."
"Very strange.  I could have sworn I left a teaspoonful of cocoa in the
tin."  He broke off.  He said softly and firmly, "You'll always tell me
when you throw things away--won't you, Mrs. Parker?"  And he walked off
very well pleased with himself, convinced, in fact, he'd shown Mrs. Parker
that under his apparent carelessness he was as vigilant as a woman.

The door banged.  She took her brushes and cloths into the bedroom.  But
when she began to make the bed, smoothing, tucking, patting, the thought of
little Lennie was unbearable.  Why did he have to suffer so?  That's what
she couldn't understand.  Why should a little angel child have to arsk for
his breath and fight for it?  There was no sense in making a child suffer
like that.

...From Lennie's little box of a chest there came a sound as though
something was boiling.  There was a great lump of something bubbling in his
chest that he couldn't get rid of.  When he coughed the sweat sprang out on
his head; his eyes bulged, his hands waved, and the great lump bubbled as a
potato knocks in a saucepan.  But what was more awful than all was when he
didn't cough he sat against the pillow and never spoke or answered, or even
made as if he heard.  Only he looked offended.

"It's not your poor old gran's doing it, my lovey," said old Ma Parker,
patting back the damp hair from his little scarlet ears.  But Lennie moved
his head and edged away.  Dreadfully offended with her he looked--and
solemn.  He bent his head and looked at her sideways as though he couldn't
have believed it of his gran.

But at the last...Ma Parker threw the counterpane over the bed.  No, she
simply couldn't think about it.  It was too much--she'd had too much in her
life to bear.  She'd borne it up till now, she'd kept herself to herself,
and never once had she been seen to cry.  Never by a living soul.  Not even
her own children had seen Ma break down.  She'd kept a proud face always.
But now!  Lennie gone--what had she?  She had nothing.  He was all she'd
got from life, and now he was took too.  Why must it all have happened to
me? she wondered.  "What have I done?" said old Ma Parker.  "What have I
done?"

As she said those words she suddenly let fall her brush.  She found herself
in the kitchen.  Her misery was so terrible that she pinned on her hat, put
on her jacket and walked out of the flat like a person in a dream.  She did
not know what she was doing.  She was like a person so dazed by the horror
of what has happened that he walks away--anywhere, as though by walking
away he could escape...

It was cold in the street.  There was a wind like ice.  People went
flitting by, very fast; the men walked like scissors; the women trod like
cats.  And nobody knew--nobody cared.  Even if she broke down, if at last,
after all these years, she were to cry, she'd find herself in the lock-up
as like as not.

But at the thought of crying it was as though little Lennie leapt in his
gran's arms.  Ah, that's what she wants to do, my dove.  Gran wants to cry.
If she could only cry now, cry for a long time, over everything, beginning
with her first place and the cruel cook, going on to the doctor's, and then
the seven little ones, death of her husband, the children's leaving her,
and all the years of misery that led up to Lennie.  But to have a proper
cry over all these things would take a long time.  All the same, the time
for it had come.  She must do it.  She couldn't put it off any longer; she
couldn't wait any more...Where could she go?

"She's had a hard life, has Ma Parker."  Yes, a hard life, indeed!  Her
chin began to tremble; there was no time to lose.  But where?  Where?

She couldn't go home; Ethel was there.  It would frighten Ethel out of her
life.  She couldn't sit on a bench anywhere; people would come arsking her
questions.  She couldn't possibly go back to the gentleman's flat; she had
no right to cry in strangers' houses.  If she sat on some steps a policeman
would speak to her.

Oh, wasn't there anywhere where she could hide and keep herself to herself
and stay as long as she liked, not disturbing anybody, and nobody worrying
her?  Wasn't there anywhere in the world where she could have her cry out--
at last?

Ma Parker stood, looking up and down.  The icy wind blew out her apron into
a balloon.  And now it began to rain.  There was nowhere.



7.  MARRIAGE A LA MODE.

On his way to the station William remembered with a fresh pang of
disappointment that he was taking nothing down to the kiddies.  Poor little
chaps!  It was hard lines on them.  Their first words always were as they
ran to greet him, "What have you got for me, daddy?" and he had nothing.
He would have to buy them some sweets at the station.  But that was what he
had done for the past four Saturdays; their faces had fallen last time when
they saw the same old boxes produced again.

And Paddy had said, "I had red ribbing on mine bee-fore!"

And Johnny had said, "It's always pink on mine.  I hate pink."

But what was William to do?  The affair wasn't so easily settled.  In the
old days, of course, he would have taken a taxi off to a decent toyshop and
chosen them something in five minutes.  But nowadays they had Russian toys,
French toys, Serbian toys--toys from God knows where.  It was over a year
since Isabel had scrapped the old donkeys and engines and so on because
they were so "dreadfully sentimental" and "so appallingly bad for the
babies' sense of form."

"It's so important," the new Isabel had explained, "that they should like
the right things from the very beginning.  It saves so much time later on.
Really, if the poor pets have to spend their infant years staring at these
horrors, one can imagine them growing up and asking to be taken to the
Royal Academy."

And she spoke as though a visit to the Royal Academy was certain immediate
death to any one...

"Well, I don't know," said William slowly.  "When I was their age I used to
go to bed hugging an old towel with a knot in it."

The new Isabel looked at him, her eyes narrowed, her lips apart.

"Dear William!  I'm sure you did!"  She laughed in the new way.

Sweets it would have to be, however, thought William gloomily, fishing in
his pocket for change for the taxi-man.  And he saw the kiddies handing the
boxes round--they were awfully generous little chaps--while Isabel's
precious friends didn't hesitate to help themselves...

What about fruit?  William hovered before a stall just inside the station.
What about a melon each?  Would they have to share that, too?  Or a
pineapple, for Pad, and a melon for Johnny?  Isabel's friends could hardly
go sneaking up to the nursery at the children's meal-times.  All the same,
as he bought the melon William had a horrible vision of one of Isabel's
young poets lapping up a slice, for some reason, behind the nursery door.

With his two very awkward parcels he strode off to his train.  The platform
was crowded, the train was in.  Doors banged open and shut.  There came
such a loud hissing from the engine that people looked dazed as they
scurried to and fro.  William made straight for a first-class smoker,
stowed away his suit-case and parcels, and taking a huge wad of papers out
of his inner pocket, he flung down in the corner and began to read.

"Our client moreover is positive...We are inclined to reconsider...in the
event of--"  Ah, that was better.  William pressed back his flattened hair
and stretched his legs across the carriage floor.  The familiar dull
gnawing in his breast quietened down.  "With regard to our decision--"  He
took out a blue pencil and scored a paragraph slowly.

Two men came in, stepped across him, and made for the farther corner.  A
young fellow swung his golf clubs into the rack and sat down opposite.  The
train gave a gentle lurch, they were off.  William glanced up and saw the
hot, bright station slipping away.  A red-faced girl raced along by the
carriages, there was something strained and almost desperate in the way she
waved and called.  "Hysterical!" thought William dully.  Then a greasy,
black-faced workman at the end of the platform grinned at the passing
train.  And William thought, "A filthy life!" and went back to his papers.

When he looked up again there were fields, and beasts standing for shelter
under the dark trees.  A wide river, with naked children splashing in the
shallows, glided into sight and was gone again.  The sky shone pale, and
one bird drifted high like a dark fleck in a jewel.

"We have examined our client's correspondence files..."  The last sentence
he had read echoed in his mind.  "We have examined ..."  William hung on to
that sentence, but it was no good; it snapped in the middle, and the
fields, the sky, the sailing bird, the water, all said, "Isabel."  The same
thing happened every Saturday afternoon.  When he was on his way to meet
Isabel there began those countless imaginary meetings.  She was at the
station, standing just a little apart from everybody else; she was sitting
in the open taxi outside; she was at the garden gate; walking across the
parched grass; at the door, or just inside the hall.

And her clear, light voice said, "It's William," or "Hillo, William!" or
"So William has come!"  He touched her cool hand, her cool cheek.

The exquisite freshness of Isabel!  When he had been a little boy, it was
his delight to run into the garden after a shower of rain and shake the
rose-bush over him.  Isabel was that rose-bush, petal-soft, sparkling and
cool.  And he was still that little boy.  But there was no running into the
garden now, no laughing and shaking.  The dull, persistent gnawing in his
breast started again.  He drew up his legs, tossed the papers aside, and
shut his eyes.

"What is it, Isabel?  What is it?" he said tenderly.  They were in their
bedroom in the new house.  Isabel sat on a painted stool before the
dressing-table that was strewn with little black and green boxes.

"What is what, William?"  And she bent forward, and her fine light hair
fell over her cheeks.

"Ah, you know!"  He stood in the middle of the room and he felt a stranger.
At that Isabel wheeled round quickly and faced him.

"Oh, William!" she cried imploringly, and she held up the hair-brush:
"Please!  Please don't be so dreadfully stuffy and--tragic.  You're always
saying or looking or hinting that I've changed.  Just because I've got to
know really congenial people, and go about more, and am frightfully keen
on--on everything, you behave as though I'd--"  Isabel tossed back her hair
and laughed--"killed our love or something.  It's so awfully absurd"--she
bit her lip--"and it's so maddening, William.  Even this new house and the
servants you grudge me."

"Isabel!"

"Yes, yes, it's true in a way," said Isabel quickly.  "You think they are
another bad sign.  Oh, I know you do.  I feel it," she said softly, "every
time you come up the stairs.  But we couldn't have gone on living in that
other poky little hole, William.  Be practical, at least!  Why, there
wasn't enough room for the babies even."

No, it was true.  Every morning when he came back from chambers it was to
find the babies with Isabel in the back drawing-room.  They were having
rides on the leopard skin thrown over the sofa back, or they were playing
shops with Isabel's desk for a counter, or Pad was sitting on the hearthrug
rowing away for dear life with a little brass fire shovel, while Johnny
shot at pirates with the tongs.  Every evening they each had a pick-a-back
up the narrow stairs to their fat old Nanny.

Yes, he supposed it was a poky little house.  A little white house with
blue curtains and a window-box of petunias.  William met their friends at
the door with "Seen our petunias?  Pretty terrific for London, don't you
think?"

But the imbecile thing, the absolutely extraordinary thing was that he
hadn't the slightest idea that Isabel wasn't as happy as he.  God, what
blindness!  He hadn't the remotest notion in those days that she really
hated that inconvenient little house, that she thought the fat Nanny was
ruining the babies, that she was desperately lonely, pining for new people
and new music and pictures and so on.  If they hadn't gone to that studio
party at Moira Morrison's--if Moira Morrison hadn't said as they were
leaving, "I'm going to rescue your wife, selfish man.  She's like an
exquisite little Titania"--if Isabel hadn't gone with Moira to Paris--if--
if...

The train stopped at another station.  Bettingford.  Good heavens!  They'd
be there in ten minutes.  William stuffed that papers back into his
pockets; the young man opposite had long since disappeared.  Now the other
two got out.  The late afternoon sun shone on women in cotton frocks and
little sunburnt, barefoot children.  It blazed on a silky yellow flower
with coarse leaves which sprawled over a bank of rock.  The air ruffling
through the window smelled of the sea.  Had Isabel the same crowd with her
this week-end, wondered William?

And he remembered the holidays they used to have, the four of them, with a
little farm girl, Rose, to look after the babies.  Isabel wore a jersey and
her hair in a plait; she looked about fourteen.  Lord! how his nose used to
peel!  And the amount they ate, and the amount they slept in that immense
feather bed with their feet locked together...William couldn't help a grim
smile as he thought of Isabel's horror if she knew the full extent of his
sentimentality.

...

"Hillo, William!"  She was at the station after all, standing just as he
had imagined, apart from the others, and--William's heart leapt--she was
alone.

"Hallo, Isabel!"  William stared.  He thought she looked so beautiful that
he had to say something, "You look very cool."

"Do I?" said Isabel.  "I don't feel very cool.  Come along, your horrid old
train is late.  The taxi's outside."  She put her hand lightly on his arm
as they passed the ticket collector.  "We've all come to meet you," she
said.  "But we've left Bobby Kane at the sweet shop, to be called for."

"Oh!" said William.  It was all he could say for the moment.

There in the glare waited the taxi, with Bill Hunt and Dennis Green
sprawling on one side, their hats tilted over their faces, while on the
other, Moira Morrison, in a bonnet like a huge strawberry, jumped up and
down.

"No ice!  No ice!  No ice!" she shouted gaily.

And Dennis chimed in from under his hat.  "Only to be had from the
fishmonger's."

And Bill Hunt, emerging, added, "With whole fish in it."

"Oh, what a bore!" wailed Isabel.  And she explained to William how they
had been chasing round the town for ice while she waited for him.  "Simply
everything is running down the steep cliffs into the sea, beginning with
the butter."

"We shall have to anoint ourselves with butter," said Dennis.  "May thy
head, William, lack not ointment."

"Look here," said William, "how are we going to sit?  I'd better get up by
the driver."

"No, Bobby Kane's by the driver," said Isabel.  "You're to sit between
Moira and me."  The taxi started.  "What have you got in those mysterious
parcels?"

"De-cap-it-ated heads!" said Bill Hunt, shuddering beneath his hat.

"Oh, fruit!"  Isabel sounded very pleased.  "Wise William!  A melon and a
pineapple.  How too nice!"

"No, wait a bit," said William, smiling.  But he really was anxious.  "I
brought them down for the kiddies."

"Oh, my dear!"  Isabel laughed, and slipped her hand through his arm.
"They'd be rolling in agonies if they were to eat them.  No"--she patted
his hand--"you must bring them something next time.  I refuse to part with
my pineapple."

"Cruel Isabel!  Do let me smell it!" said Moira.  She flung her arms across
William appealingly.  "Oh!"  The strawberry bonnet fell forward:  she
sounded quite faint.

"A Lady in Love with a Pineapple," said Dennis, as the taxi drew up before
a little shop with a striped blind.  Out came Bobby Kane, his arms full of
little packets.

"I do hope they'll be good.  I've chosen them because of the colours.
There are some round things which really look too divine.  And just look at
this nougat," he cried ecstatically, "just look at it!  It's a perfect
little ballet."

But at that moment the shopman appeared.  "Oh, I forgot.  They're none of
them paid for," said Bobby, looking frightened.  Isabel gave the shopman a
note, and Bobby was radiant again.  "Hallo, William!  I'm sitting by the
driver."  And bareheaded, all in white, with his sleeves rolled up to the
shoulders, he leapt into his place.  "Avanti!" he cried...

After tea the others went off to bathe, while William stayed and made his
peace with the kiddies.  But Johnny and Paddy were asleep, the rose-red
glow had paled, bats were flying, and still the bathers had not returned.
As William wandered downstairs, the maid crossed the hall carrying a lamp.
He followed her into the sitting-room.  It was a long room, coloured
yellow.  On the wall opposite William some one had painted a young man,
over life-size, with very wobbly legs, offering a wide-eyed daisy to a
young woman who had one very short arm and one very long, thin one.  Over
the chairs and sofa there hung strips of black material, covered with big
splashes like broken eggs, and everywhere one looked there seemed to be an
ash-tray full of cigarette ends.  William sat down in one of the arm-
chairs.  Nowadays, when one felt with one hand down the sides, it wasn't to
come upon a sheep with three legs or a cow that had lost one horn, or a
very fat dove out of the Noah's Ark.  One fished up yet another little
paper-covered book of smudged-looking poems...He thought of the wad of
papers in his pocket, but he was too hungry and tired to read.  The door
was open; sounds came from the kitchen.  The servants were talking as if
they were alone in the house.  Suddenly there came a loud screech of
laughter and an equally loud "Sh!"  They had remembered him.  William got
up and went through the French windows into the garden, and as he stood
there in the shadow he heard the bathers coming up the sandy road; their
voices rang through the quiet.

"I think its up to Moira to use her little arts and wiles."

A tragic moan from Moira.

"We ought to have a gramophone for the weekends that played 'The Maid of
the Mountains.'"

"Oh no!  Oh no!" cried Isabel's voice.  "That's not fair to William.  Be
nice to him, my children!  He's only staying until to-morrow evening."

"Leave him to me," cried Bobby Kane.  "I'm awfully good at looking after
people."

The gate swung open and shut.  William moved on the terrace; they had seen
him.  "Hallo, William!"  And Bobby Kane, flapping his towel, began to leap
and pirouette on the parched lawn.  "Pity you didn't come, William.  The
water was divine.  And we all went to a little pub afterwards and had sloe
gin."

The others had reached the house.  "I say, Isabel," called Bobby, "would
you like me to wear my Nijinsky dress to-night?"

"No," said Isabel, "nobody's going to dress.  We're all starving.
William's starving, too.  Come along, mes amis, let's begin with sardines."

"I've found the sardines," said Moira, and she ran into the hall, holding a
box high in the air.

"A Lady with a Box of Sardines," said Dennis gravely.

"Well, William, and how's London?" asked Bill Hunt, drawing the cork out of
a bottle of whisky.

"Oh, London's not much changed," answered William.

"Good old London," said Bobby, very hearty, spearing a sardine.

But a moment later William was forgotten.  Moira Morrison began wondering
what colour one's legs really were under water.

"Mine are the palest, palest mushroom colour."

Bill and Dennis ate enormously.  And Isabel filled glasses, and changed
plates, and found matches, smiling blissfully.  At one moment, she said, "I
do wish, Bill, you'd paint it."

"Paint what?" said Bill loudly, stuffing his mouth with bread.

"Us," said Isabel, "round the table.  It would be so fascinating in twenty
years' time."

Bill screwed up his eyes and chewed.  "Light's wrong," he said rudely, "far
too much yellow"; and went on eating.  And that seemed to charm Isabel,
too.

But after supper they were all so tired they could do nothing but yawn
until it was late enough to go to bed...

It was not until William was waiting for his taxi the next afternoon that
he found himself alone with Isabel.  When he brought his suit-case down
into the hall, Isabel left the others and went over to him.  She stooped
down and picked up the suit-case.  "What a weight!" she said, and she gave
a little awkward laugh.  "Let me carry it!  To the gate."

"No, why should you?" said William.  "Of course, not.  Give it to me."

"Oh, please, do let me," said Isabel.  "I want to, really."  They walked
together silently.  William felt there was nothing to say now.

"There," said Isabel triumphantly, setting the suit-case down, and she
looked anxiously along the sandy road.  "I hardly seem to have seen you
this time," she said breathlessly.  "It's so short, isn't it?  I feel
you've only just come.  Next time--"  The taxi came into sight.  "I hope
they look after you properly in London.  I'm so sorry the babies have been
out all day, but Miss Neil had arranged it.  They'll hate missing you.
Poor William, going back to London."  The taxi turned.  "Good-bye!"  She
gave him a little hurried kiss; she was gone.

Fields, trees, hedges streamed by.  They shook through the empty, blind-
looking little town, ground up the steep pull to the station.

The train was in.  William made straight for a first-class smoker, flung
back into the corner, but this time he let the papers alone.  He folded his
arms against the dull, persistent gnawing, and began in his mind to write a
letter to Isabel.

...

The post was late as usual.  They sat outside the house in long chairs
under coloured parasols.  Only Bobby Kane lay on the turf at Isabel's feet.
It was dull, stifling; the day drooped like a flag.

"Do you think there will be Mondays in Heaven?" asked Bobby childishly.

And Dennis murmured, "Heaven will be one long Monday."

But Isabel couldn't help wondering what had happened to the salmon they had
for supper last night.  She had meant to have fish mayonnaise for lunch and
now...

Moira was asleep.  Sleeping was her latest discovery.  "It's so wonderful.
One simply shuts one's eyes, that's all.  It's so delicious."

When the old ruddy postman came beating along the sandy road on his
tricycle one felt the handle-bars ought to have been oars.

Bill Hunt put down his book.  "Letters," he said complacently, and they all
waited.  But, heartless postman--O malignant world!  There was only one, a
fat one for Isabel.  Not even a paper.

"And mine's only from William," said Isabel mournfully.

"From William--already?"

"He's sending you back your marriage lines as a gentle reminder."

"Does everybody have marriage lines?  I thought they were only for
servants."

"Pages and pages!  Look at her!  A Lady reading a Letter," said Dennis.

"My darling, precious Isabel."  Pages and pages there were.  As Isabel read
on her feeling of astonishment changed to a stifled feeling.  What on earth
had induced William ...?  How extraordinary it was...What could have made
him ...?  She felt confused, more and more excited, even frightened.  It
was just like William.  Was it?  It was absurd, of course, it must be
absurd, ridiculous.  "Ha, ha, ha!  Oh dear!"  What was she to do?  Isabel
flung back in her chair and laughed till she couldn't stop laughing.

"Do, do tell us," said the others.  "You must tell us."

"I'm longing to," gurgled Isabel.  She sat up, gathered the letter, and
waved it at them.  "Gather round," she said.  "Listen, it's too marvellous.
A love-letter!"

"A love-letter!  But how divine!"  "Darling, precious Isabel."  But she had
hardly begun before their laughter interrupted her.

"Go on, Isabel, it's perfect."

"It's the most marvellous find."

"Oh, do go on, Isabel!"

"God forbid, my darling, that I should be a drag on your happiness."

"Oh! oh! oh!"

"Sh! sh! sh!"

And Isabel went on.  When she reached the end they were hysterical:  Bobby
rolled on the turf and almost sobbed.

"You must let me have it just as it is, entire, for my new book," said
Dennis firmly.  "I shall give it a whole chapter."

"Oh, Isabel," moaned Moira, "that wonderful bit about holding you in his
arms!"

"I always thought those letters in divorce cases were made up.  But they
pale before this."

"Let me hold it.  Let me read it, mine own self," said Bobby Kane.

But, to their surprise, Isabel crushed the letter in her hand.  She was
laughing no longer.  She glanced quickly at them all; she looked exhausted.
"No, not just now.  Not just now," she stammered.

And before they could recover she had run into the house, through the hall,
up the stairs into her bedroom.  Down she sat on the side of the bed.  "How
vile, odious, abominable, vulgar," muttered Isabel.  She pressed her eyes
with her knuckles and rocked to and fro.  And again she saw them, but not
four, more like forty, laughing, sneering, jeering, stretching out their
hands while she read them William's letter.  Oh, what a loathsome thing to
have done.  How could she have done it!  "God forbid, my darling, that I
should be a drag on your happiness."  William!  Isabel pressed her face
into the pillow.  But she felt that even the grave bedroom knew her for
what she was, shallow, tinkling, vain...

Presently from the garden below there came voices.

"Isabel, we're all going for a bathe.  Do come!"

"Come, thou wife of William!"

"Call her once before you go, call once yet!"

Isabel sat up.  Now was the moment, now she must decide.  Would she go with
them, or stay here and write to William.  Which, which should it be?  "I
must make up my mind."  Oh, but how could there be any question?  Of course
she would stay here and write.

"Titania!" piped Moira.

"Isa-bel?"

No, it was too difficult.  "I'll--I'll go with them, and write to William
later.  Some other time.  Later.  Not now.  But I shall certainly write,"
thought Isabel hurriedly.

And, laughing, in the new way, she ran down the stairs.



8.  THE VOYAGE.

The Picton boat was due to leave at half-past eleven.  It was a beautiful
night, mild, starry, only when they got out of the cab and started to walk
down the Old Wharf that jutted out into the harbour, a faint wind blowing
off the water ruffled under Fenella's hat, and she put up her hand to keep
it on.  It was dark on the Old Wharf, very dark; the wool sheds, the cattle
trucks, the cranes standing up so high, the little squat railway engine,
all seemed carved out of solid darkness.  Here and there on a rounded wood-
pile, that was like the stalk of a huge black mushroom, there hung a
lantern, but it seemed afraid to unfurl its timid, quivering light in all
that blackness; it burned softly, as if for itself.

Fenella's father pushed on with quick, nervous strides.  Beside him her
grandma bustled along in her crackling black ulster; they went so fast that
she had now and again to give an undignified little skip to keep up with
them.  As well as her luggage strapped into a neat sausage, Fenella carried
clasped to her her grandma's umbrella, and the handle, which was a swan's
head, kept giving her shoulder a sharp little peck as if it too wanted her
to hurry...Men, their caps pulled down, their collars turned up, swung by;
a few women all muffled scurried along; and one tiny boy, only his little
black arms and legs showing out of a white woolly shawl, was jerked along
angrily between his father and mother; he looked like a baby fly that had
fallen into the cream.

Then suddenly, so suddenly that Fenella and her grandma both leapt, there
sounded from behind the largest wool shed, that had a trail of smoke
hanging over it, "Mia-oo-oo-O-O!"

"First whistle," said her father briefly, and at that moment they came in
sight of the Picton boat.  Lying beside the dark wharf, all strung, all
beaded with round golden lights, the Picton boat looked as if she was more
ready to sail among stars than out into the cold sea.  People pressed along
the gangway.  First went her grandma, then her father, then Fenella.  There
was a high step down on to the deck, and an old sailor in a jersey standing
by gave her his dry, hard hand.  They were there; they stepped out of the
way of the hurrying people, and standing under a little iron stairway that
led to the upper deck they began to say good-bye.

"There, mother, there's your luggage!" said Fenella's father, giving
grandma another strapped-up sausage.

"Thank you, Frank."

"And you've got your cabin tickets safe?"

"Yes, dear."

"And your other tickets?"

Grandma felt for them inside her glove and showed him the tips.

"That's right."

He sounded stern, but Fenella, eagerly watching him, saw that he looked
tired and sad.  "Mia-oo-oo-O-O!"  The second whistle blared just above
their heads, and a voice like a cry shouted, "Any more for the gangway?"

"You'll give my love to father," Fenella saw her father's lips say.  And
her grandma, very agitated, answered, "Of course I will, dear.  Go now.
You'll be left.  Go now, Frank.  Go now."

"It's all right, mother.  I've got another three minutes."  To her surprise
Fenella saw her father take off his hat.  He clasped grandma in his arms
and pressed her to him.  "God bless you, mother!" she heard him say.

And grandma put her hand, with the black thread glove that was worn through
on her ring finger, against his cheek, and she sobbed, "God bless you, my
own brave son!"

This was so awful that Fenella quickly turned her back on them, swallowed
once, twice, and frowned terribly at a little green star on a mast head.
But she had to turn round again; her father was going.

"Good-bye, Fenella.  Be a good girl."  His cold, wet moustache brushed her
cheek.  But Fenella caught hold of the lapels of his coat.

"How long am I going to stay?" she whispered anxiously.  He wouldn't look
at her.  He shook her off gently, and gently said, "We'll see about that.
Here!  Where's your hand?"  He pressed something into her palm.  "Here's a
shilling in case you should need it."

A shilling!  She must be going away for ever!  "Father!" cried Fenella.
But he was gone.  He was the last off the ship.  The sailors put their
shoulders to the gangway.  A huge coil of dark rope went flying through the
air and fell "thump" on the wharf.  A bell rang; a whistle shrilled.
Silently the dark wharf began to slip, to slide, to edge away from them.
Now there was a rush of water between.  Fenella strained to see with all
her might.  "Was that father turning round?"--or waving?--or standing
alone?--or walking off by himself?  The strip of water grew broader,
darker.  Now the Picton boat began to swing round steady, pointing out to
sea.  It was no good looking any longer.  There was nothing to be seen but
a few lights, the face of the town clock hanging in the air, and more
lights, little patches of them, on the dark hills.

The freshening wind tugged at Fenella's skirts; she went back to her
grandma.  To her relief grandma seemed no longer sad.  She had put the two
sausages of luggage one on top of the other, and she was sitting on them,
her hands folded, her head a little on one side.  There was an intent,
bright look on her face.  Then Fenella saw that her lips were moving and
guessed that she was praying.  But the old woman gave her a bright nod as
if to say the prayer was nearly over.  She unclasped her hands, sighed,
clasped them again, bent forward, and at last gave herself a soft shake.

"And now, child," she said, fingering the bow of her bonnet-strings, "I
think we ought to see about our cabins.  Keep close to me, and mind you
don't slip."

"Yes, grandma!"

"And be careful the umbrellas aren't caught in the stair rail.  I saw a
beautiful umbrella broken in half like that on my way over."

"Yes, grandma."

Dark figures of men lounged against the rails.  In the glow of their pipes
a nose shone out, or the peak of a cap, or a pair of surprised-looking
eyebrows.  Fenella glanced up.  High in the air, a little figure, his hands
thrust in his short jacket pockets, stood staring out to sea.  The ship
rocked ever so little, and she thought the stars rocked too.  And now a
pale steward in a linen coat, holding a tray high in the palm of his hand,
stepped out of a lighted doorway and skimmed past them.  They went through
that doorway.  Carefully over the high brass-bound step on to the rubber
mat and then down such a terribly steep flight of stairs that grandma had
to put both feet on each step, and Fenella clutched the clammy brass rail
and forgot all about the swan-necked umbrella.

At the bottom grandma stopped; Fenella was rather afraid she was going to
pray again.  But no, it was only to get out the cabin tickets.  They were
in the saloon.  It was glaring bright and stifling; the air smelled of
paint and burnt chop-bones and indiarubber.  Fenella wished her grandma
would go on, but the old woman was not to be hurried.  An immense basket of
ham sandwiches caught her eye.  She went up to them and touched the top one
delicately with her finger.

"How much are the sandwiches?" she asked.

"Tuppence!" bawled a rude steward, slamming down a knife and fork.

Grandma could hardly believe it.

"Twopence each?" she asked.

"That's right," said the steward, and he winked at his companion.

Grandma made a small, astonished face.  Then she whispered primly to
Fenella.  "What wickedness!"  And they sailed out at the further door and
along a passage that had cabins on either side.  Such a very nice
stewardess came to meet them.  She was dressed all in blue, and her collar
and cuffs were fastened with large brass buttons.  She seemed to know
grandma well.

"Well, Mrs. Crane," said she, unlocking their washstand.  "We've got you
back again.  It's not often you give yourself a cabin."

"No," said grandma.  "But this time my dear son's thoughtfulness--"

"I hope--" began the stewardess.  Then she turned round and took a long,
mournful look at grandma's blackness and at Fenella's black coat and skirt,
black blouse, and hat with a crape rose.

Grandma nodded.  "It was God's will," said she.

The stewardess shut her lips and, taking a deep breath, she seemed to
expand.

"What I always say is," she said, as though it was her own discovery,
"sooner or later each of us has to go, and that's a certingty."  She
paused.  "Now, can I bring you anything, Mrs Crane?  A cup of tea?  I know
it's no good offering you a little something to keep the cold out."

Grandma shook her head.  "Nothing, thank you.  We've got a few wine
biscuits, and Fenella has a very nice banana."

"Then I'll give you a look later on," said the stewardess, and she went
out, shutting the door.

What a very small cabin it was!  It was like being shut up in a box with
grandma.  The dark round eye above the washstand gleamed at them dully.
Fenella felt shy.  She stood against the door, still clasping her luggage
and the umbrella.  Were they going to get undressed in here?  Already her
grandma had taken off her bonnet, and, rolling up the strings, she fixed
each with a pin to the lining before she hung the bonnet up.  Her white
hair shone like silk; the little bun at the back was covered with a black
net.  Fenella hardly ever saw her grandma with her head uncovered; she
looked strange.

"I shall put on the woollen fascinator your dear mother crocheted for me,"
said grandma, and, unstrapping the sausage, she took it out and wound it
round her head; the fringe of grey bobbles danced at her eyebrows as she
smiled tenderly and mournfully at Fenella.  Then she undid her bodice, and
something under that, and something else underneath that.  Then there
seemed a short, sharp tussle, and grandma flushed faintly.  Snip!  Snap!
She had undone her stays.  She breathed a sigh of relief, and sitting on
the plush couch, she slowly and carefully pulled off her elastic-sided
boots and stood them side by side.

By the time Fenella had taken off her coat and skirt and put on her flannel
dressing-gown grandma was quite ready.

"Must I take off my boots, grandma?  They're lace."

Grandma gave them a moment's deep consideration.  "You'd feel a great deal
more comfortable if you did, child," said she.  She kissed Fenella.  "Don't
forget to say your prayers.  Our dear Lord is with us when we are at sea
even more than when we are on dry land.  And because I am an experienced
traveller," said grandma briskly, "I shall take the upper berth."

"But, grandma, however will you get up there?"

Three little spider-like steps were all Fenella saw.  The old woman gave a
small silent laugh before she mounted them nimbly, and she peered over the
high bunk at the astonished Fenella.

"You didn't think your grandma could do that, did you?" said she.  And as
she sank back Fenella heard her light laugh again.

The hard square of brown soap would not lather, and the water in the bottle
was like a kind of blue jelly.  How hard it was, too, to turn down those
stiff sheets; you simply had to tear your way in.  If everything had been
different, Fenella might have got the giggles...At last she was inside, and
while she lay there panting, there sounded from above a long, soft
whispering, as though some one was gently, gently rustling among tissue
paper to find something.  It was grandma saying her prayers...

A long time passed.  Then the stewardess came in; she trod softly and
leaned her hand on grandma's bunk.

"We're just entering the Straits," she said.

"Oh!"

"It's a fine night, but we're rather empty.  We may pitch a little."

And indeed at that moment the Picton Boat rose and rose and hung in the air
just long enough to give a shiver before she swung down again, and there
was the sound of heavy water slapping against her sides.  Fenella
remembered she had left the swan-necked umbrella standing up on the little
couch.  If it fell over, would it break?  But grandma remembered too, at
the same time.

"I wonder if you'd mind, stewardess, laying down my umbrella," she
whispered.

"Not at all, Mrs. Crane."  And the stewardess, coming back to grandma,
breathed, "Your little granddaughter's in such a beautiful sleep."

"God be praised for that!" said grandma.

"Poor little motherless mite!" said the stewardess.  And grandma was still
telling the stewardess all about what happened when Fenella fell asleep.

But she hadn't been asleep long enough to dream before she woke up again to
see something waving in the air above her head.  What was it?  What could
it be?  It was a small grey foot.  Now another joined it.  They seemed to
be feeling about for something; there came a sigh.

"I'm awake, grandma," said Fenella.

"Oh, dear, am I near the ladder?" asked grandma.  "I thought it was this
end."

"No, grandma, it's the other.  I'll put your foot on it.  Are we there?"
asked Fenella.

"In the harbour," said grandma.  "We must get up, child.  You'd better have
a biscuit to steady yourself before you move."

But Fenella had hopped out of her bunk.  The lamp was still burning, but
night was over, and it was cold.  Peering through that round eye she could
see far off some rocks.  Now they were scattered over with foam; now a gull
flipped by; and now there came a long piece of real land.

"It's land, grandma," said Fenella, wonderingly, as though they had been at
sea for weeks together.  She hugged herself; she stood on one leg and
rubbed it with the toes of the other foot; she was trembling.  Oh, it had
all been so sad lately.  Was it going to change?  But all her grandma said
was, "Make haste, child.  I should leave your nice banana for the
stewardess as you haven't eaten it."  And Fenella put on her black clothes
again and a button sprang off one of her gloves and rolled to where she
couldn't reach it.  They went up on deck.

But if it had been cold in the cabin, on deck it was like ice.  The sun was
not up yet, but the stars were dim, and the cold pale sky was the same
colour as the cold pale sea.  On the land a white mist rose and fell.  Now
they could see quite plainly dark bush.  Even the shapes of the umbrella
ferns showed, and those strange silvery withered trees that are like
skeletons...Now they could see the landing-stage and some little houses,
pale too, clustered together, like shells on the lid of a box.  The other
passengers tramped up and down, but more slowly than they had the night
before, and they looked gloomy.

And now the landing-stage came out to meet them.  Slowly it swam towards
the Picton boat, and a man holding a coil of rope, and a cart with a small
drooping horse and another man sitting on the step, came too.

"It's Mr. Penreddy, Fenella, come for us," said grandma.  She sounded
pleased.  Her white waxen cheeks were blue with cold, her chin trembled,
and she had to keep wiping her eyes and her little pink nose.

"You've got my--"

"Yes, grandma."  Fenella showed it to her.

The rope came flying through the air, and "smack" it fell on to the deck.
The gangway was lowered.  Again Fenella followed her grandma on to the
wharf over to the little cart, and a moment later they were bowling away.
The hooves of the little horse drummed over the wooden piles, then sank
softly into the sandy road.  Not a soul was to be seen; there was not even
a feather of smoke.  The mist rose and fell and the sea still sounded
asleep as slowly it turned on the beach.

"I seen Mr. Crane yestiddy," said Mr. Penreddy.  "He looked himself then.
Missus knocked him up a batch of scones last week."

And now the little horse pulled up before one of the shell-like houses.
They got down.  Fenella put her hand on the gate, and the big, trembling
dew-drops soaked through her glove-tips.  Up a little path of round white
pebbles they went, with drenched sleeping flowers on either side.
Grandma's delicate white picotees were so heavy with dew that they were
fallen, but their sweet smell was part of the cold morning.  The blinds
were down in the little house; they mounted the steps on to the veranda.  A
pair of old bluchers was on one side of the door, and a large red watering-
can on the other.

"Tut! tut!  Your grandpa," said grandma.  She turned the handle.  Not a
sound.  She called, "Walter!"  And immediately a deep voice that sounded
half stifled called back, "Is that you, Mary?"

"Wait, dear," said grandma.  "Go in there."  She pushed Fenella gently into
a small dusky sitting-room.

On the table a white cat, that had been folded up like a camel, rose,
stretched itself, yawned, and then sprang on to the tips of its toes.
Fenella buried one cold little hand in the white, warm fur, and smiled
timidly while she stroked and listened to grandma's gentle voice and the
rolling tones of grandpa.

A door creaked.  "Come in, dear."  The old woman beckoned, Fenella
followed.  There, lying to one side on an immense bed, lay grandpa.  Just
his head with a white tuft and his rosy face and long silver beard showed
over the quilt.  He was like a very old wide-awake bird.

"Well, my girl!" said grandpa.  "Give us a kiss!"  Fenella kissed him.
"Ugh!" said grandpa.  "Her little nose is as cold as a button.  What's that
she's holding?  Her grandma's umbrella?"

Fenella smiled again, and crooked the swan neck over the bed-rail.  Above
the bed there was a big text in a deep black frame:--

"Lost!  One Golden Hour
 Set with Sixty Diamond Minutes.
 No Reward Is Offered
 For It Is Gone For Ever!"

"Yer grandma painted that," said grandpa.  And he ruffled his white tuft
and looked at Fenella so merrily she almost thought he winked at her.



9.  MISS BRILL.

Although it was so brilliantly fine--the blue sky powdered with gold and
great spots of light like white wine splashed over the Jardins Publiques--
Miss Brill was glad that she had decided on her fur.  The air was
motionless, but when you opened your mouth there was just a faint chill,
like a chill from a glass of iced water before you sip, and now and again a
leaf came drifting--from nowhere, from the sky.  Miss Brill put up her hand
and touched her fur.  Dear little thing!  It was nice to feel it again.
She had taken it out of its box that afternoon, shaken out the moth-powder,
given it a good brush, and rubbed the life back into the dim little eyes.
"What has been happening to me?" said the sad little eyes.  Oh, how sweet
it was to see them snap at her again from the red eiderdown!...But the
nose, which was of some black composition, wasn't at all firm.  It must
have had a knock, somehow.  Never mind--a little dab of black sealing-wax
when the time came--when it was absolutely necessary...Little rogue!  Yes,
she really felt like that about it.  Little rogue biting its tail just by
her left ear.  She could have taken it off and laid it on her lap and
stroked it.  She felt a tingling in her hands and arms, but that came from
walking, she supposed.  And when she breathed, something light and sad--no,
not sad, exactly--something gentle seemed to move in her bosom.

There were a number of people out this afternoon, far more than last
Sunday.  And the band sounded louder and gayer.  That was because the
Season had begun.  For although the band played all the year round on
Sundays, out of season it was never the same.  It was like some one playing
with only the family to listen; it didn't care how it played if there
weren't any strangers present.  Wasn't the conductor wearing a new coat,
too?  She was sure it was new.  He scraped with his foot and flapped his
arms like a rooster about to crow, and the bandsmen sitting in the green
rotunda blew out their cheeks and glared at the music.  Now there came a
little "flutey" bit--very pretty!--a little chain of bright drops.  She was
sure it would be repeated.  It was; she lifted her head and smiled.

Only two people shared her "special" seat:  a fine old man in a velvet
coat, his hands clasped over a huge carved walking-stick, and a big old
woman, sitting upright, with a roll of knitting on her embroidered apron.
They did not speak.  This was disappointing, for Miss Brill always looked
forward to the conversation.  She had become really quite expert, she
thought, at listening as though she didn't listen, at sitting in other
people's lives just for a minute while they talked round her.

She glanced, sideways, at the old couple.  Perhaps they would go soon.
Last Sunday, too, hadn't been as interesting as usual.  An Englishman and
his wife, he wearing a dreadful Panama hat and she button boots.  And she'd
gone on the whole time about how she ought to wear spectacles; she knew she
needed them; but that it was no good getting any; they'd be sure to break
and they'd never keep on.  And he'd been so patient.  He'd suggested
everything--gold rims, the kind that curved round your ears, little pads
inside the bridge.  No, nothing would please her.  "They'll always be
sliding down my nose!"  Miss Brill had wanted to shake her.

The old people sat on the bench, still as statues.  Never mind, there was
always the crowd to watch.  To and fro, in front of the flower-beds and the
band rotunda, the couples and groups paraded, stopped to talk, to greet, to
buy a handful of flowers from the old beggar who had his tray fixed to the
railings.  Little children ran among them, swooping and laughing; little
boys with big white silk bows under their chins, little girls, little
French dolls, dressed up in velvet and lace.  And sometimes a tiny
staggerer came suddenly rocking into the open from under the trees,
stopped, stared, as suddenly sat down "flop," until its small high-stepping
mother, like a young hen, rushed scolding to its rescue.  Other people sat
on the benches and green chairs, but they were nearly always the same,
Sunday after Sunday, and--Miss Brill had often noticed--there was something
funny about nearly all of them.  They were odd, silent, nearly all old, and
from the way they stared they looked as though they'd just come from dark
little rooms or even--even cupboards!

Behind the rotunda the slender trees with yellow leaves down drooping, and
through them just a line of sea, and beyond the blue sky with gold-veined
clouds.

Tum-tum-tum tiddle-um! tiddle-um! tum tiddley-um tum ta! blew the band.

Two young girls in red came by and two young soldiers in blue met them, and
they laughed and paired and went off arm-in-arm.  Two peasant women with
funny straw hats passed, gravely, leading beautiful smoke-coloured donkeys.
A cold, pale nun hurried by.  A beautiful woman came along and dropped her
bunch of violets, and a little boy ran after to hand them to her, and she
took them and threw them away as if they'd been poisoned.  Dear me!  Miss
Brill didn't know whether to admire that or not!  And now an ermine toque
and a gentleman in grey met just in front of her.  He was tall, stiff,
dignified, and she was wearing the ermine toque she'd bought when her hair
was yellow.  Now everything, her hair, her face, even her eyes, was the
same colour as the shabby ermine, and her hand, in its cleaned glove,
lifted to dab her lips, was a tiny yellowish paw.  Oh, she was so pleased
to see him--delighted!  She rather thought they were going to meet that
afternoon.  She described where she'd been--everywhere, here, there, along
by the sea.  The day was so charming--didn't he agree?  And wouldn't he,
perhaps?...But he shook his head, lighted a cigarette, slowly breathed a
great deep puff into her face, and even while she was still talking and
laughing, flicked the match away and walked on.  The ermine toque was
alone; she smiled more brightly than ever.  But even the band seemed to
know what she was feeling and played more softly, played tenderly, and the
drum beat, "The Brute!  The Brute!" over and over.  What would she do?
What was going to happen now?  But as Miss Brill wondered, the ermine toque
turned, raised her hand as though she'd seen some one else, much nicer,
just over there, and pattered away.  And the band changed again and played
more quickly, more gayly than ever, and the old couple on Miss Brill's seat
got up and marched away, and such a funny old man with long whiskers
hobbled along in time to the music and was nearly knocked over by four
girls walking abreast.

Oh, how fascinating it was!  How she enjoyed it!  How she loved sitting
here, watching it all!  It was like a play.  It was exactly like a play.
Who could believe the sky at the back wasn't painted?  But it wasn't till a
little brown dog trotted on solemn and then slowly trotted off, like a
little "theatre" dog, a little dog that had been drugged, that Miss Brill
discovered what it was that made it so exciting.  They were all on the
stage.  They weren't only the audience, not only looking on; they were
acting.  Even she had a part and came every Sunday.  No doubt somebody
would have noticed if she hadn't been there; she was part of the
performance after all.  How strange she'd never thought of it like that
before!  And yet it explained why she made such a point of starting from
home at just the same time each week--so as not to be late for the
performance--and it also explained why she had quite a queer, shy feeling
at telling her English pupils how she spent her Sunday afternoons.  No
wonder!  Miss Brill nearly laughed out loud.  She was on the stage.  She
thought of the old invalid gentleman to whom she read the newspaper four
afternoons a week while he slept in the garden.  She had got quite used to
the frail head on the cotton pillow, the hollowed eyes, the open mouth and
the high pinched nose.  If he'd been dead she mightn't have noticed for
weeks; she wouldn't have minded.  But suddenly he knew he was having the
paper read to him by an actress!  "An actress!"  The old head lifted; two
points of light quivered in the old eyes.  "An actress--are ye?"  And Miss
Brill smoothed the newspaper as though it were the manuscript of her part
and said gently; "Yes, I have been an actress for a long time."

The band had been having a rest.  Now they started again.  And what they
played was warm, sunny, yet there was just a faint chill--a something, what
was it?--not sadness--no, not sadness--a something that made you want to
sing.  The tune lifted, lifted, the light shone; and it seemed to Miss
Brill that in another moment all of them, all the whole company, would
begin singing.  The young ones, the laughing ones who were moving together,
they would begin, and the men's voices, very resolute and brave, would join
them.  And then she too, she too, and the others on the benches--they would
come in with a kind of accompaniment--something low, that scarcely rose or
fell, something so beautiful--moving...And Miss Brill's eyes filled with
tears and she looked smiling at all the other members of the company.  Yes,
we understand, we understand, she thought--though what they understood she
didn't know.

Just at that moment a boy and girl came and sat down where the old couple
had been.  They were beautifully dressed; they were in love.  The hero and
heroine, of course, just arrived from his father's yacht.  And still
soundlessly singing, still with that trembling smile, Miss Brill prepared
to listen.

"No, not now," said the girl.  "Not here, I can't."

"But why?  Because of that stupid old thing at the end there?" asked the
boy.  "Why does she come here at all--who wants her?  Why doesn't she keep
her silly old mug at home?"

"It's her fu-ur which is so funny," giggled the girl.  "It's exactly like a
fried whiting."

"Ah, be off with you!" said the boy in an angry whisper.  Then:  "Tell me,
ma petite chere--"

"No, not here," said the girl.  "Not yet."

...

On her way home she usually bought a slice of honey-cake at the baker's.
It was her Sunday treat.  Sometimes there was an almond in her slice,
sometimes not.  It made a great difference.  If there was an almond it was
like carrying home a tiny present--a surprise--something that might very
well not have been there.  She hurried on the almond Sundays and struck the
match for the kettle in quite a dashing way.

But to-day she passed the baker's by, climbed the stairs, went into the
little dark room--her room like a cupboard--and sat down on the red
eiderdown.  She sat there for a long time.  The box that the fur came out
of was on the bed.  She unclasped the necklet quickly; quickly, without
looking, laid it inside.  But when she put the lid on she thought she heard
something crying.



10.  HER FIRST BALL.

Exactly when the ball began Leila would have found it hard to say.  Perhaps
her first real partner was the cab.  It did not matter that she shared the
cab with the Sheridan girls and their brother.  She sat back in her own
little corner of it, and the bolster on which her hand rested felt like the
sleeve of an unknown young man's dress suit; and away they bowled, past
waltzing lamp-posts and houses and fences and trees.

"Have you really never been to a ball before, Leila?  But, my child, how
too weird--" cried the Sheridan girls.

"Our nearest neighbour was fifteen miles," said Leila softly, gently
opening and shutting her fan.

Oh dear, how hard it was to be indifferent like the others!  She tried not
to smile too much; she tried not to care.  But every single thing was so
new and exciting ...Meg's tuberoses, Jose's long loop of amber, Laura's
little dark head, pushing above her white fur like a flower through snow.
She would remember for ever.  It even gave her a pang to see her cousin
Laurie throw away the wisps of tissue paper he pulled from the fastenings
of his new gloves.  She would like to have kept those wisps as a keepsake,
as a remembrance.  Laurie leaned forward and put his hand on Laura's knee.

"Look here, darling," he said.  "The third and the ninth as usual.  Twig?"

Oh, how marvellous to have a brother!  In her excitement Leila felt that if
there had been time, if it hadn't been impossible, she couldn't have helped
crying because she was an only child, and no brother had ever said "Twig?"
to her; no sister would ever say, as Meg said to Jose that moment, "I've
never known your hair go up more successfully than it has to-night!"

But, of course, there was no time.  They were at the drill hall already;
there were cabs in front of them and cabs behind.  The road was bright on
either side with moving fan-like lights, and on the pavement gay couples
seemed to float through the air; little satin shoes chased each other like
birds.

"Hold on to me, Leila; you'll get lost," said Laura.

"Come on, girls, let's make a dash for it," said Laurie.

Leila put two fingers on Laura's pink velvet cloak, and they were somehow
lifted past the big golden lantern, carried along the passage, and pushed
into the little room marked "Ladies."  Here the crowd was so great there
was hardly space to take off their things; the noise was deafening.  Two
benches on either side were stacked high with wraps.  Two old women in
white aprons ran up and down tossing fresh armfuls.  And everybody was
pressing forward trying to get at the little dressing-table and mirror at
the far end.

A great quivering jet of gas lighted the ladies' room.  It couldn't wait;
it was dancing already.  When the door opened again and there came a burst
of tuning from the drill hall, it leaped almost to the ceiling.

Dark girls, fair girls were patting their hair, tying ribbons again,
tucking handkerchiefs down the fronts of their bodices, smoothing marble-
white gloves.  And because they were all laughing it seemed to Leila that
they were all lovely.

"Aren't there any invisible hair-pins?" cried a voice.  "How most
extraordinary!  I can't see a single invisible hair-pin."

"Powder my back, there's a darling," cried some one else.

"But I must have a needle and cotton.  I've torn simply miles and miles of
the frill," wailed a third.

Then, "Pass them along, pass them along!"  The straw basket of programmes
was tossed from arm to arm.  Darling little pink-and-silver programmes,
with pink pencils and fluffy tassels.  Leila's fingers shook as she took
one out of the basket.  She wanted to ask some one, "Am I meant to have one
too?" but she had just time to read:  "Waltz 3.  'Two, Two in a Canoe.'
Polka 4.  'Making the Feathers Fly,'" when Meg cried, "Ready, Leila?" and
they pressed their way through the crush in the passage towards the big
double doors of the drill hall.

Dancing had not begun yet, but the band had stopped tuning, and the noise
was so great it seemed that when it did begin to play it would never be
heard.  Leila, pressing close to Meg, looking over Meg's shoulder, felt
that even the little quivering coloured flags strung across the ceiling
were talking.  She quite forgot to be shy; she forgot how in the middle of
dressing she had sat down on the bed with one shoe off and one shoe on and
begged her mother to ring up her cousins and say she couldn't go after all.
And the rush of longing she had had to be sitting on the veranda of their
forsaken up-country home, listening to the baby owls crying "More pork" in
the moonlight, was changed to a rush of joy so sweet that it was hard to
bear alone.  She clutched her fan, and, gazing at the gleaming, golden
floor, the azaleas, the lanterns, the stage at one end with its red carpet
and gilt chairs and the band in a corner, she thought breathlessly, "How
heavenly; how simply heavenly!"

All the girls stood grouped together at one side of the doors, the men at
the other, and the chaperones in dark dresses, smiling rather foolishly,
walked with little careful steps over the polished floor towards the stage.

"This is my little country cousin Leila.  Be nice to her.  Find her
partners; she's under my wing," said Meg, going up to one girl after
another.

Strange faces smiled at Leila--sweetly, vaguely.  Strange voices answered,
"Of course, my dear."  But Leila felt the girls didn't really see her.
They were looking towards the men.  Why didn't the men begin?  What were
they waiting for?  There they stood, smoothing their gloves, patting their
glossy hair and smiling among themselves.  Then, quite suddenly, as if they
had only just made up their minds that that was what they had to do, the
men came gliding over the parquet.  There was a joyful flutter among the
girls.  A tall, fair man flew up to Meg, seized her programme, scribbled
something; Meg passed him on to Leila.  "May I have the pleasure?"  He
ducked and smiled.  There came a dark man wearing an eyeglass, then cousin
Laurie with a friend, and Laura with a little freckled fellow whose tie was
crooked.  Then quite an old man--fat, with a big bald patch on his head--
took her programme and murmured, "Let me see, let me see!"  And he was a
long time comparing his programme, which looked black with names, with
hers.  It seemed to give him so much trouble that Leila was ashamed.  "Oh,
please don't bother," she said eagerly.  But instead of replying the fat
man wrote something, glanced at her again.  "Do I remember this bright
little face?" he said softly.  "Is it known to me of yore?"  At that moment
the band began playing; the fat man disappeared.  He was tossed away on a
great wave of music that came flying over the gleaming floor, breaking the
groups up into couples, scattering them, sending them spinning...

Leila had learned to dance at boarding school.  Every Saturday afternoon
the boarders were hurried off to a little corrugated iron mission hall
where Miss Eccles (of London) held her "select" classes.  But the
difference between that dusty-smelling hall--with calico texts on the
walls, the poor terrified little woman in a brown velvet toque with
rabbit's ears thumping the cold piano, Miss Eccles poking the girls' feet
with her long white wand--and this was so tremendous that Leila was sure if
her partner didn't come and she had to listen to that marvellous music and
to watch the others sliding, gliding over the golden floor, she would die
at least, or faint, or lift her arms and fly out of one of those dark
windows that showed the stars.

"Ours, I think--"  Some one bowed, smiled, and offered her his arm; she
hadn't to die after all.  Some one's hand pressed her waist, and she
floated away like a flower that is tossed into a pool.

"Quite a good floor, isn't it?" drawled a faint voice close to her ear.

"I think it's most beautifully slippery," said Leila.

"Pardon!"  The faint voice sounded surprised.  Leila said it again.  And
there was a tiny pause before the voice echoed, "Oh, quite!" and she was
swung round again.

He steered so beautifully.  That was the great difference between dancing
with girls and men, Leila decided.  Girls banged into each other, and
stamped on each other's feet; the girl who was gentleman always clutched
you so.

The azaleas were separate flowers no longer; they were pink and white flags
streaming by.

"Were you at the Bells' last week?" the voice came again.  It sounded
tired.  Leila wondered whether she ought to ask him if he would like to
stop.

"No, this is my first dance," said she.

Her partner gave a little gasping laugh.  "Oh, I say," he protested.

"Yes, it is really the first dance I've ever been to."  Leila was most
fervent.  It was such a relief to be able to tell somebody.  "You see, I've
lived in the country all my life up till now..."

At that moment the music stopped, and they went to sit on two chairs
against the wall.  Leila tucked her pink satin feet under and fanned
herself, while she blissfully watched the other couples passing and
disappearing through the swing doors.

"Enjoying yourself, Leila?" asked Jose, nodding her golden head.

Laura passed and gave her the faintest little wink; it made Leila wonder
for a moment whether she was quite grown up after all.  Certainly her
partner did not say very much.  He coughed, tucked his handkerchief away,
pulled down his waistcoat, took a minute thread off his sleeve.  But it
didn't matter.  Almost immediately the band started and her second partner
seemed to spring from the ceiling.

"Floor's not bad," said the new voice.  Did one always begin with the
floor?  And then, "Were you at the Neaves' on Tuesday?"  And again Leila
explained.  Perhaps it was a little strange that her partners were not more
interested.  For it was thrilling.  Her first ball!  She was only at the
beginning of everything.  It seemed to her that she had never known what
the night was like before.  Up till now it had been dark, silent, beautiful
very often--oh yes--but mournful somehow.  Solemn.  And now it would never
be like that again--it had opened dazzling bright.

"Care for an ice?" said her partner.  And they went through the swing
doors, down the passage, to the supper room.  Her cheeks burned, she was
fearfully thirsty.  How sweet the ices looked on little glass plates and
how cold the frosted spoon was, iced too!  And when they came back to the
hall there was the fat man waiting for her by the door.  It gave her quite
a shock again to see how old he was; he ought to have been on the stage
with the fathers and mothers.  And when Leila compared him with her other
partners he looked shabby.  His waistcoat was creased, there was a button
off his glove, his coat looked as if it was dusty with French chalk.

"Come along, little lady," said the fat man.  He scarcely troubled to clasp
her, and they moved away so gently, it was more like walking than dancing.
But he said not a word about the floor.  "Your first dance, isn't it?" he
murmured.

"How did you know?"

"Ah," said the fat man, "that's what it is to be old!"  He wheezed faintly
as he steered her past an awkward couple.  "You see, I've been doing this
kind of thing for the last thirty years."

"Thirty years?" cried Leila.  Twelve years before she was born!

"It hardly bears thinking about, does it?" said the fat man gloomily.
Leila looked at his bald head, and she felt quite sorry for him.

"I think it's marvellous to be still going on," she said kindly.

"Kind little lady," said the fat man, and he pressed her a little closer,
and hummed a bar of the waltz.  "Of course," he said, "you can't hope to
last anything like as long as that.  No-o," said the fat man, "long before
that you'll be sitting up there on the stage, looking on, in your nice
black velvet.  And these pretty arms will have turned into little short fat
ones, and you'll beat time with such a different kind of fan--a black bony
one."  The fat man seemed to shudder.  "And you'll smile away like the poor
old dears up there, and point to your daughter, and tell the elderly lady
next to you how some dreadful man tried to kiss her at the club ball.  And
your heart will ache, ache"--the fat man squeezed her closer still, as if
he really was sorry for that poor heart--"because no one wants to kiss you
now.  And you'll say how unpleasant these polished floors are to walk on,
how dangerous they are.  Eh, Mademoiselle Twinkletoes?" said the fat man
softly.

Leila gave a light little laugh, but she did not feel like laughing.  Was
it--could it all be true?  It sounded terribly true.  Was this first ball
only the beginning of her last ball, after all?  At that the music seemed
to change; it sounded sad, sad; it rose upon a great sigh.  Oh, how quickly
things changed!  Why didn't happiness last for ever?  For ever wasn't a bit
too long.

"I want to stop," she said in a breathless voice.  The fat man led her to
the door.

"No," she said, "I won't go outside.  I won't sit down.  I'll just stand
here, thank you."  She leaned against the wall, tapping with her foot,
pulling up her gloves and trying to smile.  But deep inside her a little
girl threw her pinafore over her head and sobbed.  Why had he spoiled it
all?

"I say, you know," said the fat man, "you mustn't take me seriously, little
lady."

"As if I should!" said Leila, tossing her small dark head and sucking her
underlip...

Again the couples paraded.  The swing doors opened and shut.  Now new music
was given out by the bandmaster.  But Leila didn't want to dance any more.
She wanted to be home, or sitting on the veranda listening to those baby
owls.  When she looked through the dark windows at the stars, they had long
beams like wings...

But presently a soft, melting, ravishing tune began, and a young man with
curly hair bowed before her.  She would have to dance, out of politeness,
until she could find Meg.  Very stiffly she walked into the middle; very
haughtily she put her hand on his sleeve.  But in one minute, in one turn,
her feet glided, glided.  The lights, the azaleas, the dresses, the pink
faces, the velvet chairs, all became one beautiful flying wheel.  And when
her next partner bumped her into the fat man and he said, "Pardon," she
smiled at him more radiantly than ever.  She didn't even recognise him
again.



11.  THE SINGING LESSON.

With despair--cold, sharp despair--buried deep in her heart like a wicked
knife, Miss Meadows, in cap and gown and carrying a little baton, trod the
cold corridors that led to the music hall.  Girls of all ages, rosy from
the air, and bubbling over with that gleeful excitement that comes from
running to school on a fine autumn morning, hurried, skipped, fluttered by;
from the hollow class-rooms came a quick drumming of voices; a bell rang; a
voice like a bird cried, "Muriel."  And then there came from the staircase
a tremendous knock-knock-knocking.  Some one had dropped her dumbbells.

The Science Mistress stopped Miss Meadows.

"Good mor-ning," she cried, in her sweet, affected drawl.  "Isn't it cold?
It might be win-ter."

Miss Meadows, hugging the knife, stared in hatred at the Science Mistress.
Everything about her was sweet, pale, like honey.  You wold not have been
surprised to see a bee caught in the tangles of that yellow hair.

"It is rather sharp," said Miss Meadows, grimly.

The other smiled her sugary smile.

"You look fro-zen," said she.  Her blue eyes opened wide; there came a
mocking light in them.  (Had she noticed anything?)

"Oh, not quite as bad as that," said Miss Meadows, and she gave the Science
Mistress, in exchange for her smile, a quick grimace and passed on...

Forms Four, Five, and Six were assembled in the music hall.  The noise was
deafening.  On the platform, by the piano, stood Mary Beazley, Miss
Meadows' favourite, who played accompaniments.  She was turning the music
stool.  When she saw Miss Meadows she gave a loud, warning "Sh-sh! girls!"
and Miss Meadows, her hands thrust in her sleeves, the baton under her arm,
strode down the centre aisle, mounted the steps, turned sharply, seized the
brass music stand, planted it in front of her, and gave two sharp taps with
her baton for silence.

"Silence, please!  Immediately!" and, looking at nobody, her glance swept
over that sea of coloured flannel blouses, with bobbing pink faces and
hands, quivering butterfly hair-bows, and music-books outspread.  She knew
perfectly well what they were thinking.  "Meady is in a wax."  Well, let
them think it!  Her eyelids quivered; she tossed her head, defying them.
What could the thoughts of those creatures matter to some one who stood
there bleeding to death, pierced to the heart, to the heart, by such a
letter--

..."I feel more and more strongly that our marriage would be a mistake.
Not that I do not love you.  I love you as much as it is possible for me to
love any woman, but, truth to tell, I have come to the conclusion that I am
not a marrying man, and the idea of settling down fills me with nothing
but--" and the word "disgust" was scratched out lightly and "regret"
written over the top.

Basil!  Miss Meadows stalked over to the piano.  And Mary Beazley, who was
waiting for this moment, bent forward; her curls fell over her cheeks while
she breathed, "Good morning, Miss Meadows," and she motioned towards rather
than handed to her mistress a beautiful yellow chrysanthemum.  This little
ritual of the flower had been gone through for ages and ages, quite a term
and a half.  It was as much part of the lesson as opening the piano.  But
this morning, instead of taking it up, instead of tucking it into her belt
while she leant over Mary and said, "Thank you, Mary.  How very nice!  Turn
to page thirty-two," what was Mary's horror when Miss Meadows totally
ignored the chrysanthemum, made no reply to her greeting, but said in a
voice of ice, "Page fourteen, please, and mark the accents well."

Staggering moment!  Mary blushed until the tears stood in her eyes, but
Miss Meadows was gone back to the music stand; her voice rang through the
music hall.

"Page fourteen.  We will begin with page fourteen.  'A Lament.'  Now,
girls, you ought to know it by this time.  We shall take it all together;
not in parts, all together.  And without expression.  Sing it, though,
quite simply, beating time with the left hand."

She raised the baton; she tapped the music stand twice.  Down came Mary on
the opening chord; down came all those left hands, beating the air, and in
chimed those young, mournful voices:--

"Fast!  Ah, too Fast Fade the Ro-o-ses of Pleasure;
   Soon Autumn yields unto Wi-i-nter Drear.
 Fleetly!  Ah, Fleetly Mu-u-sic's Gay Measure
   Passes away from the Listening Ear."

Good Heavens, what could be more tragic than that lament!  Every note was a
sigh, a sob, a groan of awful mournfulness.  Miss Meadows lifted her arms
in the wide gown and began conducting with both hands.  "...I feel more and
more strongly that our marriage would be a mistake..." she beat.  And the
voices cried:  "Fleetly!  Ah, Fleetly."  What could have possessed him to
write such a letter!  What could have led up to it!  It came out of
nothing.  His last letter had been all about a fumed-oak bookcase he had
bought for "our" books, and a "natty little hall-stand" he had seen, "a
very neat affair with a carved owl on a bracket, holding three hat-brushes
in its claws."  How she had smiled at that!  So like a man to think one
needed three hat-brushes!  "From the Listening Ear," sang the voices.

"Once again," said Miss Meadows.  "But this time in parts.  Still without
expression."  "Fast!  Ah, too Fast."  With the gloom of the contraltos
added, one could scarcely help shuddering.  "Fade the Roses of Pleasure."
Last time he had come to see her, Basil had worn a rose in his buttonhole.
How handsome he had looked in that bright blue suit, with that dark red
rose!  And he knew it, too.  He couldn't help knowing it.  First he stroked
his hair, then his moustache; his teeth gleamed when he smiled.

"The headmaster's wife keeps on asking me to dinner.  It's a perfect
nuisance.  I never get an evening to myself in that place."

"But can't you refuse?"

"Oh, well, it doesn't do for a man in my position to be unpopular."

"Music's Gay Measure," wailed the voices.  The willow trees, outside the
high, narrow windows, waved in the wind.  They had lost half their leaves.
The tiny ones that clung wriggled like fishes caught on a line.  "...I am
not a marrying man..."  The voices were silent; the piano waited.

"Quite good," said Miss Meadows, but still in such a strange, stony tone
that the younger girls began to feel positively frightened.  "But now that
we know it, we shall take it with expression.  As much expression as you
can put into it.  Think of the words, girls.  Use your imaginations.
'Fast!  Ah, too Fast,'" cried Miss Meadows.  "That ought to break out--a
loud, strong forte--a lament.  And then in the second line, 'Winter Drear,'
make that 'Drear' sound as if a cold wind were blowing through it.  'Dre-
ear!'" said she so awfully that Mary Beazley, on the music stool, wriggled
her spine.  "The third line should be one crescendo.  'Fleetly!  Ah,
Fleetly Music's Gay Measure.'  Breaking on the first word of the last line,
Passes.'  And then on the word, 'Away,' you must begin to die...to
fade...until 'The Listening Ear' is nothing more than a faint whisper...You
can slow down as much as you like almost on the last line.  Now, please."

Again the two light taps; she lifted her arms again.  'Fast!  Ah, too
Fast.'  "...and the idea of settling down fills me with nothing but
disgust--"  Disgust was what he had written.  That was as good as to say
their engagement was definitely broken off.  Broken off!  Their engagement!
People had been surprised enough that she had got engaged.  The Science
Mistress would not believe it at first.  But nobody had been as surprised
as she.  She was thirty.  Basil was twenty-five.  It had been a miracle,
simply a miracle, to hear him say, as they walked home from church that
very dark night, "You know, somehow or other, I've got fond of you."  And
he had taken hold of the end of her ostrich feather boa.  "Passes away from
the Listening Ear."

"Repeat!  Repeat!" said Miss Meadows.  "More expression, girls!  Once
more!"

"Fast!  Ah, too Fast."  The older girls were crimson; some of the younger
ones began to cry.  Big spots of rain blew against the windows, and one
could hear the willows whispering, "...not that I do not love you..."

"But, my darling, if you love me," thought Miss Meadows, "I don't mind how
much it is.  Love me as little as you like."  But she knew he didn't love
her.  Not to have cared enough to scratch out that word "disgust," so that
she couldn't read it!  "Soon Autumn yields unto Winter Drear."  She would
have to leave the school, too.  She could never face the Science Mistress
or the girls after it got known.  She would have to disappear somewhere.
"Passes away."  The voices began to die, to fade, to whisper...to vanish...

Suddenly the door opened.  A little girl in blue walked fussily up the
aisle, hanging her head, biting her lips, and twisting the silver bangle on
her red little wrist.  She came up the steps and stood before Miss Meadows.

"Well, Monica, what is it?"

"Oh, if you please, Miss Meadows," said the little girl, gasping, "Miss
Wyatt wants to see you in the mistress's room."

"Very well," said Miss Meadows.  And she called to the girls, "I shall put
you on your honour to talk quietly while I am away."  But they were too
subdued to do anything else.  Most of them were blowing their noses.

The corridors were silent and cold; they echoed to Miss Meadows' steps.
The head mistress sat at her desk.  For a moment she did not look up.  She
was as usual disentangling her eyeglasses, which had got caught in her lace
tie.  "Sit down, Miss Meadows," she said very kindly.  And then she picked
up a pink envelope from the blotting-pad.  "I sent for you just now because
this telegram has come for you."

"A telegram for me, Miss Wyatt?"

Basil!  He had committed suicide, decided Miss Meadows.  Her hand flew out,
but Miss Wyatt held the telegram back a moment.  "I hope it's not bad
news," she said, so more than kindly.  And Miss Meadows tore it open.

"Pay no attention to letter, must have been mad, bought hat-stand to-day--
Basil," she read.  She couldn't take her eyes off the telegram.

"I do hope it's nothing very serious," said Miss Wyatt, leaning forward.

"Oh, no, thank you, Miss Wyatt," blushed Miss Meadows.  "It's nothing bad
at all.  It's"--and she gave an apologetic little laugh--"it's from my
fiance saying that...saying that--"  There was a pause.  "I see," said Miss
Wyatt.  And another pause.  Then--"You've fifteen minutes more of your
class, Miss Meadows, haven't you?"

"Yes, Miss Wyatt."  She got up.  She half ran towards the door.

"Oh, just one minute, Miss Meadows," said Miss Wyatt.  "I must say I don't
approve of my teachers having telegrams sent to them in school hours,
unless in case of very bad news, such as death," explained Miss Wyatt, "or
a very serious accident, or something to that effect.  Good news, Miss
Meadows, will always keep, you know."

On the wings of hope, of love, of joy, Miss Meadows sped back to the music
hall, up the aisle, up the steps, over to the piano.

"Page thirty-two, Mary," she said, "page thirty-two," and, picking up the
yellow chrysanthemum, she held it to her lips to hide her smile.  Then she
turned to the girls, rapped with her baton:  "Page thirty-two, girls.  Page
thirty-two."

"We come here To-day with Flowers o'erladen,
 With Baskets of Fruit and Ribbons to boot,
 To-oo Congratulate...

"Stop!  Stop!" cried Miss Meadows.  "This is awful.  This is dreadful."
And she beamed at her girls.  "What's the matter with you all?  Think,
girls, think of what you're singing.  Use your imaginations.  'With Flowers
o'erladen.  Baskets of Fruit and Ribbons to boot.'  And 'Congratulate.'"
Miss Meadows broke off.  "Don't look so doleful, girls.  It ought to sound
warm, joyful, eager.  'Congratulate.'  Once more.  Quickly.  All together.
Now then!"

And this time Miss Meadows' voice sounded over all the other voices--full,
deep, glowing with expression.



12.  THE STRANGER

It seemed to the little crowd on the wharf that she was never going to move
again.  There she lay, immense, motionless on the grey crinkled water, a
loop of smoke above her, an immense flock of gulls screaming and diving
after the galley droppings at the stern.  You could just see little couples
parading--little flies walking up and down the dish on the grey crinkled
tablecloth.  Other flies clustered and swarmed at the edge.  Now there was
a gleam of white on the lower deck--the cook's apron or the stewardess
perhaps.  Now a tiny black spider raced up the ladder on to the bridge.

In the front of the crowd a strong-looking, middle-aged man, dressed very
well, very snugly in a grey overcoat, grey silk scarf, thick gloves and
dark felt hat, marched up and down, twirling his folded umbrella.  He
seemed to be the leader of the little crowd on the wharf and at the same
time to keep them together.  He was something between the sheep-dog and the
shepherd.

But what a fool--what a fool he had been not to bring any glasses!  There
wasn't a pair of glasses between the whole lot of them.

"Curious thing, Mr. Scott, that none of us thought of glasses.  We might
have been able to stir 'em up a bit.  We might have managed a little
signalling.  'Don't hesitate to land.  Natives harmless.'  Or:  'A welcome
awaits you.  All is forgiven.'  What?  Eh?"

Mr. Hammond's quick, eager glance, so nervous and yet so friendly and
confiding, took in everybody on the wharf, roped in even those old chaps
lounging against the gangways.  They knew, every man-jack of them, that
Mrs. Hammond was on that boat, and that he was so tremendously excited it
never entered his head not to believe that this marvellous fact meant
something to them too.  It warmed his heart towards them.  They were, he
decided, as decent a crowd of people--Those old chaps over by the gangways,
too--fine, solid old chaps.  What chests--by Jove!  And he squared his own,
plunged his thick-gloved hands into his pockets, rocked from heel to toe.

"Yes, my wife's been in Europe for the last ten months.  On a visit to our
eldest girl, who was married last year.  I brought her up here, as far as
Salisbury, myself.  So I thought I'd better come and fetch her back.  Yes,
yes, yes."  The shrewd grey eyes narrowed again and searched anxiously,
quickly, the motionless liner.  Again his overcoat was unbuttoned.  Out
came the thin, butter-yellow watch again, and for the twentieth--fiftieth--
hundredth time he made the calculation.

"Let me see now.  It was two fifteen when the doctor's launch went off.
Two fifteen.  It is now exactly twenty-eight minutes past four.  That is to
say, the doctor's been gone two hours and thirteen minutes.  Two hours and
thirteen minutes!  Whee-ooh!"  He gave a queer little half-whistle and
snapped his watch to again.  "But I think we should have been told if there
was anything up--don't you, Mr. Gaven?"

"Oh, yes, Mr. Hammond!  I don't think there's anything to--anything to
worry about," said Mr. Gaven, knocking out his pipe against the heel of his
shoe.  "At the same time--"

"Quite so!  Quite so!" cried Mr. Hammond.  "Dashed annoying!"  He paced
quickly up and down and came back again to his stand between Mr. and Mrs.
Scott and Mr. Gaven.  "It's getting quite dark, too," and he waved his
folded umbrella as though the dusk at least might have had the decency to
keep off for a bit.  But the dusk came slowly, spreading like a slow stain
over the water.  Little Jean Scott dragged at her mother's hand.

"I wan' my tea, mammy!" she wailed.

"I expect you do," said Mr. Hammond.  "I expect all these ladies want their
tea."  And his kind, flushed, almost pitiful glance roped them all in
again.  He wondered whether Janey was having a final cup of tea in the
saloon out there.  He hoped so; he thought not.  It would be just like her
not to leave the deck.  In that case perhaps the deck steward would bring
her up a cup.  If he'd been there he'd have got it for her--somehow.  And
for a moment he was on deck, standing over her, watching her little hand
fold round the cup in the way she had, while she drank the only cup of tea
to be got on board...But now he was back here, and the Lord only knew when
that cursed Captain would stop hanging about in the stream.  He took
another turn, up and down, up and down.  He walked as far as the cab-stand
to make sure his driver hadn't disappeared; back he swerved again to the
little flock huddled in the shelter of the banana crates.  Little Jean
Scott was still wanting her tea.  Poor little beggar!  He wished he had a
bit of chocolate on him.

"Here, Jean!"  he said.  "Like a lift up?"  And easily, gently, he swung
the little girl on to a higher barrel.  The movement of holding her,
steadying her, relieved him wonderfully, lightened his heart.

"Hold on," he said, keeping an arm round her.

"Oh, don't worry about Jean, Mr. Hammond!" said Mrs. Scott.

"That's all right, Mrs. Scott.  No trouble.  It's a pleasure.  Jean's a
little pal of mine, aren't you, Jean?"

"Yes, Mr. Hammond," said Jean, and she ran her finger down the dent of his
felt hat.

But suddenly she caught him by the ear and gave a loud scream.  "Lo-ok, Mr.
Hammond!  She's moving!  Look, she's coming in!"

By Jove!  So she was.  At last!  She was slowly, slowly turning round.  A
bell sounded far over the water and a great spout of steam gushed into the
air.  The gulls rose; they fluttered away like bits of white paper.  And
whether that deep throbbing was her engines or his heart Mr. Hammond
couldn't say.  He had to nerve himself to bear it, whatever it was.  At
that moment old Captain Johnson, the harbour-master, came striding down the
wharf, a leather portfolio under his arm.

"Jean'll be all right," said Mr. Scott.  "I'll hold her."  He was just in
time.  Mr. Hammond had forgotten about Jean.  He sprang away to greet old
Captain Johnson.

"Well, Captain," the eager, nervous voice rang out again, "you've taken
pity on us at last."

"It's no good blaming me, Mr. Hammond," wheezed old Captain Johnson,
staring at the liner.  "You got Mrs. Hammond on board, ain't yer?"

"Yes, yes!" said Hammond, and he kept by the harbour-master's side.  "Mrs.
Hammond's there.  Hul-lo!  We shan't be long now!"

With her telephone ring-ringing, the thrum of her screw filling the air,
the big liner bore down on them, cutting sharp through the dark water so
that big white shavings curled to either side.  Hammond and the harbour-
master kept in front of the rest.  Hammond took off his hat; he raked the
decks--they were crammed with passengers; he waved his hat and bawled a
loud, strange "Hul-lo!" across the water; and then turned round and burst
out laughing and said something--nothing--to old Captain Johnson.

"Seen her?" asked the harbour-master.

"No, not yet.  Steady--wait a bit!"  And suddenly, between two great clumsy
idiots--"Get out of the way there!" he signed with his umbrella--he saw a
hand raised--a white glove shaking a handkerchief.  Another moment, and--
thank God, thank God!--there she was.  There was Janey.  There was Mrs.
Hammond, yes, yes, yes--standing by the rail and smiling and nodding and
waving her handkerchief.

"Well that's first class--first class!  Well, well, well!"  He positively
stamped.  Like lightning he drew out his cigar-case and offered it to old
Captain Johnson.  "Have a cigar, Captain!  They're pretty good.  Have a
couple!  Here"--and he pressed all the cigars in the case on the harbour-
master--"I've a couple of boxes up at the hotel."

"Thenks, Mr. Hammond!" wheezed old Captain Johnson.

Hammond stuffed the cigar-case back.  His hands were shaking, but he'd got
hold of himself again.  He was able to face Janey.  There she was, leaning
on the rail, talking to some woman and at the same time watching him, ready
for him.  It struck him, as the gulf of water closed, how small she looked
on that huge ship.  His heart was wrung with such a spasm that he could
have cried out.  How little she looked to have come all that long way and
back by herself!  Just like her, though.  Just like Janey.  She had the
courage of a--And now the crew had come forward and parted the passengers;
they had lowered the rails for the gangways.

The voices on shore and the voices on board flew to greet each other.

"All well?"

"All well."

"How's mother?"

"Much better."

"Hullo, Jean!"

"Hillo, Aun' Emily!"

"Had a good voyage?"

"Splendid!"

"Shan't be long now!"

"Not long now."

The engines stopped.  Slowly she edged to the wharf-side.

"Make way there--make way--make way!"  And the wharf hands brought the
heavy gangways along at a sweeping run.  Hammond signed to Janey to stay
where she was.  The old harbour-master stepped forward; he followed.  As to
"ladies first," or any rot like that, it never entered his head.

"After you, Captain!" he cried genially.  And, treading on the old man's
heels, he strode up the gangway on to the deck in a bee-line to Janey, and
Janey was clasped in his arms.

"Well, well, well!  Yes, yes!  Here we are at last!" he stammered.  It was
all he could say.  And Janey emerged, and her cool little voice--the only
voice in the world for him--said,

"Well, darling!  Have you been waiting long?"

No; not long.  Or, at any rate, it didn't matter.  It was over now.  But
the point was, he had a cab waiting at the end of the wharf.  Was she ready
to go off.  Was her luggage ready?  In that case they could cut off sharp
with her cabin luggage and let the rest go hang until to-morrow.  He bent
over her and she looked up with her familiar half-smile.  She was just the
same.  Not a day changed.  Just as he'd always known her.  She laid her
small hand on his sleeve.

"How are the children, John?" she asked.

(Hang the children!)  "Perfectly well.  Never better in their lives."

"Haven't they sent me letters?"

"Yes, yes--of course!  I've left them at the hotel for you to digest later
on."

"We can't go quite so fast," said she.  "I've got people to say good-bye
to--and then there's the Captain."  As his face fell she gave his arm a
small understanding squeeze.  "If the Captain comes off the bridge I want
you to thank him for having looked after your wife so beautifully."  Well,
he'd got her.  If she wanted another ten minutes--As he gave way she was
surrounded.  The whole first-class seemed to want to say good-bye to Janey.

"Good-bye, dear Mrs. Hammond!  And next time you're in Sydney I'll expect
you."

"Darling Mrs. Hammond!  You won't forget to write to me, will you?"

"Well, Mrs. Hammond, what this boat would have been without you!"

It was as plain as a pikestaff that she was by far the most popular woman
on board.  And she took it all--just as usual.  Absolutely composed.  Just
her little self--just Janey all over; standing there with her veil thrown
back.  Hammond never noticed what his wife had on.  It was all the same to
him whatever she wore.  But to-day he did notice that she wore a black
"costume"--didn't they call it?--with white frills, trimmings he supposed
they were, at the neck and sleeves.  All this while Janey handed him round.

"John, dear!"  And then:  "I want to introduce you to--"

Finally they did escape, and she led the way to her state-room.  To follow
Janey down the passage that she knew so well--that was so strange to him;
to part the green curtains after her and to step into the cabin that had
been hers gave him exquisite happiness.  But--confound it!--the stewardess
was there on the floor, strapping up the rugs.

"That's the last, Mrs. Hammond," said the stewardess, rising and pulling
down her cuffs.

He was introduced again, and then Janey and the stewardess disappeared into
the passage.  He heard whisperings.  She was getting the tipping business
over, he supposed.  He sat down on the striped sofa and took his hat off.
There were the rugs she had taken with her; they looked good as new.  All
her luggage looked fresh, perfect.  The labels were written in her
beautiful little clear hand--"Mrs. John Hammond."

"Mrs. John Hammond!"  He gave a long sigh of content and leaned back,
crossing his arms.  The strain was over.  He felt he could have sat there
for ever sighing his relief--the relief at being rid of that horrible tug,
pull, grip on his heart.  The danger was over.  That was the feeling.  They
were on dry land again.

But at that moment Janey's head came round the corner.

"Darling--do you mind?  I just want to go and say good-bye to the doctor."

Hammond started up.  "I'll come with you."

"No, no!" she said.  "Don't bother.  I'd rather not.  I'll not be a
minute."

And before he could answer she was gone.  He had half a mind to run after
her; but instead he sat down again.

Would she really not be long?  What was the time now?  Out came the watch;
he stared at nothing.  That was rather queer of Janey, wasn't it?  Why
couldn't she have told the stewardess to say good-bye for her?  Why did she
have to go chasing after the ship's doctor?  She could have sent a note
from the hotel even if the affair had been urgent.  Urgent?  Did it--could
it mean that she had been ill on the voyage--she was keeping something from
him?  That was it!  He seized his hat.  He was going off to find that
fellow and to wring the truth out of him at all costs.  He thought he'd
noticed just something.  She was just a touch too calm--too steady.  From
the very first moment--

The curtains rang.  Janey was back.  He jumped to his feet.

"Janey, have you been ill on this voyage?  You have!"

"Ill?"  Her airy little voice mocked him.  She stepped over the rugs, and
came up close, touched his breast, and looked up at him.

"Darling," she said, "don't frighten me.  Of course I haven't!  Whatever
makes you think I have?  Do I look ill?"

But Hammond didn't see her.  He only felt that she was looking at him and
that there was no need to worry about anything.  She was here to look after
things.  It was all right.  Everything was.

The gentle pressure of her hand was so calming that he put his over hers to
hold it there.  And she said:

"Stand still.  I want to look at you.  I haven't seen you yet.  You've had
your beard beautifully trimmed, and you look--younger, I think, and
decidedly thinner!  Bachelor life agrees with you."

"Agrees with me!"  He groaned for love and caught her close again.  And
again, as always, he had the feeling that he was holding something that
never was quite his--his.  Something too delicate, too precious, that would
fly away once he let go.

"For God's sake let's get off to the hotel so that we can be by ourselves!"
And he rang the bell hard for some one to look sharp with the luggage.

...

Walking down the wharf together she took his arm.  He had her on his arm
again.  And the difference it made to get into the cab after Janey--to
throw the red-and-yellow striped blanket round them both--to tell the
driver to hurry because neither of them had had any tea.  No more going
without his tea or pouring out his own.  She was back.  He turned to her,
squeezed her hand, and said gently, teasingly, in the "special" voice he
had for her:  "Glad to be home again, dearie?"  She smiled; she didn't even
bother to answer, but gently she drew his hand away as they came to the
brighter streets.

"We've got the best room in the hotel," he said.  "I wouldn't be put off
with another.  And I asked the chambermaid to put in a bit of a fire in
case you felt chilly.  She's a nice, attentive girl.  And I thought now we
were here we wouldn't bother to go home to-morrow, but spend the day
looking round and leave the morning after.  Does that suit you?  There's no
hurry, is there?  The children will have you soon enough...I thought a
day's sight-seeing might make a nice break in your journey--eh, Janey?"

"Have you taken the tickets for the day after?" she asked.

"I should think I have!"  He unbuttoned his overcoat and took out his
bulging pocket-book.  "Here we are!  I reserved a first-class carriage to
Cooktown.  There it is--'Mr. and Mrs. John Hammond.'  I thought we might as
well do ourselves comfortably, and we don't want other people butting in,
do we?  But if you'd like to stop here a bit longer--?"

"Oh, no!" said Janey quickly.  "Not for the world!  The day after to-
morrow, then.  And the children--"

But they had reached the hotel.  The manager was standing in the broad,
brilliantly-lighted porch.  He came down to greet them.  A porter ran from
the hall for their boxes.

"Well, Mr. Arnold, here's Mrs. Hammond at last!"

The manager led them through the hall himself and pressed the elevator-
bell.  Hammond knew there were business pals of his sitting at the little
hall tables having a drink before dinner.  But he wasn't going to risk
interruption; he looked neither to the right nor the left.  They could
think what they pleased.  If they didn't understand, the more fools they--
and he stepped out of the lift, unlocked the door of their room, and
shepherded Janey in.  The door shut.  Now, at last, they were alone
together.  He turned up the light.  The curtains were drawn; the fire
blazed.  He flung his hat on to the huge bed and went towards her.

But--would you believe it!--again they were interrupted.  This time it was
the porter with the luggage.  He made two journeys of it, leaving the door
open in between, taking his time, whistling through his teeth in the
corridor.  Hammond paced up and down the room, tearing off his gloves,
tearing off his scarf.  Finally he flung his overcoat on to the bedside.

At last the fool was gone.  The door clicked.  Now they were alone.  Said
Hammond:  "I feel I'll never have you to myself again.  These cursed
people!  Janey"--and he bent his flushed, eager gaze upon her--"let's have
dinner up here.  If we go down to the restaurant we'll be interrupted, and
then there's the confounded music" (the music he'd praised so highly,
applauded so loudly last night!).  "We shan't be able to hear each other
speak.  Let's have something up here in front of the fire.  It's too late
for tea.  I'll order a little supper, shall I?  How does that idea strike
you?"

"Do, darling!" said Janey.  "And while you're away--the children's
letters--"

"Oh, later on will do!" said Hammond.

"But then we'd get it over," said Janey.  "And I'd first have time to--"

"Oh, I needn't go down!" explained Hammond.  "I'll just ring and give the
order...you don't want to send me away, do you?"

Janey shook her head and smiled.

"But you're thinking of something else.  You're worrying about something,"
said Hammond.  "What is it?  Come and sit here--come and sit on my knee
before the fire."

"I'll just unpin my hat," said Janey, and she went over to the dressing-
table.  "A-ah!"  She gave a little cry.

"What is it?"

"Nothing, darling.  I've just found the children's letters.  That's all
right!  They will keep.  No hurry now!"  She turned to him, clasping them.
She tucked them into her frilled blouse.  She cried quickly, gaily:  "Oh,
how typical this dressing-table is of you!"

"Why?  What's the matter with it?" said Hammond.

"If it were floating in eternity I should say 'John!'" laughed Janey,
staring at the big bottle of hair tonic, the wicker bottle of eau-de-
Cologne, the two hair-brushes, and a dozen new collars tied with pink tape.
"Is this all your luggage?"

"Hang my luggage!" said Hammond; but all the same he liked being laughed at
by Janey.  "Let's talk.  Let's get down to things.  Tell me"--and as Janey
perched on his knees he leaned back and drew her into the deep, ugly chair-
-"tell me you're really glad to be back, Janey."

"Yes, darling, I am glad," she said.

But just as when he embraced her he felt she would fly away, so Hammond
never knew--never knew for dead certain that she was as glad as he was.
How could he know?  Would he ever know?  Would he always have this craving-
-this pang like hunger, somehow, to make Janey so much part of him that
there wasn't any of her to escape?  He wanted to blot out everybody,
everything.  He wished now he'd turned off the light.  That might have
brought her nearer.  And now those letters from the children rustled in her
blouse.  He could have chucked them into the fire.

"Janey," he whispered.

"Yes, dear?"  She lay on his breast, but so lightly, so remotely.  Their
breathing rose and fell together.

"Janey!"

"What is it?"

"Turn to me," he whispered.  A slow, deep flush flowed into his forehead.
"Kiss me, Janey!  You kiss me!"

It seemed to him there was a tiny pause--but long enough for him to suffer
torture--before her lips touched his, firmly, lightly--kissing them as she
always kissed him, as though the kiss--how could he describe it?--confirmed
what they were saying, signed the contract.  But that wasn't what he
wanted; that wasn't at all what he thirsted for.  He felt suddenly,
horrible tired.

"If you knew," he said, opening his eyes, "what it's been like--waiting to-
day.  I thought the boat never would come in.  There we were, hanging
about.  What kept you so long?"

She made no answer.  She was looking away from him at the fire.  The flames
hurried--hurried over the coals, flickered, fell.

"Not asleep, are you?" said Hammond, and he jumped her up and down.

"No," she said.  And then:  "Don't do that, dear.  No, I was thinking.  As
a matter of fact," she said, "one of the passengers died last night--a man.
That's what held us up.  We brought him in--I mean, he wasn't buried at
sea.  So, of course, the ship's doctor and the shore doctor--"

"What was it?" asked Hammond uneasily.  He hated to hear of death.  He
hated this to have happened.  It was, in some queer way, as though he and
Janey had met a funeral on their way to the hotel.

"Oh, it wasn't anything in the least infectious!" said Janey.  She was
speaking scarcely above her breath.  "It was heart."  A pause.  "Poor
fellow!" she said.  "Quite young."  And she watched the fire flicker and
fall.  "He died in my arms," said Janey.

The blow was so sudden that Hammond thought he would faint.  He couldn't
move; he couldn't breathe.  He felt all his strength flowing--flowing into
the big dark chair, and the big dark chair held him fast, gripped him,
forced him to bear it.

"What?" he said dully.  "What's that you say?"

"The end was quite peaceful," said the small voice.  "He just"--and Hammond
saw her lift her gentle hand--"breathed his life away at the end."  And her
hand fell.

"Who--else was there?" Hammond managed to ask.

"Nobody.  I was alone with him."

Ah, my God, what was she saying!  What was she doing to him!  This would
kill him!  And all the while she spoke:

"I saw the change coming and I sent the steward for the doctor, but the
doctor was too late.  He couldn't have done anything, anyway."

"But--why you, why you?" moaned Hammond.

At that Janey turned quickly, quickly searched his face.

"You don't mind, John, do you?" she asked.  "You don't--It's nothing to do
with you and me."

Somehow or other he managed to shake some sort of smile at her.  Somehow or
other he stammered:  "No--go--on, go on!  I want you to tell me."

"But, John darling--"

"Tell me, Janey!"

"There's nothing to tell," she said, wondering.  "He was one of the first-
class passengers.  I saw he was very ill when he came on board...But he
seemed to be so much better until yesterday.  He had a severe attack in the
afternoon--excitement--nervousness, I think, about arriving.  And after
that he never recovered."

"But why didn't the stewardess--"

"Oh, my dear--the stewardess!" said Janey.  "What would he have felt?  And
besides...he might have wanted to leave a message...to--"

"Didn't he?" muttered Hammond.  "Didn't he say anything?"

"No, darling, not a word!"  She shook her head softly.  "All the time I was
with him he was too weak...he was too weak even to move a finger..."

Janey was silent.  But her words, so light, so soft, so chill, seemed to
hover in the air, to rain into his breast like snow.

The fire had gone red.  Now it fell in with a sharp sound and the room was
colder.  Cold crept up his arms.  The room was huge, immense, glittering.
It filled his whole world.  There was the great blind bed, with his coat
flung across it like some headless man saying his prayers.  There was the
luggage, ready to be carried away again, anywhere, tossed into trains,
carted on to boats.

..."He was too weak.  He was too weak to move a finger."  And yet he died
in Janey's arms.  She--who'd never--never once in all these years--never on
one single solitary occasion--

No; he mustn't think of it.  Madness lay in thinking of it.  No, he
wouldn't face it.  He couldn't stand it.  It was too much to bear!

And now Janey touched his tie with her fingers.  She pinched the edges of
the tie together.

"You're not--sorry I told you, John darling?  It hasn't made you sad?  It
hasn't spoilt our evening--our being alone together?"

But at that he had to hide his face.  He put his face into her bosom and
his arms enfolded her.

Spoilt their evening!  Spoilt their being alone together!  They would never
be alone together again.



13.  BANK HOLIDAY.

A stout man with a pink face wears dingy white flannel trousers, a blue
coat with a pink handkerchief showing, and a straw hat much too small for
him, perched at the back of his head.  He plays the guitar.  A little chap
in white canvas shoes, his face hidden under a felt hat like a broken wing,
breathes into a flute; and a tall thin fellow, with bursting over-ripe
button boots, draws ribbons--long, twisted, streaming ribbons--of tune out
of a fiddle.  They stand, unsmiling, but not serious, in the broad sunlight
opposite the fruit-shop; the pink spider of a hand beats the guitar, the
little squat hand, with a brass-and-turquoise ring, forces the reluctant
flute, and the fiddler's arm tries to saw the fiddle in two.

A crowd collects, eating oranges and bananas, tearing off the skins,
dividing, sharing.  One young girl has even a basket of strawberries, but
she does not eat them.  "Aren't they dear!"  She stares at the tiny pointed
fruits as if she were afraid of them.  The Australian soldier laughs.
"Here, go on, there's not more than a mouthful."  But he doesn't want her
to eat them, either.  He likes to watch her little frightened face, and her
puzzled eyes lifted to his:  "Aren't they a price!"  He pushes out his
chest and grins.  Old fat women in velvet bodices--old dusty pin-cushions--
lean old hags like worn umbrellas with a quivering bonnet on top; young
women, in muslins, with hats that might have grown on hedges, and high
pointed shoes; men in khaki, sailors, shabby clerks, young Jews in fine
cloth suits with padded shoulders and wide trousers, "hospital boys" in
blue--the sun discovers them--the loud, bold music holds them together in
one big knot for a moment.  The young ones are larking, pushing each other
on and off the pavement, dodging, nudging; the old ones are talking:  "So I
said to 'im, if you wants the doctor to yourself, fetch 'im, says I."

"An' by the time they was cooked there wasn't so much as you could put in
the palm of me 'and!"

The only ones who are quiet are the ragged children.  They stand, as close
up to the musicians as they can get, their hands behind their backs, their
eyes big.  Occasionally a leg hops, an arm wags.  A tiny staggerer,
overcome, turns round twice, sits down solemn, and then gets up again.

"Ain't it lovely?" whispers a small girl behind her hand.

And the music breaks into bright pieces, and joins together again, and
again breaks, and is dissolved, and the crowd scatters, moving slowly up
the hill.

At the corner of the road the stalls begin.

"Ticklers!  Tuppence a tickler!  'Ool 'ave a tickler?  Tickle 'em up,
boys."  Little soft brooms on wire handles.  They are eagerly bought by the
soldiers.

"Buy a golliwog!  Tuppence a golliwog!"

"Buy a jumping donkey!  All alive-oh!"

"Su-perior chewing gum.  Buy something to do, boys."

"Buy a rose.  Give 'er a rose, boy.  Roses, lady?"

"Fevvers!  Fevvers!"  They are hard to resist.  Lovely, streaming feathers,
emerald green, scarlet, bright blue, canary yellow.  Even the babies wear
feathers threaded through their bonnets.

And an old woman in a three-cornered paper hat cries as if it were her
final parting advice, the only way of saving yourself or of bringing him to
his senses:  "Buy a three-cornered 'at, my dear, an' put it on!"

It is a flying day, half sun, half wind.  When the sun goes in a shadow
flies over; when it comes out again it is fiery.  The men and women feel it
burning their backs, their breasts and their arms; they feel their bodies
expanding, coming alive...so that they make large embracing gestures, lift
up their arms, for nothing, swoop down on a girl, blurt into laughter.

Lemonade!  A whole tank of it stands on a table covered with a cloth; and
lemons like blunted fishes blob in the yellow water.  It looks solid, like
a jelly, in the thick glasses.  Why can't they drink it without spilling
it?  Everybody spills it, and before the glass is handed back the last
drops are thrown in a ring.

Round the ice-cream cart, with its striped awning and bright brass cover,
the children cluster.  Little tongues lick, lick round the cream trumpets,
round the squares.  The cover is lifted, the wooden spoon plunges in; one
shuts one's eyes to feel it, silently scrunching.

"Let these little birds tell you your future!"  She stands beside the cage,
a shrivelled ageless Italian, clasping and unclasping her dark claws.  Her
face, a treasure of delicate carving, is tied in a green-and-gold scarf.
And inside their prison the love-birds flutter towards the papers in the
seed-tray.

"You have great strength of character.  You will marry a red-haired man and
have three children.  Beware of a blonde woman."  Look out!  Look out!  A
motor-car driven by a fat chauffeur comes rushing down the hill.  Inside
there a blonde woman, pouting, leaning forward--rushing through your life--
beware! beware!

"Ladies and gentlemen, I am an auctioneer by profession, and if what I tell
you is not the truth I am liable to have my licence taken away from me and
a heavy imprisonment."  He holds the licence across his chest; the sweat
pours down his face into his paper collar; his eyes look glazed.  When he
takes off his hat there is a deep pucker of angry flesh on his forehead.
Nobody buys a watch.

Look out again!  A huge barouche comes swinging down the hill with two old,
old babies inside.  She holds up a lace parasol; he sucks the knob of his
cane, and the fat old bodies roll together as the cradle rocks, and the
steaming horse leaves a trail of manure as it ambles down the hill.

Under a tree, Professor Leonard, in cap and gown, stands beside his banner.
He is here "for one day," from the London, Paris and Brussels Exhibition,
to tell your fortune from your face.  And he stands, smiling encouragement,
like a clumsy dentist.  When the big men, romping and swearing a moment
before, hand across their sixpence, and stand before him, they are suddenly
serious, dumb, timid, almost blushing as the Professor's quick hand notches
the printed card.  They are like little children caught playing in a
forbidden garden by the owner, stepping from behind a tree.

The top of the hill is reached.  How hot it is!  How fine it is!  The
public-house is open, and the crowd presses in.  The mother sits on the
pavement edge with her baby, and the father brings her out a glass of dark,
brownish stuff, and then savagely elbows his way in again.  A reek of beer
floats from the public-house, and a loud clatter and rattle of voices.

The wind has dropped, and the sun burns more fiercely than ever.  Outside
the two swing-doors there is a thick mass of children like flies at the
mouth of a sweet-jar.

And up, up the hill come the people, with ticklers and golliwogs, and roses
and feathers.  Up, up they thrust into the light and heat, shouting,
laughing, squealing, as though they were being pushed by something, far
below, and by the sun, far ahead of them--drawn up into the full, bright,
dazzling radiance to...what?



14.  AN IDEAL FAMILY.

That evening for the first time in his life, as he pressed through the
swing door and descended the three broad steps to the pavement, old Mr.
Neave felt he was too old for the spring.  Spring--warm, eager, restless--
was there, waiting for him in the golden light, ready in front of everybody
to run up, to blow in his white beard, to drag sweetly on his arm.  And he
couldn't meet her, no; he couldn't square up once more and stride off,
jaunty as a young man.  He was tired and, although the late sun was still
shining, curiously cold, with a numbed feeling all over.  Quite suddenly he
hadn't the energy, he hadn't the heart to stand this gaiety and bright
movement any longer; it confused him.  He wanted to stand still, to wave it
away with his stick, to say, "Be off with you!"  Suddenly it was a terrible
effort to greet as usual--tipping his wide-awake with his stick--all the
people whom he knew, the friends, acquaintances, shopkeepers, postmen,
drivers.  But the gay glance that went with the gesture, the kindly twinkle
that seemed to say, "I'm a match and more for any of you"--that old Mr.
Neave could not manage at all.  He stumped along, lifting his knees high as
if he were walking through air that had somehow grown heavy and solid like
water.  And the homeward-looking crowd hurried by, the trams clanked, the
light carts clattered, the big swinging cabs bowled along with that
reckless, defiant indifference that one knows only in dreams...

It had been a day like other days at the office.  Nothing special had
happened.  Harold hadn't come back from lunch until close on four.  Where
had he been?  What had he been up to?  He wasn't going to let his father
know.  Old Mr. Neave had happened to be in the vestibule, saying good-bye
to a caller, when Harold sauntered in, perfectly turned out as usual, cool,
suave, smiling that peculiar little half-smile that women found so
fascinating.

Ah, Harold was too handsome, too handsome by far; that had been the trouble
all along.  No man had a right to such eyes, such lashes, and such lips; it
was uncanny.  As for his mother, his sisters, and the servants, it was not
too much to say they made a young god of him; they worshipped Harold, they
forgave him everything; and he had needed some forgiving ever since the
time when he was thirteen and he had stolen his mother's purse, taken the
money, and hidden the purse in the cook's bedroom.  Old Mr. Neave struck
sharply with his stick upon the pavement edge.  But it wasn't only his
family who spoiled Harold, he reflected, it was everybody; he had only to
look and to smile, and down they went before him.  So perhaps it wasn't to
be wondered at that he expected the office to carry on the tradition.  H'm,
h'm!  But it couldn't be done.  No business--not even a successful,
established, big paying concern--could be played with.  A man had either to
put his whole heart and soul into it, or it went all to pieces before his
eyes...

And then Charlotte and the girls were always at him to make the whole thing
over to Harold, to retire, and to spend his time enjoying himself.
Enjoying himself!  Old Mr. Neave stopped dead under a group of ancient
cabbage palms outside the Government buildings!  Enjoying himself!  The
wind of evening shook the dark leaves to a thin airy cackle.  Sitting at
home, twiddling his thumbs, conscious all the while that his life's work
was slipping away, dissolving, disappearing through Harold's fine fingers,
while Harold smiled...

"Why will you be so unreasonable, father?  There's absolutely no need for
you to go to the office.  It only makes it very awkward for us when people
persist in saying how tired you're looking.  Here's this huge house and
garden.  Surely you could be happy in--in--appreciating it for a change.
Or you could take up some hobby."

And Lola the baby had chimed in loftily, "All men ought to have hobbies.
It makes life impossible if they haven't."

Well, well!  He couldn't help a grim smile as painfully he began to climb
the hill that led into Harcourt Avenue.  Where would Lola and her sisters
and Charlotte be if he'd gone in for hobbies, he'd like to know?  Hobbies
couldn't pay for the town house and the seaside bungalow, and their horses,
and their golf, and the sixty-guinea gramophone in the music-room for them
to dance to.  Not that he grudged them these things.  No, they were smart,
good-looking girls, and Charlotte was a remarkable woman; it was natural
for them to be in the swim.  As a matter of fact, no other house in the
town was as popular as theirs; no other family entertained so much.  And
how many times old Mr. Neave, pushing the cigar box across the smoking-room
table, had listened to praises of his wife, his girls, of himself even.

"You're an ideal family, sir, an ideal family.  It's like something one
reads about or sees on the stage."

"That's all right, my boy," old Mr. Neave would reply.  "Try one of those;
I think you'll like them.  And if you care to smoke in the garden, you'll
find the girls on the lawn, I dare say."

That was why the girls had never married, so people said.  They could have
married anybody.  But they had too good a time at home.  They were too
happy together, the girls and Charlotte.  H'm, h'm!  Well, well.  Perhaps
so...

By this time he had walked the length of fashionable Harcourt Avenue; he
had reached the corner house, their house.  The carriage gates were pushed
back; there were fresh marks of wheels on the drive.  And then he faced the
big white-painted house, with its wide-open windows, its tulle curtains
floating outwards, its blue jars of hyacinths on the broad sills.  On
either side of the carriage porch their hydrangeas--famous in the town--
were coming into flower; the pinkish, bluish masses of flower lay like
light among the spreading leaves.  And somehow, it seemed to old Mr. Neave
that the house and the flowers, and even the fresh marks on the drive, were
saying, "There is young life here.  There are girls--"

The hall, as always, was dusky with wraps, parasols, gloves, piled on the
oak chests.  From the music-room sounded the piano, quick, loud and
impatient.  Through the drawing-room door that was ajar voices floated.

"And were there ices?" came from Charlotte.  Then the creak, creak of her
rocker.

"Ices!" cried Ethel.  "My dear mother, you never saw such ices.  Only two
kinds.  And one a common little strawberry shop ice, in a sopping wet
frill."

"The food altogether was too appalling," came from Marion.

"Still, it's rather early for ices," said Charlotte easily.

"But why, if one has them at all ..." began Ethel.

"Oh, quite so, darling," crooned Charlotte.

Suddenly the music-room door opened and Lola dashed out.  She started, she
nearly screamed, at the sight of old Mr. Neave.

"Gracious, father!  What a fright you gave me!  Have you just come home?
Why isn't Charles here to help you off with your coat?"

Her cheeks were crimson from playing, her eyes glittered, the hair fell
over her forehead.  And she breathed as though she had come running through
the dark and was frightened.  Old Mr. Neave stared at his youngest
daughter; he felt he had never seen her before.  So that was Lola, was it?
But she seemed to have forgotten her father; it was not for him that she
was waiting there.  Now she put the tip of her crumpled handkerchief
between her teeth and tugged at it angrily.  The telephone rang.  A-ah!
Lola gave a cry like a sob and dashed past him.  The door of the telephone-
room slammed, and at the same moment Charlotte called, "Is that you,
father?"

"You're tired again," said Charlotte reproachfully, and she stopped the
rocker and offered her warm plum-like cheek.  Bright-haired Ethel pecked
his beard, Marion's lips brushed his ear.

"Did you walk back, father?" asked Charlotte.

"Yes, I walked home," said old Mr. Neave, and he sank into one of the
immense drawing-room chairs.

"But why didn't you take a cab?" said Ethel.  "There are hundred of cabs
about at that time."

"My dear Ethel," cried Marion, "if father prefers to tire himself out, I
really don't see what business of ours it is to interfere."

"Children, children?" coaxed Charlotte.

But Marion wouldn't be stopped.  "No, mother, you spoil father, and it's
not right.  You ought to be stricter with him.  He's very naughty."  She
laughed her hard, bright laugh and patted her hair in a mirror.  Strange!
When she was a little girl she had such a soft, hesitating voice; she had
even stuttered, and now, whatever she said--even if it was only "Jam,
please, father"--it rang out as though she were on the stage.

"Did Harold leave the office before you, dear?" asked Charlotte, beginning
to rock again.

"I'm not sure," said Old Mr. Neave.  "I'm not sure.  I didn't see him after
four o'clock."

"He said--" began Charlotte.

But at that moment Ethel, who was twitching over the leaves of some paper
or other, ran to her mother and sank down beside her chair.

"There, you see," she cried.  "That's what I mean, mummy.  Yellow, with
touches of silver.  Don't you agree?"

"Give it to me, love," said Charlotte.  She fumbled for her tortoise-shell
spectacles and put them on, gave the page a little dab with her plump small
fingers, and pursed up her lips.  "Very sweet!" she crooned vaguely; she
looked at Ethel over her spectacles.  "But I shouldn't have the train."

"Not the train!" wailed Ethel tragically.  "But the train's the whole
point."

"Here, mother, let me decide."  Marion snatched the paper playfully from
Charlotte.  "I agree with mother," she cried triumphantly.  "The train
overweights it."

Old Mr. Neave, forgotten, sank into the broad lap of his chair, and,
dozing, heard them as though he dreamed.  There was no doubt about it, he
was tired out; he had lost his hold.  Even Charlotte and the girls were too
much for him to-night.  They were too...too...But all his drowsing brain
could think of was--too rich for him.  And somewhere at the back of
everything he was watching a little withered ancient man climbing up
endless flights of stairs.  Who was he?

"I shan't dress to-night," he muttered.

"What do you say, father?"

"Eh, what, what?"  Old Mr. Neave woke with a start and stared across at
them.  "I shan't dress to-night," he repeated.

"But, father, we've got Lucile coming, and Henry Davenport, and Mrs. Teddie
Walker."

"It will look so very out of the picture."

"Don't you feel well, dear?"

"You needn't make any effort.  What is Charles for?"

"But if you're really not up to it," Charlotte wavered.

"Very well!  Very well!"  Old Mr. Neave got up and went to join that little
old climbing fellow just as far as his dressing-room...

There young Charles was waiting for him.  Carefully, as though everything
depended on it, he was tucking a towel round the hot-water can.  Young
Charles had been a favourite of his ever since as a little red-faced boy he
had come into the house to look after the fires.  Old Mr. Neave lowered
himself into the cane lounge by the window, stretched out his legs, and
made his little evening joke, "Dress him up, Charles!"  And Charles,
breathing intensely and frowning, bent forward to take the pin out of his
tie.

H'm, h'm!  Well, well!  It was pleasant by the open window, very pleasant--
a fine mild evening.  They were cutting the grass on the tennis court
below; he heard the soft churr of the mower.  Soon the girls would begin
their tennis parties again.  And at the thought he seemed to hear Marion's
voice ring out, "Good for you, partner...Oh, played, partner...Oh, very
nice indeed."  Then Charlotte calling from the veranda, "Where is Harold?"
And Ethel, "He's certainly not here, mother."  And Charlotte's vague, "He
said--"

Old Mr. Neave sighed, got up, and putting one hand under his beard, he took
the comb from young Charles, and carefully combed the white beard over.
Charles gave him a folded handkerchief, his watch and seals, and spectacle
case.

"That will do, my lad."  The door shut, he sank back, he was alone...

And now that little ancient fellow was climbing down endless flights that
led to a glittering, gay dining-room.  What legs he had!  They were like a
spider's--thin, withered.

"You're an ideal family, sir, an ideal family."

But if that were true, why didn't Charlotte or the girls stop him?  Why was
he all alone, climbing up and down?  Where was Harold?  Ah, it was no good
expecting anything from Harold.  Down, down went the little old spider, and
then, to his horror, old Mr. Neave saw him slip past the dining-room and
make for the porch, the dark drive, the carriage gates, the office.  Stop
him, stop him, somebody!

Old Mr. Neave started up.  It was dark in his dressing-room; the window
shone pale.  How long had he been asleep?  He listened, and through the
big, airy, darkened house there floated far-away voices, far-away sounds.
Perhaps, he thought vaguely, he had been asleep for a long time.  He'd been
forgotten.  What had all this to do with him--this house and Charlotte, the
girls and Harold--what did he know about them?  They were strangers to him.
Life had passed him by.  Charlotte was not his wife.  His wife!

...A dark porch, half hidden by a passion-vine, that drooped sorrowful,
mournful, as though it understood.  Small, warm arms were round his neck.
A face, little and pale, lifted to his, and a voice breathed, "Good-bye, my
treasure."

My treasure!  "Good-bye, my treasure!"  Which of them had spoken?  Why had
they said good-bye?  There had been some terrible mistake.  She was his
wife, that little pale girl, and all the rest of his life had been a dream.

Then the door opened, and young Charles, standing in the light, put his
hands by his side and shouted like a young soldier, "Dinner is on the
table, sir!"

"I'm coming, I'm coming," said old Mr. Neave.



15.  THE LADY'S MAID.

Eleven o'clock.  A knock at the door...I hope I haven't disturbed you,
madam.  You weren't asleep--were you?  But I've just given my lady her tea,
and there was such a nice cup over, I thought, perhaps...

...Not at all, madam.  I always make a cup of tea last thing.  She drinks
it in bed after her prayers to warm her up.  I put the kettle on when she
kneels down and I say to it, "Now you needn't be in too much of a hurry to
say your prayers."  But it's always boiling before my lady is half through.
You see, madam, we know such a lot of people, and they've all got to be
prayed for--every one.  My lady keeps a list of the names in a little red
book.  Oh dear! whenever some one new has been to see us and my lady says
afterwards, "Ellen, give me my little red book," I feel quite wild, I do.
"There's another," I think, "keeping her out of her bed in all weathers."
And she won't have a cushion, you know, madam; she kneels on the hard
carpet.  It fidgets me something dreadful to see her, knowing her as I do.
I've tried to cheat her; I've spread out the eiderdown.  But the first time
I did it--oh, she gave me such a look--holy it was, madam.  "Did our Lord
have an eiderdown, Ellen?" she said.  But--I was younger at the time--I
felt inclined to say, "No, but our Lord wasn't your age, and he didn't know
what it was to have your lumbago."  Wicked--wasn't it?  But she's too good,
you know, madam.  When I tucked her up just now and seen--saw her lying
back, her hands outside and her head on the pillow--so pretty--I couldn't
help thinking, "Now you look just like your dear mother when I laid her
out!"

...Yes, madam, it was all left to me.  Oh, she did look sweet.  I did her
hair, soft-like, round her forehead, all in dainty curls, and just to one
side of her neck I put a bunch of most beautiful purple pansies.  Those
pansies made a picture of her, madam!  I shall never forget them.  I
thought to-night, when I looked at my lady, "Now, if only the pansies was
there no one could tell the difference."

...Only the last year, madam.  Only after she'd got a little--well--feeble
as you might say.  Of course, she was never dangerous; she was the sweetest
old lady.  But how it took her was--she thought she'd lost something.  She
couldn't keep still, she couldn't settle.  All day long she'd be up and
down, up and down; you'd meet her everywhere,--on the stairs, in the porch,
making for the kitchen.  And she'd look up at you, and she'd say--just like
a child, "I've lost it, I've lost it."  "Come along," I'd say, "come along,
and I'll lay out your patience for you."  But she'd catch me by the hand--I
was a favourite of hers--and whisper, "Find it for me, Ellen.  Find it for
me."  Sad, wasn't it?

...No, she never recovered, madam.  She had a stroke at the end.  Last
words she ever said was--very slow, "Look in--the--Look--in--"  And then
she was gone.

...No, madam, I can't say I noticed it.  Perhaps some girls.  But you see,
it's like this, I've got nobody but my lady.  My mother died of consumption
when I was four, and I lived with my grandfather, who kept a hair-dresser's
shop.  I used to spend all my time in the shop under a table dressing my
doll's hair--copying the assistants, I suppose.  They were ever so kind to
me.  Used to make me little wigs, all colours, the latest fashions and all.
And there I'd sit all day, quiet as quiet--the customers never knew.  Only
now and again I'd take my peep from under the table-cloth.

...But one day I managed to get a pair of scissors and--would you believe
it, madam?  I cut off all my hair; snipped it off all in bits, like the
little monkey I was.  Grandfather was furious!  He caught hold of the
tongs--I shall never forget it--grabbed me by the hand and shut my fingers
in them.  "That'll teach you!" he said.  It was a fearful burn.  I've got
the mark of it to-day.

...Well, you see, madam, he'd taken such pride in my hair.  He used to sit
me up on the counter, before the customers came, and do it something
beautiful--big, soft curls and waved over the top.  I remember the
assistants standing round, and me ever so solemn with the penny grandfather
gave me to hold while it was being done...But he always took the penny back
afterwards.  Poor grandfather!  Wild, he was, at the fright I'd made of
myself.  But he frightened me that time.  Do you know what I did, madam?  I
ran away.  Yes, I did, round the corners, in and out, I don't know how far
I didn't run.  Oh, dear, I must have looked a sight, with my hand rolled up
in my pinny and my hair sticking out.  People must have laughed when they
saw me...

...No, madam, grandfather never got over it.  He couldn't bear the sight of
me after.  Couldn't eat his dinner, even, if I was there.  So my aunt took
me.  She was a cripple, an upholstress.  Tiny!  She had to stand on the
sofas when she wanted to cut out the backs.  And it was helping her I met
my lady...

...Not so very, madam.  I was thirteen, turned.  And I don't remember ever
feeling--well--a child, as you might say.  You see there was my uniform,
and one thing and another.  My lady put me into collars and cuffs from the
first.  Oh yes--once I did!  That was--funny!  It was like this.  My lady
had her two little nieces staying with her--we were at Sheldon at the time-
-and there was a fair on the common.

"Now, Ellen," she said, "I want you to take the two young ladies for a ride
on the donkeys."  Off we went; solemn little loves they were; each had a
hand.  But when we came to the donkeys they were too shy to go on.  So we
stood and watched instead.  Beautiful those donkeys were!  They were the
first I'd seen out of a cart--for pleasure as you might say.  They were a
lovely silver-grey, with little red saddles and blue bridles and bells
jing-a-jingling on their ears.  And quite big girls--older than me, even--
were riding them, ever so gay.  Not at all common, I don't mean, madam,
just enjoying themselves.  And I don't know what it was, but the way the
little feet went, and the eyes--so gentle--and the soft ears--made me want
to go on a donkey more than anything in the world!

...Of course, I couldn't.  I had my young ladies.  And what would I have
looked like perched up there in my uniform?  But all the rest of the day it
was donkeys--donkeys on the brain with me.  I felt I should have burst if I
didn't tell some one; and who was there to tell?  But when I went to bed--I
was sleeping in Mrs. James's bedroom, our cook that was, at the time--as
soon as the lights was out, there they were, my donkeys, jingling along,
with their neat little feet and sad eyes...Well, madam, would you believe
it, I waited for a long time and pretended to be asleep, and then suddenly
I sat up and called out as loud as I could, "I do want to go on a donkey.
I do want a donkey-ride!"  You see, I had to say it, and I thought they
wouldn't laugh at me if they knew I was only dreaming.  Artful--wasn't it?
Just what a silly child would think...

...No, madam, never now.  Of course, I did think of it at one time.  But it
wasn't to be.  He had a little flower-shop just down the road and across
from where we was living.  Funny--wasn't it?  And me such a one for
flowers.  We were having a lot of company at the time, and I was in and out
of the shop more often than not, as the saying is.  And Harry and I (his
name was Harry) got to quarrelling about how things ought to be arranged--
and that began it.  Flowers! you wouldn't believe it, madam, the flowers he
used to bring me.  He'd stop at nothing.  It was lilies-of-the-valley more
than once, and I'm not exaggerating!  Well, of course, we were going to be
married and live over the shop, and it was all going to be just so, and I
was to have the window to arrange...Oh, how I've done that window of a
Saturday!  Not really, of course, madam, just dreaming, as you might say.
I've done it for Christmas--motto in holly, and all--and I've had my Easter
lilies with a gorgeous star all daffodils in the middle.  I've hung--well,
that's enough of that.  The day came he was to call for me to choose the
furniture.  Shall I ever forget it?  It was a Tuesday.  My lady wasn't
quite herself that afternoon.  Not that she'd said anything, of course; she
never does or will.  But I knew by the way that she kept wrapping herself
up and asking me if it was cold--and her little nose looked...pinched.  I
didn't like leaving her; I knew I'd be worrying all the time.  At last I
asked her if she'd rather I put it off.  "Oh no, Ellen," she said, "you
mustn't mind about me.  You mustn't disappoint your young man."  And so
cheerful, you know, madam, never thinking about herself.  It made me feel
worse than ever.  I began to wonder...then she dropped her handkerchief and
began to stoop down to pick it up herself--a thing she never did.
"Whatever are you doing!" I cried, running to stop her.  "Well," she said,
smiling, you know, madam, "I shall have to begin to practise."  Oh, it was
all I could do not to burst out crying.  I went over to the dressing-table
and made believe to rub up the silver, and I couldn't keep myself in, and I
asked her if she'd rather I...didn't get married.  "No, Ellen," she said--
that was her voice, madam, like I'm giving you--"No, Ellen, not for the
wide world!"  But while she said it, madam--I was looking in her glass; of
course, she didn't know I could see her--she put her little hand on her
heart just like her dear mother used to, and lifted her eyes...Oh, madam!

When Harry came I had his letters all ready, and the ring and a ducky
little brooch he'd given me--a silver bird it was, with a chain in its
beak, and on the end of the chain a heart with a dagger.  Quite the thing!
I opened the door to him.  I never gave him time for a word.  "There you
are," I said.  "Take them all back," I said, "it's all over.  I'm not going
to marry you," I said, "I can't leave my lady."  White! he turned as white
as a woman.  I had to slam the door, and there I stood, all of a tremble,
till I knew he had gone.  When I opened the door--believe me or not, madam-
-that man was gone!  I ran out into the road just as I was, in my apron and
my house-shoes, and there I stayed in the middle of the road...staring.
People must have laughed if they saw me...

...Goodness gracious!--What's that?  It's the clock striking!  And here
I've been keeping you awake.  Oh, madam, you ought to have stopped me...Can
I tuck in your feet?  I always tuck in my lady's feet, every night, just
the same.  And she says, "Good night, Ellen.  Sleep sound and wake early!"
I don't know what I should do if she didn't say that, now.

...Oh dear, I sometimes think...whatever should I do if anything were
to...But, there, thinking's no good to any one--is it, madam?  Thinking
won't help.  Not that I do it often.  And if ever I do I pull myself up
sharp, "Now, then, Ellen.  At it again--you silly girl!  If you can't find
anything better to do than to start thinking!..."



THE END





A little bird was asked: Why are your songs so short?
He replied: I have many songs to sing, and I should like to sing them all.

Anton Tchehov



To
H. M. Tomlinson



CONTENTS

Introductory Note
The Tiredness of Rosabel
How Pearl Button was Kidnapped
The Journey to Bruges
A Truthful Adventure
New Dresses
The Woman at the Store
Ole Underwood
The Little Girl
Millie
Pension Séguin
Violet
Bains Turcs
Something Childish but very Natural
An Indiscreet Journey
Spring Pictures
Late at Night
Two Tuppenny Ones, Please
The Black Cap
A Suburban Fairy Tale
Carnation
See-Saw
This Flower
The Wrong House
Sixpence
Poison



INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


Most of the stories and sketches in this collection were written in the
years between the publication of Katherine Mansfield's first book, "In a
German Pension," in 1911 and the publication of her second, "Bliss and
other Stories," in 1920. There are a few exceptions. The first story, The
Tiredness of Rosabel, was written in 1908 when Katherine Mansfield was
nineteen years old, and the three stories following also were written
before "In a German Pension" was published: while Sixpence and Poison
were written after Bliss had appeared. Sixpence was excluded from "The
Garden-Party and Other Stories" by Katherine Mansfield because she
thought it "sentimental"; Poison was excluded because I thought it was
not wholly successful. I have since changed my mind: it now seems to me a
little masterpiece.

I have no doubt that Katherine Mansfield, were she still alive, would not
have suffered some of these stories to appear. When she was urged to
allow "In a German Pension" to be republished, she would always reply:
"Not now; not yet--not until I have a body of work done and it can be
seen in perspective. It is not true of me now: I am not like that any
more. When the time for a collected edition comes--" she would end,
laughing. The time has come.

The stories are arranged in chronological order.



THE TIREDNESS OF ROSABEL


At the corner of Oxford Circus Rosabel bought a bunch of violets, and
that was practically the reason why she had so little tea--for a scone
and a boiled egg and a cup of cocoa at Lyons are not ample sufficiency
after a hard day's work in a millinery establishment. As she swung on to
the step of the Atlas 'bus, grabbed her skirt with one hand and clung to
the railing with the other, Rosabel thought she would have sacrificed her
soul for a good dinner--roast duck and green peas, chestnut stuffing,
pudding with brandy sauce--something hot and strong and filling. She sat
down next to a girl very much her own age who was reading Anna Lombard in
a cheap, paper-covered edition, and the rain had tear-spattered the
pages. Rosabel looked out of the windows; the street was blurred and
misty, but light striking on the panes turned their dullness to opal and
silver, and the jewellers' shops seen through this, were fairy palaces.
Her feet were horribly wet, and she knew the bottom of her skirt and
petticoat would be coated with black, greasy mud. There was a sickening
smell of warm humanity--it seemed to be oozing out of everybody in the
'bus--and everybody had the same expression, sitting so still, staring in
front of them. How many times had she read these advertisements--"Sapolio
Saves Time, Saves Labour"--"Heinz's Tomato Sauce"--and the inane,
annoying dialogue between doctor and judge concerning the superlative
merits of "Lamplough's Pyretic Saline." She glanced at the book which the
girl read so earnestly, mouthing the words in a way that Rosabel
detested, licking her first finger and thumb each time that she turned
the page. She could not see very clearly; it was something about a hot,
voluptuous night, a band playing, and a girl with lovely, white
shoulders. Oh, Heavens! Rosabel stirred suddenly and unfastened the two
top buttons of her coat...she felt almost stifled. Through her
half-closed eyes the whole row of people on the opposite seat seemed to
resolve into one fatuous, staring face...

And this was her corner. She stumbled a little on her way out and lurched
against the girl next her. "I beg your pardon," said Rosabel, but the
girl did not even look up. Rosabel saw that she was smiling as she read.

Westbourne Grove looked as she had always imagined Venice to look at
night, mysterious, dark, even the hansoms were like gondolas dodging up
and down, and the lights trailing luridly--tongues of flame licking the
wet street--magic fish swimming in the Grand Canal. She was more than
glad to reach Richmond Road, but from the corner of the street until she
came to No. 26 she thought of those four flights of stairs. Oh, why four
flights! It was really criminal to expect people to live so high up.
Every house ought to have a lift, something simple and inexpensive, or
else an electric staircase like the one at Earl's Court--but four
flights! When she stood in the hall and saw the first flight ahead of her
and the stuffed albatross head on the landing, glimmering ghost-like in
the light of the little gas jet, she almost cried. Well, they had to be
faced; it was very like bicycling up a steep hill, but there was not the
satisfaction of flying down the other side...

Her own room at last! She closed the door, lit the gas, took off her hat
and coat, skirt, blouse, unhooked her old flannel dressing-gown from
behind the door, pulled it on, then unlaced her boots--on consideration
her stockings were not wet enough to change. She went over to the
wash-stand. The jug had not been filled again to-day. There was just
enough water to soak the sponge, and the enamel was coming off the
basin--that was the second time she had scratched her chin.

It was just seven o'clock. If she pulled the blind up and put out the gas
it was much more restful--Rosabel did not want to read. So she knelt down
on the floor, pillowing her arms on the window-sill...just one little
sheet of glass between her and the great wet world outside!

She began to think of all that had happened during the day. Would she
ever forget that awful woman in the grey mackintosh who had wanted a
trimmed motor-cap--"something purple with something rosy each side"--or
the girl who had tried on every hat in the shop and then said she would
"call in to-morrow and decide definitely." Rosabel could not help
smiling; the excuse was worn so thin...

But there had been one other--a girl with beautiful red hair and a white
skin and eyes the colour of that green ribbon shot with gold they had got
from Paris last week. Rosabel had seen her electric brougham at the door;
a man had come in with her, quite a young man, and so well dressed.

"What is it exactly that I want, Harry?" she had said, as Rosabel took
the pins out of her hat, untied her veil, and gave her a hand-mirror.

"You must have a black hat," he had answered, "a black hat with a feather
that goes right round it and then round your neck and ties in a bow under
your chin, and the ends tuck into your belt--a decent-sized feather."

The girl glanced at Rosabel laughingly. "Have you any hats like that?"

They had been very hard to please; Harry would demand the impossible, and
Rosabel was almost in despair. Then she remembered the big, untouched box
upstairs.

"Oh, one moment, Madam," she had said. "I think perhaps I can show you
something that will please you better." She had run up, breathlessly, cut
the cords, scattered the tissue paper, and yes, there was the very
hat--rather large, soft, with a great, curled feather, and a black velvet
rose, nothing else. They had been charmed. The girl had put it on and
then handed it to Rosabel.

"Let me see how it looks on you," she said, frowning a little, very
serious indeed.

Rosabel turned to the mirror and placed it on her brown hair, then faced
them.

"Oh, Harry, isn't it adorable," the girl cried, "I must have that!" She
smiled again at Rosabel. "It suits you, beautifully."

A sudden, ridiculous feeling of anger had seized Rosabel. She longed to
throw the lovely, perishable thing in the girl's face, and bent over the
hat, flushing.

"It's exquisitely finished off inside, Madam," she said. The girl swept
out to her brougham, and left Harry to pay and bring the box with him.

"I shall go straight home and put it on before I come out to lunch with
you," Rosabel heard her say.

The man leant over her as she made out the bill, then, as he counted the
money into her hand--"Ever been painted?" he said.

"No," said Rosabel, shortly, realising the swift change in his voice, the
slight tinge of insolence, of familiarity.

"Oh, well you ought to be," said Harry. "You've got such a damned pretty
little figure."

Rosabel did not pay the slightest attention. How handsome he had been!
She had thought of no one else all day; his face fascinated her; she
could see clearly his fine, straight eyebrows, and his hair grew back
from his forehead with just the slightest suspicion of crisp curl, his
laughing, disdainful mouth. She saw again his slim hands counting the
money into hers...Rosabel suddenly pushed the hair back from her face,
her forehead was hot...if those slim hands could rest one moment...the
luck of that girl!

Suppose they changed places. Rosabel would drive home with him, of course
they were in love with each other, but not engaged, very nearly, and she
would say--"I won't be one moment." He would wait in the brougham while
her maid took the hat-box up the stairs, following Rosabel. Then the
great, white and pink bedroom with roses everywhere in dull silver vases.
She would sit down before the mirror and the little French maid would
fasten her hat and find her a thin, fine veil and another pair of white
suède gloves--a button had come off the gloves she had worn that morning.
She had scented her furs and gloves and handkerchief, taken a big muff
and run down stairs. The butler opened the door, Harry was waiting, they
drove away together...That was life, thought Rosabel! On the way to the
Carlton they stopped at Gerard's, Harry bought her great sprays of Parma
violets, filled her hands with them.

"Oh, they are sweet!" she said, holding them against her face.

"It is as you always should be," said Harry, "with your hands full of
violets."

(Rosabel realised that her knees were getting stiff; she sat down on the
floor and leant her head against the wall.) Oh, that lunch! The table
covered with flowers, a band hidden behind a grove of palms playing music
that fired her blood like wine--the soup, and oysters, and pigeons, and
creamed potatoes, and champagne, of course, and afterwards coffee and
cigarettes. She would lean over the table fingering her glass with one
hand, talking with that charming gaiety which Harry so appreciated.
Afterwards a matinee, something that gripped them both, and then tea at
the "Cottage."

"Sugar? Milk? Cream?" The little homely questions seemed to suggest a
joyous intimacy. And then home again in the dusk, and the scent of the
Parma violets seemed to drench the air with their sweetness.

"I'll call for you at nine," he said as he left her.

The fire had been lighted in her boudoir, the curtains drawn, there were
a great pile of letters waiting her--invitations for the Opera, dinners,
balls, a week-end on the river, a motor tour--she glanced through them
listlessly as she went upstairs to dress. A fire in her bedroom, too, and
her beautiful, shining dress spread on the bed--white tulle over silver,
silver shoes, silver scarf, a little silver fan. Rosabel knew that she
was the most famous woman at the ball that night; men paid her homage, a
foreign Prince desired to be presented to this English wonder. Yes, it
was a voluptuous night, a band playing, and her lovely white shoulders...

But she became very tired. Harry took her home, and came in with her for
just one moment. The fire was out in the drawingroom, but the sleepy maid
waited for her in her boudoir. She took off her cloak, dismissed the
servant, and went over to the fireplace, and stood peeling off her
gloves; the firelight shone on her hair, Harry came across the room and
caught her in his arms--"Rosabel, Rosabel, Rosabel"...Oh, the haven of
those arms, and she was very tired.

(The real Rosabel, the girl crouched on the floor in the dark, laughed
aloud, and put her hand up to her hot mouth.)

Of course they rode in the park next morning, the engagement had been
announced in the Court Circular, all the world knew, all the world was
shaking hands with her...

They were married shortly afterwards at St. George's, Hanover Square, and
motored down to Harry's old ancestral home for the honeymoon; the
peasants in the village curtseyed to them as they passed; under the folds
of the rug he pressed her hands convulsively. And that night she wore
again her white and silver frock. She was tired after the journey and
went upstairs to bed...quite early...

The real Rosabel got up from the floor and undressed slowly, folding her
clothes over the back of a chair. She slipped over her head her coarse,
calico nightdress, and took the pins out of her hair--the soft, brown
flood of it fell round her, warmly. Then she blew out the candle and
groped her way into bed, pulling the blankets and grimy "honeycomb" quilt
closely round her neck, cuddling down in the darkness...

So she slept and dreamed, and smiled in her sleep, and once threw out her
arm to feel for something which was not there, dreaming still.

And the night passed. Presently the cold fingers of dawn closed over her
uncovered hand; grey light flooded the dull room. Rosabel shivered, drew
a little gasping breath, sat up. And because her heritage was that tragic
optimism, which is all too often the only inheritance of youth, still
half asleep, she smiled, with a little nervous tremor round her mouth.

(1908)



HOW PEARL BUTTON WAS KIDNAPPED


Pearl Button swung on the little gate in front of the House of Boxes. It
was the early afternoon of a sunshiny day with little winds playing
hide-and-seek in it. They blew Pearl Button's pinafore frill into her
mouth, and they blew the street dust all over the House of Boxes. Pearl
watched it--like a cloud--like when mother peppered her fish and the top
of the pepper-pot came off. She swung on the little gate, all alone, and
she sang a small song. Two big women came walking down the street. One
was dressed in red and the other was dressed in yellow and green. They
had pink handkerchiefs over their heads, and both of them carried a big
flax basket of ferns. They had no shoes and stockings on, and they came
walking along, slowly, because they were so fat, and talking to each
other and always smiling. Pearl stopped swinging, and when they saw her
they stopped walking. They looked and looked at her and then they talked
to each other, waving their arms and clapping their hands together. Pearl
began to laugh.

The two women came up to her, keeping close to the hedge and looking in a
frightened way towards the House of Boxes.

"Hallo, little girl!" said one.

Pearl said, "Hallo!"

"You all alone by yourself?"

Pearl nodded.

"Where's your mother?"

"In the kitching, ironing-because-its-Tues-day."

The women smiled at her and Pearl smiled back. "Oh," she said, "haven't
you got very white teeth indeed! Do it again."

The dark women laughed, and again they talked to each other with funny
words and wavings of the hands. "What's your name?" they asked her.

"Pearl Button."

"You coming with us, Pearl Button? We got beautiful things to show you,"
whispered one of the women. So Pearl got down from the gate and she
slipped out into the road. And she walked between the two dark women down
the windy road, taking little running steps to keep up, and wondering
what they had in their House of Boxes.

They walked a long way. "You tired?" asked one of the women, bending down
to Pearl. Pearl shook her head. They walked much further. "You not
tired?" asked the other woman. And Pearl shook her head again, but tears
shook from her eyes at the same time and her lips trembled. One of the
women gave over her flax basket of ferns and caught Pearl Button up in
her arms, and walked with Pearl Button's head against her shoulder and
her dusty little legs dangling. She was softer than a bed and she had a
nice smell--a smell that made you bury your head and breathe and breathe
it...

They set Pearl Button down in a log room full of other people the same
colour as they were--and all these people came close to her and looked at
her, nodding and laughing and throwing up their eyes. The woman who had
carried Pearl took off her hair ribbon and shook her curls loose. There
was a cry from the other women, and they crowded close and some of them
ran a finger through Pearl's yellow curls, very gently, and one of them,
a young one, lifted all Pearl's hair and kissed the back of her little
white neck. Pearl felt shy but happy at the same time. There were some
men on the floor, smoking, with rugs and feather mats round their
shoulders. One of them made a funny face at her and he pulled a great big
peach out of his pocket and set it on the floor, and flicked it with his
finger as though it were a marble. It rolled right over to her. Pearl
picked it up. "Please can I eat it?" she asked. At that they all laughed
and clapped their hands, and the man with the funny face made another at
her and pulled a pear out of his pocket and sent it bobbling over the
floor. Pearl laughed. The women sat on the floor and Pearl sat down too.
The floor was very dusty. She carefully pulled up her pinafore and dress
and sat on her petticoat as she had been taught to sit in dusty places,
and she ate the fruit, the juice running all down her front.

"Oh!" she said in a very frightened voice to one of the women, "I've
spilt all the juice!

"That doesn't matter at all," said the woman, patting her cheek. A man
came into the room with a long whip in his hand. He shouted something.
They all got up, shouting, laughing, wrapping themselves up in rugs and
blankets and feather mats. Pearl was carried again, this time into a
great cart, and she sat on the lap of one of her women with the driver
beside her. It was a green cart with a red pony and a black pony. It went
very fast out of the town. The driver stood up and waved the whip round
his head. Pearl peered over the shoulder of her woman. Other carts were
behind like a procession. She waved at them. Then the country came. First
fields of short grass with sheep on them and little bushes of white
flowers and pink briar rose baskets--then big trees on both sides of the
road--and nothing to be seen except big trees. Pearl tried to look
through them but it was quite dark. Birds were singing. She nestled
closer in the big lap. The woman was warm as a cat, and she moved up and
down when she breathed, just like purring. Pearl played with a green
ornament round her neck, and the woman took the little hand and kissed
each of her fingers and then turned it over and kissed the dimples. Pearl
had never been happy like this before. On the top of a big hill they
stopped. The driving man turned to Pearl and said, "Look, look!" and
pointed with his whip.

And down at the bottom of the hill was something perfectly different--a
great big piece of blue water was creeping over the land. She screamed
and clutched at the big woman, "What is it, what is it?"

"Why," said the woman, "it's the sea."

"Will it hurt us--is it coming?"

"Ai-e, no, it doesn't come to us. It's very beautiful. You look again."

Pearl looked. "You're sure it can't come," she said.

"Ai-e, no. It stays in its place," said the big woman. Waves with white
tops came leaping over the blue. Pearl watched them break on a long piece
of land covered with gardenpath shells. They drove round a corner.

There were some little houses down close to the sea, with wood fences
round them and gardens inside. They comforted her. Pink and red and blue
washing hung over the fences, and as they came near more people came out,
and five yellow dogs with long thin tails. All the people were fat and
laughing, with little naked babies holding on to them or rolling about in
the gardens like puppies. Pearl was lifted down and taken into a tiny
house with only one room and a verandah. There was a girl there with two
pieces of black hair down to her feet. She was setting the dinner on the
floor. "It is a funny place," said Pearl, watching the pretty girl while
the woman unbuttoned her little drawers for her. She was very hungry. She
ate meat and vegetables and fruit and the woman gave her milk out of a
green cup. And it was quite silent except for the sea outside and the
laughs of the two women watching her.

"Haven't you got any Houses of Boxes?" she said. "Don't you all live in a
row? Don't the men go to offices? Aren't there any nasty things?"

They took off her shoes and stockings, her pinafore and dress. She walked
about in her petticoat and then she walked outside with the grass pushing
between her toes. The two women came out with different sorts of baskets.
They took her hands. Over a little paddock, through a fence, and then on
warm sand with brown grass in it they went down to the sea. Pearl held
back when the sand grew wet, but the women coaxed, "Nothing to hurt, very
beautiful. You come." They dug in the sand and found some shells which
they threw into the baskets. The sand was wet as mud pies. Pearl forgot
her fright and began digging too. She got hot and wet, and suddenly over
her feet broke a little line of foam. "Oo, oo!" she shrieked, dabbling
with her feet, "Lovely, lovely!" She paddled in the shallow water. It was
warm. She made a cup of her hands and caught some of it. But it stopped
being blue in her hands. She was so excited that she rushed over to her
woman and flung her little thin arms round the woman's neck, hugging her,
kissing...

Suddenly the girl gave a frightful scream. The woman raised herself and
Pearl slipped down on the sand and looked towards the land. Little men in
blue coats--little blue men came running, running towards her with shouts
and whistlings--a crowd of little blue men to carry her back to the House
of Boxes.

(1910)



THE JOURNEY TO BRUGES


"You got three-quarters of an hour," said the porter. "You got an hour
mostly. Put it in the cloak-room, lady."

A German family, their luggage neatly buttoned into what appeared to be
odd canvas trouser legs, filled the entire space before the counter, and
a homoeopathic young clergyman, his black dicky flapping over his shirt,
stood at my elbow. We waited and waited, for the cloak-room porter could
not get rid of the German family, who appeared by their enthusiasm and
gestures to be explaining to him the virtue of so many buttons. At last
the wife of the party seized her particular packet and started to undo
it. Shrugging his shoulders, the porter turned to me. "Where for?" he
asked.

"Ostend."

"Wot are you putting it in here for?" I said, "Because I've a long time
to wait."

He shouted, "Train's in 2.20. No good bringing it here. Hi, you there,
lump it off!"

My porter lumped it. The young clergyman, who had listened and remarked,
smiled at me radiantly. "The train is in," he said, "really in. You've
only a few moments, you know." My sensitiveness glimpsed a symbol in his
eye. I ran to the book-stall. When I returned I had lost my porter. In
the teasing heat I ran up and down the platform. The whole travelling
world seemed to possess a porter and glory in him except me. Savage and
wretched I saw them watch me with that delighted relish of the hot in the
very much hotter. "One could have a fit running in weather like this,"
said a stout lady, eating a farewell present of grapes. Then I was
informed that the train was not yet in. I had been running up and down
the Folkstone express. On a higher platform I found my porter sitting on
the suit case.

"I knew you'd be doin' that," he said, airily.

"I nearly come and stop you. I seen you from' ere."

I dropped into a smoking compartment with four young men, two of whom
were saying good-bye to a pale youth with a cane. "Well, good-bye, old
chap. It's frightfully good of you to have come down. I knew you. I knew
the same old slouch. Now, look here, when we come back we'll have a night
of it. What? Ripping of you to have come, old man." This from an
enthusiast, who lit a cigar as the train swung out, turned to his
companion and said, "Frightfully nice chap, but--lord--what a bore!" His
companion, who was dressed entirely in mole, even unto his socks and
hair, smiled gently. I think his brain must have been the same colour: he
proved so gentle and sympathetic a listener. In the opposite corner to me
sat a beautiful young Frenchman with curly hair and a watch-chain from
which dangled a silver fish, a ring, a silver shoe, and a medal. He
stared out of the window the whole time, faintly twitching his nose. Of
the remaining member there was nothing to be seen from behind his luggage
but a pair of tan shoes and a copy of The Snark's Summer Annual.

"Look here, old man," said the Enthusiast, "I want to change all our
places. You know those arrangements you've made--I want to cut them out
altogether. Do you mind?"

"No," said the Mole, faintly. "But why?"

"Well, I was thinking it over in bed last night, and I'm hanged if I can
see the good of us paying fifteen bob if we don't want to. You see what I
mean?" The Mole took off his pince-nez and breathed on them. "Now I don't
want to unsettle you," went on the Enthusiast, "because, after all, it's
your party--you asked me. I wouldn't upset it for anything, but--there
you are--you see--what?"

Suggested the Mole: "I'm afraid people will be down on me for taking you
abroad."

Straightway the other told him how sought after he had been. From far and
near, people who were full up for the entire month of August had written
and begged for him. He wrung the Mole's heart by enumerating those
longing homes and vacant chairs dotted all over England, until the Mole
deliberated between crying and going to sleep. He chose the latter.

They all went to sleep except the young Frenchman, who took a little
pocket edition out of his coat and nursed it on his knee while he gazed
at the warm, dusty country. At Shorncliffe the train stopped. Dead
silence. There was nothing to be seen but a large white cemetery.
Fantastic it looked in the late afternoon sun, its full-length marble
angels appearing to preside over a cheerless picnic of the Shorncliffe
departed on the brown field. One white butterfly flew over the railway
lines. As we crept out of the station I saw a poster advertising the
Athenaeum. The Enthusiast grunted and yawned, shook himself into
existence by rattling the money in his trouser pockets. He jabbed the
Mole in the ribs. "I say, we're nearly there! Can you get down those
beastly golf-clubs of mine from the rack?" My heart yearned over the
Mole's immediate future, but he was cheerful and offered to find me a
porter at Dover, and strapped my parasol in with my rugs. We saw the sea.
"It's going to be beastly rough," said the Enthusiast, "Gives you a head,
doesn't it? Look here, I know a tip for sea-sickness, and it's this: You
lie on your back--flat--you know, cover your face, and eat nothing but
biscuits."

"Dover!" shouted a guard.

In the act of crossing the gangway we renounced England. The most blatant
British female produced her mite of French: we "S'il vous plaît'd" one
another on the deck, "Merci'd" one another on the stairs, and "Pardon'd"
to our heart's content in the saloon. The stewardess stood at the foot of
the stairs, a stout, forbidding female, pockmarked, her hands hidden
under a businesslike-looking apron. She replied to our salutations with
studied indifference, mentally ticking off her prey. I descended to the
cabin to remove my hat. One old lady was already established there.

She lay on a rose and white couch, a black shawl tucked round her,
fanning herself with a black feather fan. Her grey hair was half covered
with a lace cap and her face gleamed from the black drapings and rose
pillows with charming old-world dignity. There was about her a faint
rustling and the scents of camphor and lavender. As I watched her,
thinking of Rembrandt and, for some reason, Anatole France, the
stewardess bustled up, placed a canvas stool at her elbow, spread a
newspaper upon it, and banged down a receptacle rather like a baking tin.
I went up on deck. The sea was bright green, with rolling waves. All the
beauty and artificial flower of France had removed their hats and bound
their heads in veils. A number of young German men, displaying their
national bulk in light-coloured suits cut in the pattern of pyjamas,
promenaded. French family parties--the female element in chairs, the male
in graceful attitudes against the ship's side--talked already with that
brilliance which denotes friction! I found a chair in a corner against a
white partition, but unfortunately this partition had a window set in it
for the purpose of providing endless amusement for the curious, who
peered through it, watching those bold and brave spirits who walked
"for'ard" and were drenched and beaten by the waves. In the first
half-hour the excitement of getting wet and being pleaded with, and
rushing into dangerous places to return and be rubbed down, was
all-absorbing. Then it palled--the parties drifted into silence. You
would catch them staring intently at the ocean--and yawning. They grew
cold and snappy. Suddenly a young lady in a white woollen hood with
cherry bows got up from her chair and swayed over to the railings. We
watched her, vaguely sympathetic. The young man with whom she had been
sitting called to her.

"Are you better?" Negative expressed.

He sat up in his chair. "Would you like me to hold your head?"

"No," said her shoulders

"Would you care for a coat round you?...Is it over?...Are you going to
remain there?"...He looked at her with infinite tenderness. I decided
never again to call men unsympathetic, and to believe in the
allconquering power of love until I died--but never put it to the test. I
went down to sleep.

I lay down opposite the old lady, and watched the shadows spinning over
the ceilings and the wave-drops shining on the portholes.

In the shortest sea voyage there is no sense of time. You have been down
in the cabin for hours or days or years. Nobody knows or cares. You know
all the people to the point of indifference. You do not believe in dry
land any more--you are caught in the pendulum itself, and left there,
idly swinging. The light faded.

I fell asleep, to wake to find the stewardess shaking me. "We are there
in two minutes," said she. Forlorn ladies, freed from the embrace of
Neptune, knelt upon the floor and searched for their shoes and
hairpins--only the old and dignified one lay passive, fanning herself.
She looked at me and smiled.

"Grâce de Dieu, c'est fini," she quavered in a voice so fine it seemed to
quaver on a thread of lace.

I lifted up my eyes. "Oui, c'est fini!"

"Vous allez à Strasbourg, Madame?"

"No," I said. "Bruges."

"That is a great pity," said she, closing her fan and the conversation. I
could not think why, but I had visions of myself perhaps travelling in
the same railway carriage with her, wrapping her in the black shawl, of
her falling in love with me and leaving me unlimited quantities of money
and old lace...These sleepy thoughts pursued me until I arrived on deck.

The sky was indigo blue, and a great many stars were shining: our little
ship stood black and sharp in the clear air. "Have you the
tickets?...Yes, they want the tickets...Produce your tickets!"...We were
squeezed over the gangway, shepherded into the custom house, where
porters heaved our luggage on to long wooden slabs, and an old man
wearing horn spectacles checked it without a word.

"Follow me!" shouted the villainous-looking creature whom I had endowed
with my worldly goods. He leapt on to a railway line, and I leapt after
him. He raced along a platform, dodging the passengers and fruit wagons,
with the security of a cinematograph figure. I reserved a seat and went
to buy fruit at a little stall displaying grapes and greengages. The old
lady was there, leaning on the arm of a large blond man, in white, with a
flowing tie. We nodded.

"Buy me," she said in her delicate voice, "three ham sandwiches, mon
cher!"

"And some cakes," said he.

"Yes, and perhaps a bottle of lemonade."

"Romance is an imp!" thought I, climbing up into the carriage. The train
swung out of the station; the air, blowing through the open windows,
smelled of fresh leaves. There were sudden pools of light in the
darkness; when I arrived at Bruges the bells were ringing, and white and
mysterious shone the moon over the Grand' Place.

(1910)



A TRUTHFUL ADVENTURE


"The little town lies spread before the gaze of the eager traveller like
a faded tapestry threaded with the silver of its canals, made musical by
the great chiming belfry. Life is long since asleep in Bruges; fantastic
dreams alone breathe over tower and mediaeval house front, enchanting the
eye, inspiring the soul and filling the mind with the great beauty of
contemplation."

I read this sentence from a guide-book while waiting for Madame in the
hotel sitting-room. It sounded extremely comforting, and my tired heart,
tucked away under a thousand and one grey city wrappings, woke and
exulted within me...I wondered if I had enough clothes with me to last
for at least a month. "I shall dream away whole days," I thought, "take a
boat and float up and down the canals, or tether it to a green bush
tangling the water side, and absorb mediaeval house fronts. At evensong I
shall lie in the long grass of the Béguinage meadow and look up at the
elm trees--their leaves touched with gold light and quivering in the blue
air--listening the while to the voices of nuns at prayer in the little
chapel, and growing full enough of grace to last me the whole winter."

While I soared magnificently upon these very new feathers Madame came in
and told me that there was no room at all for me in the hotel--not a bed,
not a corner. She was extremely friendly and seemed to find a fund of
secret amusement in the fact; she looked at me as though expecting me to
break into delighted laughter. "To-morrow," she said, "there may be. I am
expecting a young gentleman who is suddenly taken ill to move from number
eleven. He is at present at the chemist's--perhaps you would care to see
the room?"

"Not at all," said I. "Neither shall I wish to-morrow to sleep in the
bedroom of an indisposed young gentleman."

"But he will be gone," cried Madame, opening her blue eyes wide and
laughing with that French cordiality so enchanting to English hearing. I
was too tired and hungry to feel either appreciative or argumentative.
"Perhaps you can recommend me another hotel?"

"Impossible!" She shook her head and turned up her eyes, mentally
counting over the blue bows painted on the ceiling. "You see, it is the
season in Bruges, and people do not care to let their rooms for a very
short time"--not a glance at my little suit case lying between us, but I
looked at it gloomily, and it seemed to dwindle before my desperate
gaze--become small enough to hold nothing but a collapsible folding
tooth-brush.

"My large box is at the station," I said coldly, buttoning my gloves.

Madame started. "You have more luggage...Then you intend to make a long
stay in Bruges, perhaps?"

"At least a fortnight--perhaps a month." I shrugged my shoulders.

"One moment," said Madame. "I shall see what I can do." She disappeared,
I am sure not further than the other side of the door, for she reappeared
immediately and told me I might have a room at her private house--"just
round the corner and kept by an old servant who, although she has a wall
eye, has been in our family for fifteen years. The porter will take you
there, and you can have supper before you go."

I was the only guest in the dining-room. A tired waiter provided me with
an omelette and a pot of coffee, then leaned against a sideboard and
watched me while I ate, the limp table napkin over his arm seeming to
symbolise the very man. The room was hung with mirrors reflecting
unlimited empty tables and watchful waiters and solitary ladies finding
sad comfort in omelettes, and sipping coffee to the rhythm of
Mendelssohn's Spring Song played over three times by the great chiming
belfry.

"Are you ready, Madame?" asked the waiter. "It is I who carry your
luggage."

"Quite ready."

He heaved the suit case on to his shoulder and strode before me--past the
little pavement cafés where men and women, scenting our approach, laid
down their beer and their post-cards to stare after us, down a narrow
street of shuttered houses, through the Place van Eyck, to a red-brick
house. The door was opened by the wall-eyed family treasure, who held a
candle like a minature frying-pan in her hand. She refused to admit us
until we had both told the whole story.

"C'est ça, c'est ça," said she. "Jean, number five!"

She shuffled up the stairs, unlocked a door and lit another minature
frying-pan upon the bed-table. The room was papered in pink, having a
pink bed, a pink door and a pink chair. On pink mats on the mantelpiece
obese young cherubs burst out of pink eggshells with trumpets in their
mouths. I was brought a can of hot water; I shut and locked the door.
"Bruges at last," I thought as I climbed into a bed so slippery with fine
linen that one felt like a fish endeavouring to swim over an ice pond,
and this quiet house with the old "typical" servant,--the Place van Eyck,
with the white statue surrounded by those dark and heavy trees,--there
was almost a touch of Verlaine in that...

Bang! went a door. I started up in terror and felt for the frying-pan,
but it was the room next to mine suddenly invaded. "Ah! home at last,"
cried a female voice. "Mon Dieu, my feet! Would you go down to Marie, mon
cher, and ask her for the tin bath and some hot water?"

"No, that is too much," boomed the answer. "You have washed them three
times to-day already."

"But you do not know the pain I suffer; they are quite inflamed. Look
only!"

"I have looked three times already; I am tired. I beg of you come to
bed."

"It would be useless; I could not sleep. Mon Dieu, mon Dieu, how a woman
suffers!" A masculine snort accompanied by the sounds of undressing.

"Then, if I wait until the morning will you promise not to drag me to a
picture gallery?"

"Yes, yes, I promise."

"But truly?"

"I have said so."

"Now can I believe you?"

A long groan.

"It is absurd to make that noise, for you know yourself the same thing
happened last evening and this morning."

...There was only one thing to be done. I coughed and cleared my throat
in that unpleasant and obtrusive way of strange people in next door
bedrooms. It acted like a charm, their conversation sifted into a whisper
for female voice only! I fell asleep.

"Barquettes for hire. Visit the Venice of the North by boat. Explore the
little known and fascinating by-ways." With the memory of the guide book
clinging about me I went into the shop and demanded a boat. "Have you a
small canoe?"

"No, Mademoiselle, but a little boat--very suitable."

"I wish to go alone and return when I like."

"Then you have been here before?"

"No."

The boatman looked puzzled. "It is not safe for Mademoiselle to go
without a guide for the first time."

"Then I will take one on the condition that he is silent and points out
no beauties to me."

"But the names of the bridges?" cried the boatman--"the famous house
fronts?"

I ran down to the landing stage. "Pierre, Pierre!" called the waterman. A
burly young Belgian, his arms full of carpet strips and red velvet
pillows, appeared and tossed his spoil into an immense craft. On the
bridge above the landing stage a crowd collected, watching the
proceedings, and just as I took my seat a fat couple who had been hanging
over the parapet rushed down the steps and declared they must come too.
"Certainly, certainly," said Pierre, handing in the lady with charming
grace. "Mademoiselle will not mind at all." They sat in the stern, the
gentleman held the lady's hand, and we twisted among these "silver
ribbons" while Pierre threw out his chest and chanted the beauties of
Bruges with the exultant abandon of a Latin lover. "Turn your head this
way--to the left--to the right--now, wait one moment--look up at the
bridge--observe this house front. Mademoiselle do you wish to see the Lac
d'Amour?"

I looked vague; the fat couple answered for me.

"Then we shall disembark."

We rowed close into a little parapet. We caught hold of a bush and I
jumped out. "Now, Monsieur," who successfully followed, and, kneeling on
the bank, gave Madame the crook of his walking-stick for support. She
stood up, smiling and vigorous, clutched the walking-stick, strained
against the boat side, and the next moment had fallen flat into the
water. "Ah! what has happened--what has happened!" screamed Monsieur,
clutching her arm, for the water was not deep, reaching only to her waist
mark. Somehow or other we fished her up on to the bank where she sat and
gasped, wringing her black alpaca skirt.

"It is all over--a little accident!" said she, amazingly cheerful.

But Pierre was furious. "It is the fault of Mademoiselle for wishing to
see the Lac d'Amour," said he. "Madame had better walk through the meadow
and drink something hot at the little café opposite."

"No, no," said she, but Monsieur seconded Pierre.

"You will await our return," said Pierre, loathing me. I nodded and
turned my back, for the sight of Madame flopping about on the meadow
grass like a large, ungainly duck, was too much. One cannot expect to
travel in upholstered boats with people who are enlightened enough to
understand laughter that has its wellspring in sympathy. When they were
out of sight I ran as fast as I could over the meadow, crawled through a
fence, and never went near the Lac d'Amour again. "They may think me as
drowned as they please," thought I, "I have had quite enough of canals to
last me a lifetime."

In the Béguinage meadow at evensong little groups of painters are dotted
about in the grass with spindle-legged easles which seem to possess a
separate individuality, and stand rudely defying their efforts and
returning their long, long gaze with an unfinished stare. English girls
wearing flower-wreathed hats and the promise of young American manhood,
give expression to their souls with a gaiety and "camaraderie," a sort of
"the world is our shining playground" spirit--theoretically delightful.
They call to one another, and throw cigarettes and fruit and chocolates
with youthful naïveté, while parties of tourists who have escaped the
clutches of an old woman lying in wait for them in the shadow of the
chapel door, pause thoughtfully in front of the easels to "see and
remark, and say whose?"

I was lying under a tree with the guilty consciousness of no sketch
book--watching the swifts wheel and dip in the bright air, and wondering
if all the brown dogs resting in the grass belonged to the young
painters, when two people passed me, a man and a girl, their heads bent
over a book. There was something vaguely familiar in their walk. Suddenly
they looked down at me--we stared--opened our mouths. She swooped down
upon me, and he took off his immaculate straw hat and placed it under his
left arm.

"Katherine! How extraordinary! How incredible after all these years!"
cried she. Turning to the man: "Guy, can you believe it?--It's Katherine,
in Bruges of all places in the world!"

"Why not?" said I, looking very bright and trying to remember her name.

"But, my dear, the last time we met was in New Zealand--only think of the
miles!"

Of course, she was Betty Sinclair; I'd been to school with her.

"Where are you staying; have you been here long? Oh, you haven't changed
a day--not a day. I'd have known you anywhere."

She beckoned to the young man, and said, blushing as though she were
ashamed of the fact, but it had to be faced, "This is my husband." We
shook hands. He sat down and chewed a grass twig. Silence fell while
Betty recovered breath and squeezed my hand.

"I didn't know you were married," I said stupidly.

"Oh, my dear--got a baby!" said Betty. "We live in England now. We're
frightfully keen on the Suffrage, you know."

Guy removed the straw. "Are you with us?" he asked, intensely.

I shook my head. He put the straw back again and narrowed his eyes.

"Then here's the opportunity," said Betty. "My dear, how long are you
going to stay? We must go about together and have long talks. Guy and I
aren't a honeymoon couple, you know. We love to have other people with us
sometimes."

The belfry clashed into See the Conquering Hero Comes!

"Unfortunately I have to go home quite soon. I've had an urgent letter."

"How disappointing! You know Bruges is simply packed with treasures and
churches and pictures. There's an out-door concert tonight in the Grand'
Place, and a competition of bell ringers to-morrow to go on for a whole
week."

"Go I must," I said so firmly that my soul felt imperative marching
orders, stimulated by the belfry.

"But the quaint streets and the Continental smells, and the lace
makers--if we could just wander about--we three--and absorb it all." I
sighed and bit my underlip.

"What's your objection to the vote?" asked Guy, watching the nuns wending
their way in sweet procession among the trees.

"I always had the idea you were so frightfully keen on the future of
women," said Betty. "Come to dinner with us to-night. Let's thrash the
whole subject out. You know, after the strenuous life in London, one does
seem to see things in such a different light in this old world city."

"Oh, a very different light indeed," I answered, shaking my head at the
familiar guide book emerging from Guy's pocket.

(1910)



NEW DRESSES


Mrs. Carsfield and her mother sat at the dining-room table putting the
finishing touches to some green cashmere dresses. They were to be worn by
the two Misses Carsfield at church on the following day, with apple-green
sashes, and straw hats with ribbon tails. Mrs. Carsfield had set her
heart on it, and this being a late night for Henry, who was attending a
meeting of the Political League, she and the old mother had the
dining-room to themselves, and could make "a peaceful litter" as she
expressed it. The red cloth was taken off the table--where stood the
wedding-present sewing machine, a brown work-basket, the "material," and
some torn fashion journals. Mrs. Carsfield worked the machine, slowly,
for she feared the green thread would give out, and had a sort of tired
hope that it might last longer if she was careful to use a little at a
time; the old woman sat in a rocking chair, her skirt turned back, and
her felt-slippered feet on a hassock, tying the machine threads and
stitching some narrow lace on the necks and cuffs. The gas jet flickered.
Now and again the old woman glanced up at the jet and said, "There's
water in the pipe, Anne, that's what's the matter," then was silent, to
say again a moment later, "There must be water in that pipe, Anne," and
again, with quite a burst of energy, "Now there is--I'm certain of it."

Anne frowned at the sewing machine. "The way mother harps on things--it
gets frightfully on my nerves," she thought. "And always when there's no
earthly opportunity to better a thing...I suppose it's old age--but most
aggravating." Aloud she said: "Mother, I'm having a really substantial
hem in this dress of Rose's--the child has got so leggy, lately. And
don't put any lace on Helen's cuffs; it will make a distinction, and
besides she's so careless about rubbing her hands on anything grubby."

"Oh there's plenty," said the old woman. "I'll put it a little higher
up." And she wondered why Anne had such a down on Helen--Henry was just
the same. They seemed to want to hurt Helen's feelings--the distinction
was merely an excuse.

"Well," said Mrs. Carsfield, "you didn't see Helen's clothes when I took
them off to-night, Black from head to foot after a week. And when I
compared them before her eyes with Rose's she merely shrugged, you know
that habit she's got, and began stuttering. I really shall have to see
Dr. Malcolm about her stuttering, if only to give her a good fright. I
believe it's merely an affectation she's picked up at school--that she
can help it."

"Anne, you know she's always stuttered. You did just the same when you
were her age, she's highly strung." The old woman took off her
spectacles, breathed on them, and rubbed them with a corner of her sewing
apron.

"Well, the last thing in the world to do her any good is to let her
imagine that" answered Anne, shaking out one of the green frocks, and
pricking at the pleats with her needle. "She is treated exactly like
Rose, and the Boy hasn't a nerve. Did you see him when I put him on the
rocking-horse to-day, for the first time? He simply gurgled with joy.
He's more the image of his father every day."

"Yes, he certainly is a thorough Carsfield," assented the old woman,
nodding her head.

"Now that's another thing about Helen," said Anne. "The peculiar way she
treats Boy, staring at him and frightening him as she does. You remember
when he was a baby how she used to take away his bottle to see what he
would do? Rose is perfect with the child--but Helen..."

The old woman put down her work on the table. A little silence fell, and
through the silence the loud ticking of the dining-room clock. She wanted
to speak her mind to Anne once and for all about the way she and Henry
were treating Helen, ruining the child, but the ticking noise distracted
her. She could not think of the words and sat there stupidly, her brain
going tick, tick, to the dining-room clock.

"How loudly that clock ticks," was all she said.

"Oh there's mother--off the subject again--giving me no help or
encouragement," thought Anne. She glanced at the clock.

"Mother, if you've finished that frock, would you go into the kitchen and
heat up some coffee, and perhaps cut a plate of ham. Henry will be in
directly. I'm practically through with this second frock by myself." She
held it up for inspection. "Aren't they charming? They ought to last the
children a good two years, and then I expect they'll do for
school--lengthened, and perhaps dyed."

"I'm glad we decided on the more expensive material," said the old woman.

Left alone in the dining-room Anne's frown deepened, and her mouth
drooped--a sharp line showed from nose to chin. She breathed deeply, and
pushed back her hair. There seemed to be no air in the room, she felt
stuffed up, and it seemed so useless to be tiring herself out with fine
sewing for Helen. One never got through with children, and never had any
gratitude from them--except Rose--who was exceptional. Another sign of
old age in mother was her absurd point of view about Helen, and her
"touchiness" on the subject. There was one thing, Mrs. Carsfield said to
herself. She was determined to keep Helen apart from Boy. He had all his
father's sensitiveness to unsympathetic influences. A blessing that the
girls were at school all day!

At last the dresses were finished and folded over the back of the chair.
She carried the sewing machine over to the book-shelves, spread the
table-cloth, and went over to the window. The blind was up, she could see
the garden quite plainly: there must be a moon about. And then she caught
sight of something shining on the garden seat. A book, yes, it must be a
book, left there to get soaked through by the dew. She went out into the
hall, put on her goloshes, gathered up her skirt, and ran into the
garden. Yes, it was a book. She picked it up carefully. Damp already--and
the cover bulging. She shrugged her shoulders in the way that her little
daughter had caught from her. In the shadowy garden that smelled of grass
and rose leaves, Anne's heart hardened. Then the gate clicked and she saw
Henry striding up the front path.

"Henry!" she called.

"Hullo," he cried, "what on earth are you doing down there...Moon-gazing,
Anne?" She ran forward and kissed him.

"Oh, look at this book," she said. "Helen's been leaving it about, again.
My dear, how you smell of cigars!"

Said Henry: "You've got to smoke a decent cigar when you're with, these
other chaps. Looks so bad if you don't. But come inside, Anne; you
haven't got anything on. Let the book go hang! You're cold, my dear,
you're shivering." He put his arm round her shoulder. "See the moon over
there, by the chimney? Fine night. By jove! I had the fellows roaring
to-night--I made a colossal joke. One of them said: 'Life is a game of
cards,' and I, without thinking, just straight out..." Henry paused by
the door and held up a finger. "I said...well I've forgotten the exact
words, but they shouted, my dear, simply shouted. No, I'll remember what
I said in bed to-night; you know I always do."

"I'll take this book into the kitchen to dry on the stove-rack," said
Anne, and she thought, as she banged the pages, "Henry has been drinking
beer again, that means indigestion tomorrow. No use mentioning Helen
to-night."

When Henry had finished the supper, he lay back in the chair, picking his
teeth, and patted his knee for Anne to come and sit there.

"Hullo," he said, jumping her up and down, "what's the green fandangles
on the chair back? What have you and mother been up to, eh?"

Said Anne, airily, casting a most careless glance at the green dresses,
"Only some frocks for the children. Remnants for Sunday."

The old woman put the plate and cup and saucer together, then lighted a
candle.

"I think I'll go to bed," she said, cheerfully.

"Oh, dear me, how unwise of Mother," thought Anne. "She makes Henry
suspect by going away like that, as she always does if there's any
unpleasantness brewing."

"No, don't go to bed yet, mother," cried Henry, jovially. "Let's have a
look at the things." She passed him over the dresses, faintly smiling.
Henry rubbed them through his fingers.

"So these are the remnants, are they, Anne? Don't feel much like the
Sunday trousers my mother used to make me out of an ironing blanket. How
much did you pay for this a yard, Anne?"

Anne took the dresses from him, and played with a button of his
waistcoat.

"Forget the exact price, darling. Mother and I rather skimped them, even
though they were so cheap. What can great big men bother about
clothes...? Was Lumley there, tonigh?"

"Yes, he says their kid was a bit bandylegged at just the same age as
Boy. He told me of a new kind of chair for children that the draper has
just got in--makes them sit with their legs straight. By the way, have
you got this month's draper's bill?"

She had been waiting for that--had known it was coming. She slipped off
his knee and yawned.

"Oh, dear me," she said, "I think I'll follow mother. Bed's the place for
me." She stared at Henry, vacantly. "Bill--bill did you say, dear? Oh,
I'll look it out in the morning."

"No, Anne, hold on." Henry got up and went over to the cupboard where the
bill file was kept. "To-morrow's no good--because it's Sunday. I want to
get that account off my chest before I turn in. Sit down there--in the
rocking-chair--you needn't stand!"

She dropped into the chair, and began humming, all the while her thoughts
coldly busy, and her eyes fixed on her husband's broad back as he bent
over the cupboard door. He dawdled over finding the file.

"He's keeping me in suspense on purpose," she thought. "We can afford
it--otherwise why should I do it? I know our income and our expenditure.
I'm not a fool. They're a hell upon earth every month, these bills." And
she thought of her bed upstairs, yearned for it, imagining she had never
felt so tired in her life.

"Here we are!" said Henry. He slammed the file on to the table.

"Draw up your chair..."

"Clayton: Seven yards green cashmere at five shillings a
yard--thirty-five shillings." He read the item twice--then folded the
sheet over, and bent towards Anne. He was flushed and his breath smelt of
beer. She knew exactly how he took things in that mood, and she raised
her eyebrows and nodded.

"Do you mean to tell me," stormed Henry, "that lot over there cost
thirty-five shillings--that stuff you've been mucking up for the
children. Good God! Anybody would think you'd married a millionaire. You
could buy your mother a trousseau with that money. You're making yourself
a laughing-stock for the whole town. How do you think I can buy Boy a
chair or anything else--if you chuck away my earnings like that? Time and
again you impress upon me the impossibility of keeping Helen decent; and
then you go decking her out the next moment in thirty-five shillings
worth of green cashmere..."

On and on stormed the voice.

"He'll have calmed down in the morning, when the beer's worked off,"
thought Anne, and later, as she toiled up to bed, "When he sees how
they'll last, he'll understand..."

A brilliant Sunday morning. Henry and Anne quite reconciled, sitting in
the dining-room waiting for church time to the tune of Carsfield junior,
who steadily thumped the shelf of his high-chair with a gravy spoon given
him from the breakfast table by his father.

"That beggar's got muscle," said Henry, proudly. "I've timed him by my
watch. He's kept that up for five minutes without stopping."

"Extraordinary," said Anne, buttoning her gloves. "I think he's had that
spoon almost long enough now, dear, don't you? I'm so afraid of him
putting it into his mouth."

"Oh, I've got an eye on him." Henry stood over his small son. "Go it, old
man. Tell Mother boys like to kick up a row."

Anne kept silence. At any rate it would keep his eye off the children
when they came down in those cashmeres. She was still wondering if she
had drummed into their minds often enough the supreme importance of being
careful and of taking them off immediately after church before dinner,
and why Helen was fidgety when she was pulled about at all, when the door
opened and the old woman ushered them in, complete to the straw hats with
ribbon tails.

She could not help thrilling, they looked so very superior--Rose carrying
her prayer-book in a white case embroidered with a pink woollen cross.
But she feigned indifference immediately, and the lateness of the hour.
Not a word more on the subject from Henry, even with the thirty-five
shillings worth walking hand in hand before him all the way to church.
Anne decided that was really generous and noble of him. She looked up at
him, walking with the shoulders thrown back. How fine he looked in that
long black coat, with the white silk tie just showing! And the children
looked worthy of him. She squeezed his hand in church, conveying by that
silent pressure, "It was for your sake I made the dresses; of course you
can't understand that, but really, Henry." And she fully believed it.

On their way home the Carsfield family met Doctor Malcolm, out walking
with a black dog carrying his stick in its mouth. Doctor Malcolm stopped
and asked after Boy so intelligently that Henry invited him to dinner.

"Come and pick a bone with us and see Boy for yourself," he said. And
Doctor Malcolm accepted. He walked beside Henry and shouted over his
shoulder, "Helen, keep an eye on my boy baby, will you, and see he
doesn't swallow that walking-stick. Because if he does, a tree will grow
right out of his mouth or it will go to his tail and make it so stiff
that a wag will knock you into kingdom come!"

"Oh, Doctor Malcolm!" laughed Helen, stooping over the dog, "Come along,
doggie, give it up, there's a good boy!"

"Helen, your dress!" warned Anne.

"Yes, indeed," said Doctor Malcolm. "They are looking top-notchers
to-day--the two young ladies."

"Well, it really is Rose's colour," said Anne.

"Her complexion is so much more vivid than Helen's."

Rose blushed. Doctor Malcolm's eyes twinkled, and he kept a tight rein on
himself from saying she looked like a tomato in a lettuce salad.

"That child wants taking down a peg," he decided. "Give me Helen every
time. She'll come to her own yet, and lead them just the dance they
need."

Boy was having his mid-day sleep when they arrived home, and Doctor
Malcolm begged that Helen might show him round the garden. Henry,
repenting already of his generosity, gladly assented, and Anne went into
the kitchen to interview the servant girl.

"Mumma, let me come too and taste the gravy," begged Rose.

"Huh!" muttered Doctor Malcolm. "Good riddance."

He established himself on the garden bench--put up his feet and took off
his hat, to give the sun "a chance of growing a second crop," he told
Helen.

She asked, soberly: "Doctor Malcolm, do you really like my dress."

"Of course I do, my lady. Don't you?"

"Oh yes, I'd like to be born and die in it, But it was such a
fuss--tryings on, you know, and pullings, and 'don'ts.' I believe mother
would kill me if it got hurt. I even knelt on my petticoat all through
church because of dust on the hassock."

"Bad as that!" asked Doctor Malcolm, rolling his eyes at Helen.

"Oh, far worse," said the child, then burst into laughter and shouted,
"Hellish!" dancing over the lawn.

"Take care, they'll hear you, Helen."

"Oh, booh! It's just dirty old cashmere--serve them right. They can't see
me if they're not here to see and so it doesn't matter. It's only with
them I feel funny."

"Haven't you got to remove your finery before dinner."

"No, because you're here."

"O my prophetic soul!" groaned Doctor Malcolm.

Coffee was served in the garden. The servant girl brought out some cane
chairs and a rug for Boy. The children were told to go away and play.

"Leave off worrying Doctor Malcolm, Helen," said Henry. "You mustn't be a
plague to people who are not members of your own family." Helen pouted,
and dragged over to the swing for comfort. She swung high, and thought
Doctor Malcolm was a most beautiful man--and wondered if his dog had
finished the plate of bones in the back yard. Decided to go and see.
Slower she swung, then took a flying leap; her tight skirt caught on a
nail--there was a sharp, tearing sound--quickly she glanced at the
others--they had not noticed--and then at the frock--at a hole big enough
to stick her hand through. She felt neither frightened nor sorry. "I'll
go and change it," she thought.

"Helen, where are you going to?" called Anne.

"Into the house for a book."

The old woman noticed that the child held her skirt in a peculiar way.
Her petticoat string must have come untied. But she made no remark. Once
in the bedroom Helen unbuttoned the frock, slipped out of it, and
wondered what to do next. Hide it somewhere--she glanced all round the
room--there was nowhere safe from them. Except the top of the
cupboard--but even standing on a chair she could not throw so high--it
fell back on top of her every time--the horrid, hateful thing. Then her
eyes lighted on her school satchel hanging on the end of the bed post.
Wrap it in her school pinafore--put it in the bottom of the bag with the
pencil case on top. They'd never look there. She returned to the garden
in the every-day dress--but forgot about the book.

"A-ah," said Anne, smilingironically. "What a new leaf for Doctor
Malcolm's benefit! Look, Mother, Helen has changed without being told
to."

"Come here, dear, and be done up properly."

She whispered to Helen: "Where did you leave your dress?"

"Left it on the side of the bed. Where I took it off," sang Helen.

Doctor Malcolm was talking to Henry of the advantages derived from public
school education for the sons of commercial men, but he had his eye on
the scene, and watching Helen, he smelt a rat--smelt a Hamelin tribe of
them.

Confusion and consternation reigned. One of the green cashmeres had
disappeared--spirited off the face of the earth--during the time that
Helen took it off and the children's tea.

"Show me the exact spot," scolded Mrs. Carsfield for the twentieth time.
"Helen, tell the truth."

"Mumma, I swear I left it on the floor."

"Well, it's no good swearing if it's not there. It can't have been
stolen!"

"I did see a very funny-looking man in a white cap walking up and down
the road and staring in the windows as I came up to change." Sharply Anne
eyed her daughter.

"Now," she said. "I know you are telling lies."

She turned to the old woman, in her voice something of pride and joyous
satisfaction.

"You hear, Mother--this cock-and-bull story?"

When they were near the end of the bed Helen blushed and turned away from
them. And now and again she wanted to shout "I tore it, I tore it," and
she fancied she had said it and seen their faces, just as sometimes in
bed she dreamed she had got up and dressed. But as the evening wore on
she grew quite careless--glad only of one thing--people had to go to
sleep at night. Viciously she stared at the sun shining through the
window space and making a pattern of the curtain on the bare nursery
floor. And then she looked at Rose, painting a text at the nursery table
with a whole egg cup full of water to herself...

Henry visited their bedroom the last thing. She heard him come creaking
into their room and hid under the bedclothes. But Rose betrayed her.

"Helen's not asleep," piped Rose.

Henry sat by the bedside pulling his moustache.

"If it were not Sunday, Helen, I would whip you. As it is, and I must be
at the office early to-morrow, I shall give you a sound smacking after
tea in the evening...Do you hear me?"

She grunted.

"You love your father and mother, don't you?"

No answer.

Rose gave Helen a dig with her foot.

"Well," said Henry, sighing deeply, "I suppose you love Jesus?"

"Rose has scratched my leg with her toe nail," answered Helen.

Henry strode out of the room and flung himself on to his own bed, with
his outdoor boots on the starched bolster, Anne noticed, but he was too
overcome for her to venture a protest. The old woman was in the bedroom
too, idly combing the hairs from Anne's brush. Henry told them the story,
and was gratified to observe Anne's tears.

"It is Rose's turn for her toe-nails after the bath next Saturday,"
commented the old woman.

In the middle of the night Henry dug his elbow into Mrs. Carsfield.

"I've got an idea," he said. "Malcolm's at the bottom of this."

"No...how...why...where...bottom of what?"

"Those damned green dresses."

"Wouldn't be surprised," she managed to articulate, thinking, "imagine
his rage if I woke him up to tell him an idiotic thing like that!"

"Is Mrs. Carsfield at home," asked Doctor Malcolm.

"No, sir, she's out visiting," answered the servant girl.

"Is Mr. Carsfield anywhere about?"

"Oh, no, sir, he's never home midday."

"Show me into the drawing-room."

The servant girl opened the drawing-room door, cocked her eye at the
doctor's bag. She wished he would leave it in the hall--even if she could
only feel the outside without opening it...But the doctor kept it in his
hand.

The old woman sat in the drawing-room, a roll of knitting on her lap. Her
head had fallen back--her mouth was open--she was asleep and quietly
snoring. She started up at the sound of the doctor's footsteps and
straightened her cap.

"Oh, Doctor--you did, take me by surprise. I was dreaming that Henry had
bought Anne five little canaries. Please sit down!"

"No, thanks. I just popped in on the chance of catching you alone...You
see this bag?"

The old woman nodded.

"Now, are you any good at opening bags?"

"Well, my husband was a great traveller and once I spent a whole night in
a railway train."

"Well, have a go at opening this one."

The old woman knelt on the floor--her fingers trembled.

"There's nothing startling inside?" she asked.

"Well, it won't bite exactly," said Doctor Malcolm.

The catch sprang open--the bag yawned like a toothless mouth, and she
saw, folded in its depths--green cashmere--with narrow lace on the neck
and sleeves.

"Fancy that!" said the old woman mildly.

"May I take it out, Doctor?" She professed neither astonishment nor
pleasure--and Malcolm felt disappointed.

"Helen's dress," he said, and bending towards her, raised his voice.
"That young spark's Sunday rig-out."

"I'm not deaf, Doctor," answered the old woman. "Yes, I thought it looked
like it. I told Anne only this morning it was bound to turn up
somewhere." She shook the crumpled frock, and looked it over. "Things
always do if you give them time; I've noticed that so often--it's such a
blessing."

"You know Lindsay--the postman? Gastric ulcers--called there this
morning...Saw this brought in by Lena, who'd got it from Helen on her way
to school. Said the kid fished it out of her satchel rolled in a
pinafore, and said her mother had told her to give it away because it did
not fit her. When I saw the tear I understood yesterday's 'new leaf,' as
Mrs. Carsfield put it. Was up to the dodge in a jiffy. Got the
dress--bought some stuff at Clayton's and made my sister Bertha sew it
while I had dinner. I knew what would be happening this end of the
line--and I knew you'd see Helen through for the sake of getting one in
at Henry."

"How thoughtful of you, Doctor!" said the old woman. "I'll tell Anne I
found it under my dolman."

"Yes, that's your ticket," said Doctor Malcolm.

"But of course Helen would have forgotten the whipping by to-morrow
morning, and I'd promised her a new doll..." The old woman spoke
regretfully.

Doctor Malcolm snapped his bag together.

"It's no good talking to the old bird," he thought, "she doesn't take in
half I say. Don't seem to have got any forrader than doing Helen out of a
doll."

(1910)



THE WOMAN AT THE STORE


All that day the heat was terrible. The wind blew close to the ground; it
rooted among the tussock grass, slithered along the road, so that the
white pumice dust swirled in our faces, settled and sifted over us and
was like a dry-skin itching for growth on our bodies. The horses stumbled
along, coughing and chuffing. The pack horse was sick--with a big, open
sore rubbed under the belly. Now and again she stopped short, threw back
her head, looked at us as though she were going to cry, and whinnied.
Hundreds of larks shrilled; the sky was slate colour, and the sound of
the larks reminded me of slate pencils scraping over its surface. There
was nothing to be seen but wave after wave of tussock grass, patched with
purple orchids and manuka bushes covered with thick spider webs.

Jo rode ahead. He wore a blue galatea shirt, corduroy trousers and riding
boots. A white handkerchief, spotted with red--it looked as though his
nose had been bleeding on it--was knotted round his throat. Wisps of
white hair straggled from under his wideawake--his moustache and eyebrows
were called white--he slouched in the saddle, grunting. Not once that day
had he sung

    "I don't care, for don't you see,
    My wife's mother was in front of me!"

It was the first day we had been without it for a month, and now there
seemed something uncanny in his silence. Jim rode beside me, white as a
clown; his black eyes glittered, and he kept shooting out his tongue and
moistening his lips. He was dressed in a Jaeger vest, and a pair of blue
duck trousers, fastened round the waist with a plaited leather belt. We
had hardly spoken since dawn. At noon we had lunched off fly biscuits and
apricots by the side of a swampy creek.

"My stomach feels like the crop of a hen," said Jo. "Now then, Jim,
you're the bright boy of the party--where's this 'ere store you kep' on
talking about. 'Oh, yes,' you says, 'I know a fine store, with a paddock
for the horses and a creek runnin' through, owned by a friend of mine
who'll give yer a bottle of whisky before 'e shakes hands with yer.' I'd
like ter see that place--merely as a matter of curiosity--not that I'd
ever doubt yer word--as yer know very well--but..."

Jim laughed. "Don't forget there's a woman too, Jo, with blue eyes and
yellow hair, who'll promise you something else before she shakes hands
with you. Put that in your pipe and smoke it."

"The heat's making you balmy," said Jo. But he dug his knees into the
horse. We shambled on. I half fell asleep, and had a sort of uneasy dream
that the horses were not moving forward at all--then that I was on a
rocking-horse, and my old mother was scolding me for raising such a
fearful dust from the drawing-room carpet. "You've entirely worn off the
pattern of the carpet," I heard her saying, and she gave the reins a tug.
I snivelled and woke to find Jim leaning over me, maliciously smiling.

"That was a case of all but," said he. "I just caught you. What'sup? Been
bye-bye?"

"No!" I raised my head. "Thank the Lord we're arriving somewhere."

We were on the brow of the hill, and below us there was a whare roofed
with corrugated iron. It stood in a garden, rather far back from the
road--a big paddock opposite, and a creek and a clump of young willow
trees. A thin line of blue smoke stood up straight from the chimney of
the whare; and as I looked a woman came out, followed by a child and a
sheep dog--the woman carrying what appeared to me a black stick. She made
gestures at us.

The horses put on a final spurt, Jo took off his wideawake, shouted,
threw out his chest, and began singing, "I don't care, for don't you
see..." The sun pushed through the pale clouds and shed a vivid light
over the scene. It gleamed on the woman's yellow hair, over her flapping
pinafore and the rifle she was carrying. The child hid behind her, and
the yellow dog, a mangy beast, scuttled back into the whare, his tail
between his legs. We drew rein and dismounted.

"Hallo," screamed the woman. "I thought you was three' awks. My kid comes
runnin' in ter me. 'Mumma,' says she, 'there's three brown things comin'
over the 'ill,' says she. An' I comes out smart, I can tell yer. 'They'll
be' awks,' I says to her. Oh, the' awks about 'ere, yer wouldn't
believe."

The "kid" gave us the benefit of one eye from behind the woman's
pinafore--then retired again.

"Where's your old man?" asked Jim.

The woman blinked rapidly, screwing up her face.

"Away shearin'. Bin away a month. I suppose yer not goin' to stop, are
yer? There's a storm comin' up."

"You bet we are," said Jo. "So you're on your lonely, missus?"

She stood, pleating the frills of her pinafore, and glancing from one to
the other of us, like a hungry bird. I smiled at the thought of how Jim
had pulled Jo's leg about her. Certainly her eyes were blue, and what
hair she had was yellow, but ugly. She was a figure of fun. Looking at
her, you felt there was nothing but sticks and wires under that
pinafore--her front teeth were knocked out, she had red pulpy hands, and
she wore on her feet a pair of dirty Bluchers.

"I'll go and turn out the horses," said Jim.

"Got any embrocation? Poi's rubbed herself to hell!"

"Arf a mo!" The woman stood silent a moment, her nostrils expanding as
she breathed. Then she shouted violently. "I'd rather you didn't
stop...You can't, and there's the end of it. I don't let out that paddock
any more. You'll have to go on; I ain't got nothing!"

"Well, I'm blest!" said Jo, heavily. He pulled me aside. "Gone a bit
off'er dot," he whispered. "Too much alone, you know" very significantly.
"Turn the sympathetic tap on' er, she'll come round all right."

But there was no need--she had come round by herself.

"Stop if yer like!" she muttered, shrugging her shoulders. To me--"I'll
give yer the embrocation if yer come along."

"Right-o, I'll take it down to them." We walked together up the garden
path. It was planted on both sides with cabbages. They smelled like stale
dish-water. Of flowers there were double poppies and sweet-williams. One
little patch was divided off by pawa shells--presumably it belonged to
the child--for she ran from her mother and began to grub in it with a
broken clothes-peg. The yellow dog lay across the doorstep, biting fleas;
the woman kicked him away.

"Gar-r, get away, you beast the place ain't tidy. I 'aven't 'ad time ter
fix things to-day--been ironing. Come right in."

It was a large room, the walls plastered with old pages of English
periodicals. Queen Victoria's Jubilee appeared to be the most recent
number. A table with an ironing board and wash tub on it, some wooden
forms, a black horsehair sofa, and some broken cane chairs pushed against
the walls. The mantelpiece above the stove was draped in pink paper,
further ornamented with dried grasses and ferns and a coloured print of
Richard Seddon. There were four doors--one, judging from the smell, let
into the "Store," one on to the "backyard," through a third I saw the
bedroom. Flies buzzed in circles round the ceiling, and treacle papers
and bundles of dried clover were pinned to the window curtains.

I was alone in the room; she had gone into the store for the embrocation.
I heard her stamping about and muttering to herself: "I got some, now
where did I put that bottle? It's behind the pickles no, it ain't." I
cleared a place on the table and sat there, swinging my legs. Down in the
paddock I could hear Jo singing and the sound of hammer strokes as Jim
drove in the tent pegs. It was sunset. There is no twilight in our New
Zealand days, but a curious half-hour when everything appears
grotesque--it frightens--as though the savage spirit of the country
walked abroad and sneered at what it saw. Sitting alone in the hideous
room I grew afraid. The woman next door was a long time finding that
stuff. What was she doing in there? Once I thought I heard her bang her
hands down on the counter, and once she half moaned, turning it into a
cough and clearing her throat. I wanted to shout "Buck up!" but I kept
silent.

"Good Lord, what a life!" I thought. "Imagine being here day in, day out,
with that rat of a child and a mangy dog. Imagine bothering about
ironing. Mad, of course she's mad! Wonder how long she's been
here--wonder if I could get her to talk."

At that moment she poked her head round the door.

"Wot was it yer wanted?" she asked.

"Embrocation."

"Oh, I forgot. I got it, it was in front of the pickle jars."

She handed me the bottle.

"My, you do look tired, you do! Shall I knock yer up a few scones for
supper! There's some tongue in the store, too, and I'll cook yer a
cabbage if you fancy it."

"Right-o." I smiled at her. "Come down to the paddock and bring the kid
for tea."

She shook her head, pursing up her mouth.

"Oh no. I don't fancy it. I'll send the kid down with the things and a
billy of milk. Shall I knock up a few extry scones to take with yer
ter-morrow?"

"Thanks."

She came and stood by the door.

"How old is the kid?"

"Six--come next Christmas. I'ad a bit of trouble with 'er one way an'
another. I 'adn't any milk till a month after she was born and she
sickened like a cow."

"She's not like you--takes after her father?"

Just as the woman had shouted her refusal at us before, she shouted at me
then.

"No, she don't! She's the dead spit of me. Any fool could see that. Come
on in now, Else, you stop messing in the dirt."

I met Jo climbing over the paddock fence.

"What's the old bitch got in the store?" he asked.

"Don't know--didn't look."

"Well, of all the fools. Jim's slanging you. What have you been doing all
the time?"

"She couldn't find this stuff. Oh, my shakes, you are smart!"

Jo had washed, combed his wet hair in a line across his forehead, and
buttoned a coat over his shirt. He grinned.

Jim snatched the embrocation from me. I went to the end of the paddock
where the willows grew and bathed in the creek. The water was clear and
soft as oil. Along the edges held by the grass and rushes, white foam
tumbled and bubbled. I lay in the water and looked up at the trees that
were still a moment, then quivered lightly, and again were still. The air
smelt of rain. I forgot about the woman and the kid until I came back to
the tent. Jim lay by the fire, watching the billy boil.

I asked where Jo was, and if the kid had brought our supper.

"Pooh," said Jim, rolling over and looking up at the sky. "Didn't you see
how Jo had been titivating? He said to me before he went up to the whare,
'Dang it! she'll look better by night light--at any rate, my buck, she's
female flesh!'"

"You had Jo about her looks--you had me, too."

"No--look here. I can't make it out. It's four years since I came past
this way, and I stopped here two days. The husband was a pal of mine
once, down the West Coast--a fine, big chap, with a voice on him like a
trombone. She'd been barmaid down the Coast--as pretty as a wax doll. The
coach used to come this way then once a fortnight, that was before they
opened the railway up Napier way, and she had no end of a time! Told me
once in a confidential moment that she knew one hundred and twenty-five
different ways of kissing!"

"Oh, go on, Jim! She isn't the same woman!"

"Course she is I can't make it out. What I think is the old man's cleared
out and left her: that's all my eye about shearing. Sweet life! The only
people who come through now are Maoris and sundowners!"

Through the dark we saw the gleam of the kid's pinafore. She trailed over
to us with a basket in her hand, the milk billy in the other. I unpacked
the basket, the child standing by.

"Come over here," said Jim, snapping his fingers at her.

She went, the lamp from the inside of the tent cast a bright light over
her. A mean, undersized brat, with whitish hair, and weak eyes. She
stood, legs wide apart and her stomach protruding.

"What do you do all day?" asked Jim.

She scraped out one tear with her little finger, looked at the result and
said, "Draw."

"Huh! What do you draw? Leave your ears alone!"

"Pictures."

"What on?"

"Bits of butter paper an' a pencil of my Mumma's."

"Boh! What a lot of words at one time!" Jim rolled his eyes at her.
"Baa-lambs and moo-cows?"

"No, everything. I'll draw all of you when you're gone, and your horses
and the tent, and that one"--she pointed to me--"with no clothes on in
the creek. I looked at her where she couldn't see me from."

"Thanks very much. How ripping of you," said Jim. "Where's Dad?"

The kid pouted. "I won't tell you because I don't like yer face!" She
started operations on the other ear.

"Here," I said. "Take the basket, get along home and tell the other man
supper's ready."

"I don't want to."

"I'll give you a box on the ear if you don't," said Jim, savagely.

"Hie! I'll tell Mumma. I'll tell Mumma." The kid fled.

We ate until we were full, and had arrived at the smoke stage before Jo
came back, very flushed and jaunty, a whisky bottle in his hand.

"'Ave a drink--you two!" he shouted, carrying off matters with a high
hand. "'Ere, shove along the cups."

"One hundred and twenty-five different ways," I murmured to Jim.

"What's that? Oh! stow it!" said Jo.

"Why 'ave you always got your knife into me. You gas like a kid at a
Sunday School beano. She wants us to go up there to-night, and have a
comfortable chat. "I"--he waved his hand airily--"I got 'er round."

"Trust you for that," laughed Jim. "But did she tell you where the old
man's got to?"

Jo looked up. "Shearing! You 'eard 'er, you fool!"

The woman had fixed up the room, even to a light bouquet of
sweet-williams on the table. She and I sat one side of the table, Jo and
Jim the other. An oil lamp was set between us, the whisky bottle and
glasses, and a jug of water. The kid knelt against one of the forms,
drawing on butter paper; I wondered, grimly, if she was attempting the
creek episode. But Jo had been right about night time. The woman's hair
was tumbled--two red spots burned in her cheeks--her eyes shone--and we
knew that they were kissing feet under the table. She had changed the
blue pinafore for a white calico dressing jacket and a black skirt--the
kid was decorated to the extent of a blue sateen hair ribbon. In the
stifling room, with the flies buzzing against the ceiling and dropping on
to the table, we got slowly drunk.

"Now listen to me," shouted the woman, banging her fist on the table.
"It's six years since I was married, and four miscarriages. I says to
'im, I says, what do you think I'm doin' up 'ere? If you was back at the
coast, I'd 'ave you lynched for child murder. Over and over I tells
'im--you've broken my spirit and spoiled my looks, and wot for--that's
wot I'm driving at." She clutched her head with her hands and stared
round at us. Speaking rapidly, "Oh, some days--an' months of them--I 'ear
them two words knockin' inside me all the time--'Wot for!' but sometimes
I'll be cooking the spuds an' I lifts the lid off to give 'em a prong and
I 'ears, quite suddin again, 'Wot for!' Oh! I don't mean only the spuds
and the kid--I mean--I mean," she hiccoughed--"you know what I mean, Mr.
Jo."

"I know," said Jo, scratching his head.

"Trouble with me is," she leaned across the table, "he left me too much
alone. When the coach stopped coming, sometimes he'd go away days,
sometimes he'd go away weeks, and leave me ter look after the store. Back
'e'd come--pleased as Punch. 'Oh, 'allo, 'e'd say. 'Ow are you gettin'
on. Come and give us a kiss.' Sometimes I'd turn a bit nasty, and then
'e'd go off again, and if I took it all right, 'e'd wait till 'e could
twist me round 'is finger, then 'e'd say, 'Well, so long, I'm off,' and
do you think I could keep 'im?--not me!"

"Mumma," bleated the kid, "I made a picture of them on the 'ill, an' you
an' me, an' the dog down below."

"Shut your mouth!" said the woman.

A vivid flash of lightning played over the room--we heard the mutter of
thunder.

"Good thing that's broke loose," said Jo. "I've 'ad it in me 'ead for
three days."

"Where's your old man now?" asked Jim, slowly.

The woman blubbered and dropped her head on to the table. "Jim, 'e's gone
shearin' and left me alone again," she wailed.

"'Ere, look out for the glasses," said Jo. "Cheer-o, 'ave another drop.
No good cryin' over spilt 'usbands! You Jim, you blasted cuckoo!"

"Mr. Jo," said the woman, drying her eyes on her jacket frill, "you're a
gent, an' if I was a secret woman, I'd place any confidence in your
'ands. I don't mind if I do 'ave a glass on that."

Every moment the lightning grew more vivid and the thunder sounded
nearer. Jim and I were silent--the kid never moved from her bench. She
poked her tongue out and blew on her paper as she drew.

"It's the loneliness," said the woman, addressing Jo--he made sheep's
eyes at her--"and bein' shut up 'ere like a broody 'en." He reached his
hand across the table and held hers, and though the position looked most
uncomfortable when they wanted to pass the water and whisky, their hands
stuck together as though glued. I pushed back my chair and went over to
the kid, who immediately sat flat down on her artistic achievements and
made a face at me.

"You're not to look," said she.

"Oh, come on, don't be nasty!" Jim came over to us, and we were just
drunk enough to wheedle the kid into showing us. And those drawings of
hers were extraordinary and repulsively vulgar. The creations of a
lunatic with a lunatic's cleverness. There was no doubt about it, the
kid's mind was diseased. While she showed them to us, she worked herself
up into a mad excitement, laughing and trembling, and shooting out her
arms.

"Mumma," she yelled. "Now I'm going to draw them what you told me I never
was to--now I am."

The woman rushed from the table and beat the child's head with the flat
of her hand.

"I'll smack you with yer clothes turned up if yer dare say that again,"
she bawled.

Jo was too drunk to notice, but Jim caught her by the arm. The kid did
not utter a cry. She drifted over to the window and began picking flies
from the treacle paper.

We returned to the table--Jim and I sitting one side, the woman and Jo,
touching shoulders, the other. We listened to the thunder, saying
stupidly, "That was a near one," "There it goes again," and Jo, at a
heavy hit, "Now we're off," "Steady on the brake," until rain began to
fall, sharp as cannon shot on the iron roof.

"You'd better doss here for the night," said the woman.

"That's right," assented Jo, evidently in the know about this move.

"Bring up yer things from the tent. You two can doss in the store along
with the kid--she's used to sleep in there and won't mind you."

"Oh Mumma, I never did," interrupted the kid.

"Shut yer lies! An' Mr. Jo can 'ave this room."

It sounded a ridiculous arrangement, but it was useless to attempt to
cross them, they were too far gone. While the woman sketched the plan of
action, Jo sat, abnormally solemn and red, his eyes bulging, and pulling
at his moustache.

"Give us a lantern," said Jim, "I'll go down to the paddock." We two went
together. Rain whipped in our faces, the land was light as though a bush
fire was raging. We behaved like two children let loose in the thick of
an adventure, laughed and shouted to each other, and came back to the
whare to find the kid already bedded in the counter of the store.

The woman brought us a lamp. Jo took his bundle from Jim, the door was
shut.

"Good-night all," shouted Jo.

Jim and I sat on two sacks of potatoes. For the life of us we could not
stop laughing. Strings of onions and half-hams dangled from the
ceiling--wherever we looked there were advertisements for "Camp Coffee"
and tinned meats. We pointed at them, tried to read them aloud--overcome
with laughter and hiccoughs. The kid in the counter stared at us. She
threw off her blanket and scrambled to the floor, where she stood in her
grey flannel night-gown, rubbing one leg against the other. We paid no
attention to her.

"Wot are you laughing at?" she said, uneasily.

"You!" shouted Jim. "The red tribe of you, my child."

She flew into a rage and beat herself with her hands. "I won't be laughed
at, you curs--you." He swooped down upon the child and swung her on to
the counter.

"Go to sleep, Miss Smarty--or make a drawing--here's a pencil--you can
use Mumma's account book."

Through the rain we heard Jo creak over the boarding of the next
room--the sound of a door being opened--then shut to.

"It's the loneliness," whispered Jim.

"One hundred and twenty-five different ways--alas! my poor brother!"

The kid tore out a page and flung it at me.

"There you are," she said. "Now I done it ter spite Mumma for shutting me
up 'ere with you two. I done the one she told me I never ought to. I done
the one she told me she'd shoot me if I did. Don't care! Don't care!"

The kid had drawn the picture of the woman shooting at a man with a rook
rifle and then digging a hole to bury him in.

She jumped off the counter and squirmed about on the floor biting her
nails.

Jim and I sat till dawn with the drawing beside us. The rain ceased, the
little kid fell asleep, breathing loudly. We got up, stole out of the
whare, down into the paddock. White clouds floated over a pink sky--a
chill wind blew; the air smelled of wet grass. Just as we swung into the
saddle Jo came out of the whare--he motioned to us to ride on.

"I'll pick you up later," he shouted.

A bend in the road, and the whole place disappeared.

(1911)



OLE UNDERWOOD


To Anne Estelle Rice


Down the windy hill stalked Ole Underwood. He carried a black umbrella
in one hand, in the other a red and white spotted handkerchief knotted
into a lump. He wore a black peaked cap like a pilot; gold rings gleamed
in his ears and his little eyes snapped like two sparks. Like two sparks
they glowed in the smoulder of his bearded face. On one side of the hill
grew a forest of pines from the road right down to the sea. On the other
side short tufted grass and little bushes of white manuka flower. The
pine-trees roared like waves in their topmost branches, their stems
creaked like the timber of ships; in the windy air flew the white manuka
flower. "Ah-k!" shouted Ole Underwood, shaking his umbrella at the wind
bearing down upon him, beating him, half strangling him with his black
cape. "Ah-k!" shouted the wind a hundred times as loud, and filled his
mouth and nostrils with dust. Something inside Ole Underwood's breast
beat like a hammer. One, two--one, two--never stopping, never changing.
He couldn't do anything. It wasn't loud. No, it didn't make a noise--only
a thud. One, two--one, two--like some one beating on an iron in a prison,
some one in a secret place--bang--bang--bang--trying to get free. Do what
he would, fumble at his coat, throw his arms about, spit, swear, he
couldn't stop the noise. Stop! Stop! Stop! Stop! Ole Underwood began to
shuffle and run.

Away below, the sea heaving against the stone walls, and the little town
just out of its reach close packed together, the better to face the grey
water. And up on the other side of the hill the prison with high red
walls. Over all bulged the grey sky with black web-like clouds streaming.

Ole Underwood slackened his pace as he neared the town, and when he came
to the first house he flourished his umbrella like a herald's staff and
threw out his chest, his head glancing quickly from right to left. They
were ugly little houses leading into the town, built of wood--two windows
and a door, a stumpy verandah and a green mat of grass before. Under one
verandah yellow hens huddled out of the wind. "Shoo!" shouted Ole
Underwood, and laughed to see them fly, and laughed again at the woman
who came to the door and shook a red, soapy fist at him. A little girl
stood in another yard untwisting some rags from a clothes-line. When she
saw Ole Underwood she let the clothes-prop fall and rushed screaming to
the door, beating it, screaming "Mumma--Mumma!" That started the hammer
in Ole Underwood's heart. Mum-ma--Mum-ma! He saw an old face with a
trembling chin and grey hair nodding out of the window as they dragged
him past. Mumma--Mum-ma! He looked up at the big red prison perched on
the hill and he pulled a face as if he wanted to cry.

At the corner in front of the pub some carts were pulled up, and some men
sat in the porch of the pub drinking and talking. Ole Underwood wanted a
drink. He slouched into the bar. It was half full of old and young men in
big coats and top boots with stock whips in their hands. Behind the
counter a big girl with red hair pulled the beer handles and cheeked the
men. Ole Underwood sneaked to one side, like a cat. Nobody looked at him,
only the men looked at each other, one or two of them nudged. The girl
nodded and winked at the fellow she was serving. He took some money out
of his knotted handkerchief and slipped it on to the counter. His hand
shook. He didn't speak. The girl took no notice; she served everybody,
went on with her talk, and then as if by accident shoved a mug towards
him. A great big jar of red pinks stood on the bar counter. Ole Underwood
stared at them as he drank and frowned at them. Red--red--red--red! beat
the hammer. It was very warm in the bar and quiet as a pond, except for
the talk and the girl. She kept on laughing. Ha! Ha! That was what the
men liked to see, for she threw back her head and her great breasts
lifted and shook to her laughter.

In one corner sat a stranger. He pointed at Ole Underwood. "Cracked!"
said one of the men. "When he was a young fellow, thirty years ago, a man
'ere done in 'is woman, and 'e foun' out an' killed 'er. Got twenty years
in quod up on the 'ill. Came out cracked."

"Oo done 'er in?" asked the man.

"Dunno. 'E dunno, nor nobody. 'E was a sailor till 'e marrid 'er.
Cracked!" The man spat and smeared the spittle on the floor, shrugging
his shoulders. "'E's 'armless enough."

Ole Underwood heard; he did not turn, but he shot out an old claw and
crushed up the red pinks. "Uh-Uh! You ole beast! Uh! You ole swine!"
screamed the girl, leaning across the counter and banging him with a tin
jug. "Get art! Get art! Don' you never come 'ere no more!" Somebody
kicked him: he scuttled like a rat.

He walked past the Chinamen's shops. The fruit and vegetables were all
piled up against the windows. Bits of wooden cases, straw, and old
newspapers were strewn over the pavement. A woman flounced out of a shop
and slushed a pail of slops over his feet. He peered in at the windows,
at the Chinamen sitting in little groups on old barrels playing cards.
They made him smile. He looked and looked, pressing his face against the
glass and sniggering. They sat still with their long pigtails bound round
their heads and their faces yellow as lemons. Some of them had knives in
their belts, and one old man sat by himself on the floor plaiting his
long crooked toes together. The Chinamen didn't mind Ole Underwood. When
they saw him they nodded. He went to the door of a shop and cautiously
opened it. In rushed the wind with him, scattering the cards. "Ya-Ya!
Ya-Ya!" screamed the Chinamen, and Ole Underwood rushed off, the hammer
beating quick and hard. Ya-Ya! He turned a corner out of sight. He
thought he heard one of the Chinks after him, and he slipped into a
timber-yard. There he lay panting...

Close by him, under another stack there was a heap of yellow shavings. As
he watched them they moved and a little grey cat unfolded herself and
came out waving her tail. She trod delicately over to Ole Underwood and
rubbed against his sleeve. The hammer in Ole Underwood's heart beat
madly. It pounded up into his throat, and then it seemed to half stop and
beat very, very faintly. "Kit! Kit! Kit!" That was what she used to call
the little cat he brought her off the ship--"Kit! Kit! Kit!"--and stoop
down with the saucer in her hands. "Ah! my God! my Lord!" Ole Underwood
sat up and took the kitten in his arms and rocked to and fro, crushing it
against his face. It was warm and soft, and it mewed faintly. He buried
his eyes in its fur. My God! My Lord! He tucked the little cat in his
coat and stole out of the woodyard, and slouched down towards the
wharves. As he came near the sea, Ole Underwood's nostrils expanded. The
mad wind smelled of tar and ropes and slime and salt. He crossed the
railway line, he crept behind the wharf-sheds and along a little cinder
path that threaded through a patch of rank fennel to some stone drain
pipes carrying the sewage into the sea. And he stared up at the wharves
and at the ships with flags flying, and suddenly the old, old lust swept
over Ole Underwood. "I will! I will! I will!" he muttered.

He tore the little cat out of his coat and swung it by its tail and flung
it out to the sewer opening. The hammer beat loud and strong. He tossed
his head, he was young again. He walked on to the wharves, past the
wool-bales, past the loungers and the loafers to the extreme end of the
wharves. The sea sucked against the wharf-poles as though it drank
something from the land. One ship was loading wool. He heard a crane
rattle and the shriek of a whistle. So he came to the little ship lying
by herself with a bit of a plank for a gangway, and no sign of
anybody--anybody at all. Ole Underwood looked once back at the town, at
the prison perched like a red bird, at the black webby clouds trailing.
Then he went up the gangway and on to the slippery deck. He grinned, and
rolled in his walk, carrying high in his hand the red and white
handkerchief. His ship! Mine! Mine! Mine! beat the hammer. There was a
door latched open on the lee-side, labelled "State-room." He peered in. A
man lay sleeping on a bunk--his bunk--a great big man in a seaman's coat
with a long fair beard and hair on the red pillow. And looking down upon
him from the wall there shone her picture--his woman's picture--smiling
and smiling at the big sleeping man.

(1912)



THE LITTLE GIRL


To the little girl he was a figure to be feared and avoided. Every
morning before going to business he came into the nursery and gave her a
perfunctory kiss, to which she responded with "Good-bye, father." And oh,
the glad sense of relief when she heard the noise of the buggy growing
fainter and fainter down the long road!

In the evening, leaning over the banisters at his home-coming, she heard
his loud voice in the hall. "Bring my tea into the smoking-room...Hasn't
the paper come yet? Have they taken it into the kitchen again? Mother, go
and see if my paper's out there--and bring me my slippers."

"Kezia," mother would call to her, "if you're a good girl you can come
down and take off father's boots." Slowly the girl would slip down the
stairs, holding tightly to the banisters with one hand--more slowly
still, across the hall, and push open the smoking-room door.

By that time he had his spectacles on and looked at her over them in a
way that was terrifying to the little girl.

"Well, Kezia, get a move on and pull off these boots and take them
outside. Been a good girl to-day?"

"I d-d-don't know, father."

"You d-d-don't know? If you stutter like that mother will have to take
you to the doctor."

She never stuttered with other people--had quite given it up--but only
with father, because then she was trying so hard to say the words
properly.

"What's the matter? What are you looking so wretched about? Mother, I
wish you would teach this child not to appear on the brink of
suicide...Here, Kezia, carry my teacup back to the table--carefully; your
hands jog like an old lady's. And try to keep your handkerchief in your
pocket, not up your sleeve."

"Y-y-yes, father."

On Sundays she sat in the same pew with him in church, listening while he
sang in a loud, clear voice, watching while he made little notes during
the sermon with the stump of a blue pencil on the back of an
envelope--his eyes narrowed to a slit--one hand beating a silent tattoo
on the pew ledge. He said his prayers so loudly she was certain God heard
him above the clergyman.

He was so big--his hands and his neck, especially his mouth when he
yawned. Thinking about him alone in the nursery was like thinking about a
giant.

On Sunday afternoons grandmother sent her down to the drawing-room,
dressed in her brown velvet, to have a "nice talk with father and
mother." But the little girl always found mother reading The Sketch and
father stretched out on the couch, his handkerchief on his face, his feet
propped on one of the best sofa pillows, and so soundly sleeping that he
snored.

She, perched on the piano-stool, gravely watched him until he woke and
stretched, and asked the time--then looked at her.

"Don't stare so, Kezia. You look like a little brown owl."

One day, when she was kept indoors with a cold, the grandmother told her
that father's birthday was next week, and suggested she should make him a
pincushion for a present out of a beautiful piece of yellow silk.

Laboriously, with a double cotton, the little girl stitched three sides.
But what to fill it with? That was the question. The grandmother was out
in the garden, and she wandered into mother's bedroom to look for
"scraps." On the bed table she discovered a great many sheets of fine
paper, gathered them up, shredded them into tiny pieces, and stuffed her
case, then sewed up the fourth side.

That night there was a hue and cry over the house. Father's great speech
for the Port Authority had been lost. Rooms were ransacked--servants
questioned. Finally mother came into the nursery.

"Kezia, I suppose you didn't see some papers on a table in our room?"

"Oh, yes," she said. "I tore them up for my s'prise."

"What!" screamed mother. "Come straight down to the dining-room this
instant."

And she was dragged down to where father was pacing to and fro, hands
behind his back.

"Well?" he said sharply.

Mother explained.

He stopped and stared in a stupefied manner at the child.

"Did you do that?"

"N-n-no," she whispered.

"Mother, go up to the nursery and fetch down the damned thing--see that
the child's put to bed this instant."

Crying too much to explain, she lay in the shadowed room watching the
evening light sift through the Venetian blinds and trace a sad little
pattern on the floor.

Then father came into the room with a ruler in his hands.

"I am going to whip you for this," he said.

"Oh, no, no!" she screamed, cowering down under the bedclothes.

He pulled them aside.

"Sit up," he commanded, "and hold out your hands. You must be taught once
and for all not to touch what does not belong to you."

"But it was for your b-b-birthday."

Down came the ruler on her little, pink palms.

Hours later, when the grandmother had wrapped her in a shawl and rocked
her in the rocking-chair the child cuddled close to her soft body.

"What did Jesus make fathers for?" she sobbed.

"Here's a clean hanky, darling, with some of my lavender water on it. Go
to sleep, pet; you'll forget all about it in the morning. I tried to
explain to father, but he was too upset to listen to-night."

But the child never forgot. Next time she saw him she whipped both hands
behind her back, and a red colour flew into her cheeks.

The Macdonalds lived in the next-door house. Five children there were.
Looking through a hole in the vegetable garden fence the little girl saw
them playing "tag" in the evening. The father with the baby Mac on his
shoulders, two little girls hanging on to his coat tails, ran round and
round the flower beds, shaking with laughter. Once she saw the boys turn
the hose on him--turn the hose on him--and he made a great grab at them,
tickling them until they got hiccoughs. Then it was she decided there
were different sorts of fathers.

Suddenly, one day, mother became ill, and she and grandmother drove into
town in a closed carriage.

The little girl was left alone in the house with Alice, the "general."
That was all right in the daytime, but while Alice was putting her to bed
she grew suddenly afraid.

"What'll I do if I have nightmare?" she asked. "I often have nightmare,
and then grannie takes me into her bed--I can't stay in the dark--it all
gets 'whispery.'...What'll I do if I do?"

"You just go to sleep, child," said Alice, pulling off her socks and
whacking them against the bedrail, "and don't you holler out and wake
your poor pa."

But the same old nightmare came--the butcher with a knife and a rope who
grew nearer and nearer, smiling that dreadful smile, while she could not
move, could only stand still, crying out, "Grandma, Grandma!" She woke
shivering, to see father beside her bed, a candle in his hand.

"What's the matter?" he said.

"Oh, a butcher--a knife--I want grannie." He blew out the candle, bent
down and caught up the child in his arms, carrying her along the passage
to the big bedroom. A newspaper was on the bed--a half-smoked cigar
balanced against his reading-lamp. He pitched the paper on the floor,
threw the cigar into the fireplace, then carefully tucked up the child.
He lay down beside her. Half asleep still, still with the butcher's smile
all about her, it seemed, she crept close to him, snuggled her head under
his arm, held tightly to his pyjama jacket.

Then the dark did not matter; she lay still. "Here, rub your feet against
my legs and get them warm," said father.

Tired out, he slept before the little girl. A funny feeling came over
her. Poor father! Not so big, after all--and with no one to look after
him...He was harder than the grandmother, but it was a nice
hardness...And every day he had to work and was too tired to be a Mr.
Macdonald...She had torn up all his beautiful writing...She stirred
suddenly, and sighed.

"What's the matter?" asked father. "Another dream?"

"Oh," said the little girl, "my head's on your heart; I can hear it
going. What a big heart you've got, father dear."

(1912)



MILLIE


Millie stood leaning against the verandah, until the men were out of
sight. When they were far down the road Willie Cox turned round on his
horse and waved. But she didn't wave back. She nodded her head a little
and made a grimace. Not a bad young fellow, Willie Cox, but a bit too
free and easy for her taste. Oh, my word! it was hot. Enough to fry your
hair!

Millie put her handkerchief over her head and shaded her eyes with her
hand. In the distance along the dusty road she could see the horses, like
brown spots dancing up and down, and when she looked away from them and
over the burnt paddocks she could see them still--just before her eyes,
jumping like mosquitoes. It was half-past two in the afternoon. The sun
hung in the faded blue sky like a burning mirror, and away beyond the
paddocks the blue mountains quivered and leapt like sea.

Sid wouldn't be back until half-past ten. He had ridden over to the
township with four of the boys to help hunt down the young fellow who'd
murdered Mr. Williamson. Such a dreadful thing! And Mrs. Williamson left
all alone with all those kids. Funny! she couldn't think of Mr.
Williamson being dead! He was such a one for a joke. Always having a
lark. Willie Cox said they found him in the barn, shot bang through the
head, and the young English "johnny" who'd been on the station learning
farming--disappeared. Funny! she couldn't think of anyone shooting Mr.
Williamson, and him so popular and all. My word! when they caught that
young man! Well, you couldn't be sorry for a young fellow like that. As
Sid said, if he wasn't strung up where would they all be? A man like that
doesn't stop at one go. There was blood all over the barn. And Willie Cox
said he was that knocked out he picked a cigarette up out of the blood
and smoked it. My word! he must have been half dotty.

Millie went back into the kitchen. She put some ashes on the stove and
sprinkled them with water. Languidly, the sweat pouring down her face,
and dropping off her nose and chin, she cleared away the dinner, and
going into the bedroom, stared at herself in the fly-specked mirror, and
wiped her face and neck with a towel. She didn't know what was the matter
with herself that afternoon. She could have a good cry--just for
nothing--and then change her blouse and have a good cup of tea. Yes, she
felt like that!

She flopped down on the side of the bed and stared at the coloured print
on the wall opposite, Garden Party at Windsor Castle. In the foreground
emerald lawns planted with immense oak trees, and in their grateful
shade, a muddle of ladies and gentlemen and parasols and little tables.
The background was filled with the towers of Windsor Castle, flying three
Union Jacks, and in the middle of the picture the old Queen, like a tea
cosy with a head on top of it.

"I wonder if it really looked like that." Millie stared at the flowery
ladies, who simpered back at her. "I wouldn't care for that sort of
thing. Too much side. What with the Queen an' one thing an' another."

Over the packing-case dressing-table there was a large photograph of her
and Sid, taken on their wedding day. Nice picture that--if you do like.
She was sitting down in a basket chair, in her cream cashmere and satin
ribbons, and Sid, standing with one hand on her shoulder, looking at her
bouquet. And behind them there were some fern trees, and a waterfall, and
Mount Cook in the distance, covered with snow. She had almost forgotten
her wedding day; time did pass so, and if you hadn't any one to talk
things over with, they soon dropped out of your mind. "I wunner why we
never had no kids..." She shrugged her shoulders--gave it up. "Well, I've
never missed them. I wouldn't be surprised if Sid had, though. He's
softer than me."

And then she sat quiet, thinking of nothing at all, her red swollen hands
rolled in her apron, her feet stuck out in front of her, her little head
with the thick screw of dark hair drooped on her chest. Tick-tick went
the kitchen clock, the ashes clinked in the grate, and the venetian blind
knocked against the kitchen window. Quite suddenly Millie felt
frightened. A queer trembling started inside her--in her stomach--and
then spread all over to her knees and hands. "There's somebody about."
She tiptoed to the door and peered into the kitchen. Nobody there; the
verandah doors were closed, the blinds were down, and in the dusky light
the white face of the clock shone, and the furniture seemed to bulge and
breathe...and listen, too. The clock--the ashes--and the venetian--and
then again--something else, like steps in the back yard. "Go an' see what
it is, Millie Evans."

She darted to the back door, opened it, and at the same moment some one
ducked behind the wood pile. "Who's that?" she cried, in a loud, bold
voice. "Come out o' that! I seen yer. I know where y'are. I got my gun.
Come out from behind of that wood stack!" She was not frightened any
more. She was furiously angry. Her heart banged like a drum.

"I'll teach you to play tricks with a woman," she yelled, and she took a
gun from the kitchen corner, and dashed down the verandah steps, across
the glaring yard to the other side of the wood stack. A young man lay
there, on his stomach, one arm across his face. "Get up! You're
shamming!" Still holding the gun she kicked him in the shoulders. He gave
no sign. "Oh, my God, I believe he's dead." She knelt down, seized hold
of him, and turned him over on his back. He rolled like a sack. She
crouched back on her haunches, staring; her lips and nostrils fluttered
with horror.

He was not much more than a boy, with fair hair, and a growth of fair
down on his lips and chin. His eyes were open, rolled up, showing the
whites, and his face was patched with dust caked with sweat. He wore a
cotton shirt and trousers, with sandshoes on his feet. One of the
trousers was stuck to his leg with a patch of dark blood. "I can't," said
Millie, and then, "You've got to." She bent over and felt his heart.
"Wait a minute," she stammered, "wait a minute," and she ran into the
house for brandy and a pail of water. "What are you going to do, Millie
Evans? Oh, I don't know. I never seen anyone in a dead faint before." She
knelt down, put her arm under the boy's head and poured some brandy
between his lips. It spilled down both sides of his mouth. She dipped a
corner of her apron in the water and wiped his face and his hair and his
throat, with fingers that trembled. Under the dust and sweat his face
gleamed, white as her apron, and thin, and puckered in little lines. A
strange dreadful feeling gripped Millie Evans' bosom--some seed that had
never flourished there, unfolded and struck deep roots and burst into
painful leaf. "Are yer coming round? Feeling all right again?" The boy
breathed sharply, half choked, his eyelids quivered, and he moved his
head from side to side. "You're better," said Millie, smoothing his hair.
"Feeling fine now again, ain't you?" The pain in her bosom half
suffocated her. "It's no good you crying, Millie Evans. You got to keep
your head." Quite suddenly he sat up and leaned against the wood pile,
away from her, staring on the ground. "There now!" cried Millie Evans, in
a strange, shaking voice.

The boy turned and looked at her, still not speaking, but his eyes were
so full of pain and terror that she had to shut her teeth and clench her
hands to stop from crying. After a long pause he said in the little voice
of a child talking in his sleep, "I'm hungry." His lips quivered. She
scrambled to her feet and stood over him. "You come right into the house
and have a sit down meal," she said. "Can you walk?" "Yes," he whispered,
and swaying he followed her across the glaring yard to the verandah.

At the bottom step he paused, looking at her again. "I'm not coming in,"
he said. He sat on the verandah step in the little pool of shade that lay
round the house. Millie watched him. "When did yer last 'ave anythink to
eat?" He shook his head. She cut a chunk off the greasy corned beef and a
round of bread plastered with butter; but when she brought it he was
standing up, glancing round him, and paid no attention to the plate of
food. "When are they coming back?" he stammered.

At that moment she knew. She stood, holding the plate, staring. He was
Harrison. He was the English johnny who'd killed Mr. Williamson. "I know
who you are," she said, very slowly, "yer can't fox me. That's who you
are. I must have been blind in me two eyes not to 'ave known from the
first." He made a movement with his hands as though that was all nothing.
"When are they coming back?" And she meant to say, "Any minute. They're
on their way now." Instead she said to the dreadful, frightened face,
"Not till 'arf past ten." He sat down, leaning against one of the
verandah poles. His face broke up into little quivers. He shut his eyes
and tears streamed down his cheeks. "Nothing but a kid. An' all them
fellows after 'im. 'E don't stand any more of a chance than a kid would."
"Try a bit of beef," said Millie. "It's the food you want. Somethink to
steady your stomach." She moved across the verandah and sat down beside
him, the plate on her knees. "'Ere--try a bit." She broke the bread and
butter into little pieces, and she thought, "They won't ketch him. Not if
I can 'elp it. Men is all beasts. I don' care wot 'e's done, or wot 'e
'asn't done. See 'im through, Millie Evans. 'E's nothink but a sick kid."

Millie lay on her back, her eyes wide open, listening. Sid turned over,
hunched the quilt round his shoulders, muttered "Good-night, ole girl."
She heard Willie Cox and the other chap drop their clothes on to the
kitchen floor, and then their voices, and Willie Cox saying, "Lie down,
Gumboil. Lie down, yer little devil," to his dog. The house dropped
quiet. She lay and listened. Little pulses tapped in her body, listening,
too. It was hot. She was frightened to move because of Sid. "'E must get
off. 'E must. I don' care anythink about justice an' all the rot they've
bin spoutin' to-night," she thought, savagely. "'Ow are yer to know what
anythink's like till yer do know. It's all rot." She strained to the
silence. He ought to be moving...Before there was a sound from outside,
Willie Cox's Gumboil got up and padded sharply across the kitchen floor
and sniffed at the back door. Terror started up in Millie. "What's that
dog doing? Uh! What a fool that young fellow is with a dog 'anging about.
Why don't 'e lie down an'sleep." The dog stopped, but she knew it was
listening.

Suddenly, with a sound that made her cry out in horror the dog started
barking and rushing to and fro. "What's that? What's up?" Sid flung out
of bed. "It ain't nothink. It's only Gumboil. Sid, Sid!" She clutched his
arm, but he shook her off. "My Christ, there's somethink up. My God!" Sid
flung into his trousers. Willie Cox opened the back door. Gumboil in a
fury darted out into the yard, round the corner of the house. "Sid,
there's some one in the paddock," roared the other chap. "What is
it--what's that?" Sid dashed out on to the front verandah. "'Ere, Millie,
take the lantin. Willie, some skunk's got 'old of one of the 'orses." The
three men bolted out of the house, and at the same moment Millie saw
Harrison dash across the paddock on Sid's horse and down the road.
"Millie, bring that blasted lantin." She ran in her bare feet, her
nightdress flicking her legs. They were after him in a flash. And at the
sight of Harrison in the distance, and the three men hot after, a strange
mad joy smothered everything else. She rushed into the road--she laughed
and shrieked and danced in the dust, jigging the lantern. "A--ah! Arter
'im, Sid! A--a--a--h! Ketch him, Willie. Go it! Go it! A--ah, Sid! Shoot
'im down. Shoot 'im!"

(1913)



PENSION SÉGUIN


The servant who opened the door was twin sister to that efficient and
hideous creature bearing a soup tureen into the First French Picture. Her
round red face shone like freshly washed china. She had a pair of immense
bare arms to match, and a quantity of mottled hair arranged in a sort of
bow. I stammered in a ridiculous, breathless fashion, as though a pack of
Russian wolves were behind me, rather than five flights of beautifully
polished French stairs.

"Have you a room?" The servant girl did not know. She would ask Madame.
Madame was at dinner.

"Will you come in, please?"

Through the dark hall, guarded by a large black stove that had the
appearance of a headless cat with one red all-seeing eye in the middle of
its stomach, I followed her into the salon.

"Please to sit down," said the servant girl, closing the door behind her.
I heard her list slippers shuffle along the corridor, the sound of
another door opening--a little clamour--instantly suppressed. Silence
followed.

The salon was long and narrow, with a yellow floor dotted with white
mats. White muslin curtains hid the windows: the walls were white,
decorated with pictures of pale ladies drifting down cypress avenues to
forsaken temples, and moons rising over boundless oceans. You would have
thought that all the long years of Madame's virginity had been devoted to
the making of white mats--that her childish voice had lisped its numbers
in crochet-work stitches. I did not dare to begin counting them. They
rained upon me from every possible place, like impossible snowflakes.
Even the piano stool was buttoned into one embroidered with P.F.

I had been looking for a resting place all the morning. At the start I
flew up innumerable stairs as though they were major scales--the most
cheerful things in the world--but after repeated failures the scales had
resolved into the minor, and my heart, which was quite cast down by this
time, leapt up again at these signs and tokens of virtue and sobriety. "A
woman with such sober passions," thought I, "is bound to be quiet and
clean, with few babies and a much absent husband. Mats are not the sort
of things that lend themselves in their making to cheerful singing. Mats
are essentially the fruits of pious solitude. I shall certainly take a
room here." And I began to dream of unpacking my clothes in a little
white room, and getting into a kimono and lying on a white bed, watching
the curtains float out from the windows in the delicious autumn air that
smelled of apples and honey...until the door opened and a tall thin woman
in a lilac pinafore came in, smiling in a vague fashion.

"Madame Séguin?"

"Yes, Madame."

I repeated the familiar story. A quiet room, removed from any church
bells, or crowing cocks, or little boys' schools, or railway stations.

"There are none of such things anywhere near here," said Madame, looking
very surprised. "I have a very beautiful room to let, and quite
unexpectedly. It has been occupied by a young gentleman from Buenos Ayres
whose father died, unfortunately, and implored him to return home
immediately. Quite natural, indeed."

"Oh, very!" said I, hoping that the Hamlet-like apparition was at rest
again and would not invade my solitude to make certain of his son's
obedience.

"If Madame will follow me."

Down a dark corridor, round a corner I felt my way. I wanted to ask
Madame if this was where Buenos Ayres père appeared unto his son, but I
did not dare to.

"Here--you see. Quite away from everything," said Madame.

I have always viewed with a proper amount of respect and abhorrence those
penetrating spirits who are not susceptible to appearances. What is there
to believe in except appearances? I have nearly always found that they
are the only things worth enjoying at all, and if ever an innocent child
lays its head upon my knee and begs for the truth of the matter, I shall
tell it the story of my one and only nurse, who, knowing my horror of
gooseberry jam, spread a coat of apricot over the top of the jam jar. As
long as I believed it apricot I was happy, and learning wisdom, I
contrived to eat the apricot and leave the gooseberry behind. "So, you
see, my little innocent creature," I shall end, "the great thing to learn
in this life is to be content with appearances, and shun the vulgarities
of the grocer and philosopher."

Bright sunlight streamed through the windows of the delightful room.
There was an alcove for the bed, a writing table was placed against the
window, a couch against the wall. And outside the window I looked down
upon an avenue of gold and red trees and up at a range of mountains white
with fresh fallen snow.

"One hundred and eighty francs a month," murmured Madame, smiling at
nothing, but seeming to imply by her manner, "Of course this has nothing
to do with the matter." I said, "That is too much. I cannot afford more
than one hundred and fifty francs."

"But," explained Madame, "the size! the alcove! And the extreme rarity of
being overlooked by so many mountains."

"Yes," I said.

"And then the food. There are four meals a day, and breakfast in your
room if you wish it."

"Yes," I said, more feebly.

"And my husband a Professor at the Conservatoire--that again is so rare."

Courage is like a disobedient dog, once it starts running away it flies
all the faster for your attempts to recall it.

"One hundred and sixty," I said.

"If you agree to take it for two months I will accept," said Madame, very
quickly. I agreed.

Marie helped to unstrap my boxes. She knelt on the floor, grinning and
scratching her big red arms.

"Ah, how glad I am Madame has come," she said. "Now we shall have some
life again. Monsieur Arthur, who lived in this room--he was a gay one.
Singing all day and sometimes dancing. Many a time Mademoiselle
Ambatielos would be playing and he'd dance for an hour without stopping."

"Who is Mademoiselle Ambatielos?" I asked.

"A young lady studying at the Conservatoire," said Marie, sniffing in a
very friendly fashion. "But she gives lessons too. Ah, mon Dieu,
sometimes when I am dusting in her room I think her fingers will drop
off. She plays all day long. But I like that--that's life, noise is.
That's what I say. You'll hear her soon. Up and down she goes!" said
Marie, with extreme heartiness.

"But," I cried, loathing Marie, "how many other people are staying here?"

Marie shrugged. "Nobody to speak of. There's the Russian gentleman, a
priest he is, and Madame's three children--and that's all. The children
are lively enough," she said, filling the wash-stand pitcher, "but then
there's the baby--the boy! Ah, you'll know about him, poor little one,
soon enough!" She was so detestable I would not ask her anything further.

I waited until she was gone, and leaned against the window sill, watching
the sun deepen in the trees until they seemed full and trembling with
gold, and wondering what was the matter with the mysterious baby.

All through the afternoon Mademoiselle Ambatielos and the piano warred
with the Appassionata Sonata. They shattered it to bits and re-made it to
their heart's desire--they unpicked it--and tried it in various styles.
They added a little touch--caught up something. Finally they decided that
the only thing of importance was the loud pedal. The mysterious baby,
hidden behind Heaven knows how many doors, cried with such curious
persistence that I had to strain my ears, wondering if it was a baby or
an engine or a far-off whistle. At dusk Marie, accompanied by the two
little girls, brought me a lamp. My appearance disturbed these charming
children to such an extent that they rushed up and down the corridor in a
frenzied state for half-an-hour afterwards, bumping themselves against
the walls, and shrieking with derisive laughter.

At eight the gong sounded for supper. I was hungry. The corridor was
filled with the warm, strong smell of cooked meat. "Well," I thought, "at
any rate, judging by the smell, the food must be good." And feeling very
frightened I entered the dining-room.

Two rows of faces turned to watch me. M. Séguin introduced me, rapped on
the table with the soup spoon, and the two little girls, impudent and
scornful, cried: "Bon soir, Madame," while the baby, half washed away by
his afternoon's performance, emptied his cup of milk over his head while
Madame Séguin showed me my seat. In the confusion caused by this last
episode, and by his being carried away by Marie, screaming and spitting
with rage, I sat down next to the Russian priest and opposite
Mademoiselle Ambatielos. M. Séguin took a loaf of bread from a
three-legged basket at his elbow and carved it against his chest.

Soup was served--with vermicelli letters of the alphabet floating in it.
These were last straws to the little Séguin's table manners.

"Maman, Yvonne's got more letters than me."

"Maman, Hélène keeps taking my letters out with her spoon."

"Children! Children! Quiet, quiet!" said Madame Séguin gently. "No, don't
do it."

Hélène seized Yvonne's plate and pulled it towards her.

"Stop," said M. Séguin, who was like a rat, with spectacles all misted
over with soup steam. "Hélène, leave the table. Go to Marie." Exit
Hélène, with her apron over her head.

Soup was followed by chestnuts and Brussels sprouts. All the time the
Russian priest, who wore a pale blue tie with a buttoned frock coat and a
moustache fierce as a Gogol novel, kept up a flow of conversation with
Mademoiselle Ambatielos. She looked very young. She was stout, with a
high firm bust decorated with a spray of artificial roses. She never
ceased touching the roses or her blouse or hair, or looking at her
hands--with a smile trembling on her mouth and her blue eyes wide and
staring. She seemed half intoxicated with her fresh young body.

"I saw you this morning when you didn't see me," said the priest.

"You didn't."

"I did."

"He didn't, did he, Madame?"

Madame Séguin smiled, and carried away the chestnuts, bringing back a
dish of pears.

"I hope you will come into the salon after dinner," she said to me. "We
always chat a little--we are such a family party." I smiled, wondering
why pears should follow chestnuts.

"I must apologise for baby," she went on. "He is so nervous. But he
spends his day in a room at the other end of the apartment to you. You
will not be troubled. Only think of it! He passes whole days banging his
little head against the floor and walls. The doctors cannot understand it
at all."

M. Séguin pushed back his chair, said grace. I followed desperately into
the salon. "I expect you have been admiring my mats," said Madame Séguin,
with more animation than she had hitherto shown. "People always imagine
they are the product of my industry. But, alas, no! They are all made by
my friend, Madame Kummer, who has the pension on the first floor."

(1913)



VIOLET


    "I met a young virgin
    Who sadly did moan"


There is a very unctuous and irritating English proverb to the effect
that "Every cloud has a silver lining." What comfort can it be to one
steeped to the eyebrows in clouds to ponder over their linings, and what
an unpleasant picture-postcard seal it sets upon one's tragedy--turning
it into a little ha'penny monstrosity with a moon in the left-hand corner
like a vainglorious threepenny bit! Nevertheless, like most unctuous and
irritating things, it is true. The lining woke me after my first night at
the Pension Séguin and showed me over the feather bolster a room bright
with sunlight as if every golden-haired baby in Heaven were pelting the
earth with buttercup posies. "What a charming fancy!" I thought. "How
much prettier than the proverb! It sounds like a day in the country with
Katharine Tynan."

And I saw a little picture of myself and Katharine Tynan being handed
glasses of milk by a red-faced woman with an immensely fat apron, while
we discussed the direct truth of proverbs as opposed to the fallacy of
playful babies. But in such a case imaginary I was ranged on the side of
the proverbs. "There's a lot of sound sense in 'em," said that coarse
being. "I admire the way they put their collective foot down upon the
female attempt to embroider everything. 'The pitcher that goes too often
to the well gets broken.' Also gut. Not even a loophole for a set of
verses to a broken pitcher. No possible chance of the well being one of
those symbolic founts to which all hearts in the form of pitchers are
carried. The only proverb I disapprove of," went on this impossible
creature, pulling a spring onion from the garden bed and chewing on it,
"is the one about a bird in the hand. I naturally prefer birds in
bushes." "But," said Katharine Tynan, tender and brooding, as she lifted
a little green fly from her milk glass, "but if you were Saint Francis,
the bird would not mind being in your hand. It would prefer the white
nest of your fingers to any bush."

I jumped out of bed and ran over to the window and opened it wide and
leaned out. Down below in the avenue a wind shook and swung the trees;
the scent of leaves was on the lifting air. The houses lining the avenue
were small and white. Charming, chaste-looking little houses, showing
glimpses of lace and knots of ribbon, for all the world like country
children in a row, about to play "Nuts and May." I began to imagine an
adorable little creature named Yvette who lived in one and all of these
houses...She spends her morning in a white lace boudoir cap, worked with
daisies, sipping chocolate from a Sèvres cup with one hand, while a
faithful attendant polishes the little pink nails of the other. She
spends the afternoon in her tiny white and gold boudoir, curled up, a
Persian kitten on her lap, while her ardent, beautiful lover leans over
the back of the sofa, kissing and kissing again that thrice fascinating
dimple on her left shoulder...When one of the balcony windows opened, and
a stout servant swaggered out with her arms full of rugs and carpet
strips. With a gesture expressing fury and disgust she flung them over
the railing, disappeared, re-appeared again with a long-handled cane
broom and fell upon the wretched rugs and carpets. Bang! Whack! Whack!
Bang! Their feeble, pitiful jigging inflamed her to ever greater effort.
Clouds of dust flew up round her, and when one little rug escaped and
flopped down to the avenue below, like a fish, she leaned over the
balcony, shaking her fist and the broom at it.

Lured by the noise, an old gentleman came to a window opposite and cast
an eye of approval upon the industrious girl and yawned in the face of
the lovely day. There was an air of detachment and deliberation about the
way he carefully felt over the muscles of his arms and legs, pressed his
throat, coughed, and shot a jet of spittle out of the window. Nobody
seemed more surprised at this last feat than he. He seemed to regard it
as a small triumph in its way, buttoning his immense stomach into a white
piqué waistcoat with every appearance of satisfaction. Away flew my
charming Yvette in a black and white check dress, an alpaca apron, and a
market basket over her arm.

I dressed, ate a roll and drank some tepid coffee, feeling very sobered.
I thought how true it was that the world was a delightful place if it
were not for the people, and how more than true it was that people were
not worth troubling about, and that wise men should set their affections
upon nothing smaller than cities, heavenly or otherwise, and
countrysides, which are always heavenly.

With these reflections, both pious and smug, I put on my hat, groped my
way along the dark passage, and ran down the five flights of stairs into
the Rue St. Léger. There was a garden on the opposite side of the street,
through which one walked to the University and the more pretentious
avenues fronting the Place du Théâtre. Although autumn was well advanced,
not a leaf had fallen from the trees, the little shrubs and bushes were
touched with pink and crimson, and against the blue sky the trees stood
sheathed in gold. On stone benches nursemaids in white cloaks and stiff
white caps chattered and wagged their heads like a company of cockatoos,
and, up and down, in the sun, some genteel babies bowled hoops with a
delicate air. What peculiar pleasure it is to wander through a strange
city and amuse oneself as a child does, playing a solitary game!

"Pardon, Madame, mais voulez-vous..." and then the voice faltered and
cried my name as though I had been given up for lost times without
number; as though I had been drowned in foreign seas, and burnt in
American hotel fires, and buried in a hundred lonely graves. "What on
earth are you doing here?" Before me, not a day changed, not a hairpin
altered, stood Violet Burton. I was flattered beyond measure at this
enthusiasm, and pressed her cold, strong hand, and said "Extraordinary!"

"But what are you here for?"

"...Nerves."

"Oh, impossible, I really can't believe that."

"It is perfectly true," I said, my enthusiasm waning. There is nothing
more annoying to a woman than to be suspected of nerves of iron.

"Well, you certainly don't look it," said she, scrutinising me, with that
direct English frankness that makes one feel as though sitting in the
glare of a window at breakfast-time.

"What are you here for?" I said, smiling graciously to soften the glare.
At that she turned and looked across the lawns, and fidgetted with her
umbrella like a provincial actress about to make a confession.

"I"--in a quiet affected voice--"I came here to forget...But," facing me
again, and smiling energetically, "don't let's talk about that. Not yet.
I can't explain. Not until I know you all over again." Very
solemnly--"Not until I am sure you are to be trusted."

"Oh, don't trust me, Violet!" I cried. "I'm not to be trusted. I wouldn't
if I were you." She frowned and stared.

"What a terrible thing to say. You can't be in earnest."

"Yes, I am. There's nothing I adore talking about so much as another
person's secret." To my surprise, she came to my side and put her arm
through mine.

"Thank you," she said, gratefully. "I think it's awfully good of you to
take me into your confidence like that. Awfully. And even if it were
true...but no, it can't be true, otherwise you wouldn't have told me. I
mean it can't be psychologically true of the same nature to be frank and
dishonourable at the same time. Can it? But then...I don't know. I
suppose it is possible. Don't you find that the Russian novelists have
made an upheaval of all your conclusions?" We walked, bras dessus bras
dessous, down the sunny path.

"Let's sit down," said Violet. "There's a fountain quite near this bench.
I often come here. You can hear it all the time." The faint noise of the
water sounded like a half-forgotten tune, half sly, half laughing.

"Isn't it wonderful!" breathed Violet. "Like weeping in the night."

"Oh, Violet," said I, terrified at this turn. "Wonderful things don't
weep in the night. They sleep like tops and know nothing more till again
it is day."

She put her arm over the back of the bench and crossed her legs.

"Why do you persist in denying your emotions? Why are you ashamed of
them?" she demanded.

"I'm not. But I keep them tucked away, and only produce them very
occasionally, like special little pots of jam, when the people whom I
love come to tea."

"There you are again! Emotions and jam! Now, I'm absolutely different. I
live on mine. Sometimes I wish I didn't--but then again I would rather
suffer through them--suffer intensely, I mean; go down into the depths
with them, for the sake of that wonderful upward swing on to the
pinnacles of happiness." She edged nearer to me.

"I wish I could think where I get my nature from," she went on. "Father
and mother are absolutely different. I mean--they're quite normal--quite
commonplace." I shook my head and raised my eyebrows. "But it is no use
fighting it. It has beaten me. Absolutely--once and for all." A pause,
inadequately filled by the sly, laughing water. "Now," said Violet,
impressively, "you know what I meant when I said I came here to forget."

"But I assure you I don't, Violet. How can you expect me to be so subtle?
I quite understand that you don't wish to tell me until you know me
better. Quite!"

She opened her eyes and her mouth.

"I have told you! I mean--not straight out. Not in so many words. But
then--how could I? But when I told you of my emotional nature, and that I
had been in the depths and swept up to the pinnacles...surely, surely you
realised that I was telling you, symbolically. What else can you have
thought?"

No young girl ever performs such gymnastic feats by herself. Yet in my
experience I had always imagined that the depths followed the pinnacles.
I ventured to suggest so.

"They do," said Violet, gloomily. "You see them, if you look, before and
after."

"Like the people in Shelley's Skylark," said I.

Violet looked vague, and I repented. But I did not know how to
sympathise, and I had no idea of the relative sizes.

"It was in the summer," said Violet. "I had been most frightfully
depressed. I don't know what it was. For one thing I felt as though I
could not make up my mind to anything. I felt so terribly useless--that I
had no place in the scheme of things--and worst of all, nobody who
understood me...It may have been what I was reading at the time...but I
don't think...not entirely. Still one never knows. Does one? And then I
met...Mr. Farr, at a dance--"

"Oh, call him by his Christian name, Violet. You can't go on telling me
about Mr. Farr and you...on the heights."

"Why on earth not? Very well--I met--Arthur. I think I must have been mad
that evening. For one thing there had been a bother about going. Mother
didn't want me to, because she said there wouldn't be anybody to see me
home. And I was frightfully keen. I must have had a presentiment, I
think. Do you believe in presentiments?...I don't know, we can't be
certain, can we? Anyhow, I went. And he was there." She turned a deep
scarlet and bit her lip. Oh, I really began to like Violet Burton--to
like her very much indeed.

"Go on," I said.

"We danced together seven times and we talked the whole time. The music
was very slow,--we talked of everything. You know...about books and
theatres and all that sort of thing at first, and then--about our souls."

"...What?"

"I said--our souls. He understood me absolutely. And after the seventh
dance...No, I must tell you the first thing he ever said to me. He said,
'Do you believe in Pan?' Quite quietly. Just like that. And then he said,
'I knew you did.' Wasn't that extra-or-din-ary! After the seventh dance
we sat out on the landing. And...shall I go on?"

"Yes, go on."

"He said, 'I think I must be mad. I want to kiss you,'--and--I let him."

"Do go on."

"I simply can't tell you what I felt like. Fancy! I'd never kissed out of
the family before. I mean--of course--never a man. And then he said: 'I
must tell you--I am engaged."'

"Well?"

"What else is there? Of course I simply rushed upstairs and tumbled
everything over in the dressing-room and found my coat and went home. And
next morning I made Mother let me come here. I thought," said Violet, "I
thought I would have died of shame."

"Is that all?" I cried. "You can't mean to say that's all?"

"What else could there be? What on earth did you expect. How
extraordinary you are--staring at me like that!"

And in the long pause I heard again the little fountain, half sly, half
laughing--at me, I thought, not at Violet.

(1913)



BAINS TURCS


"Third storey--to the left, Madame," said the cashier, handing me a pink
ticket. "One moment--I will ring for the elevator." Her black satin skirt
swished across the scarlet and gold hall, and she stood among the
artificial palms, her white neck and powdered face topped with masses of
gleaming orange hair--like an over-ripe fungus bursting from a thick,
black stem. She rang and rang. "A thousand pardons, Madame. It is
disgraceful. A new attendant. He leaves this week." With her fingers on
the bell she peered into the cage as though she expected to see him,
lying on the floor, like a dead bird. "It is disgraceful." There appeared
from nowhere a tiny figure disguised in a peaked cap and dirty white
cotton gloves. "Here you are?" she scolded. "Where have you been? What
have you been doing?" For answer the figure hid its face behind one of
the white cotton gloves and sneezed twice. "Ugh! Disgusting! Take Madame
to the third storey!" The midget stepped aside, bowed, entered after me
and clashed the gates to. We ascended, very slowly, to an accompaniment
of sneezes and prolonged, half whistling sniffs. I asked the top of the
patent-leather cap: "Have you a cold?" "It is the air, Madame," replied
the creature, speaking through its nose with a restrained air of great
relish, "one is never dry here. Third floor--if you please," sneezing
over my ten-centime tip.

I walked along a tiled corridor decorated with advertisements for
lingerie and bust improvers--was allotted a tiny cabin and a blue print
chemise and told to undress and find the Warm Room as soon as possible.
Through the matchboard walls and from the corridor sounded cries and
laughter and snatches of conversation.

"Are you ready?"

"Are you coming out now?"

"Wait till you see me!"

"Berthe--Berthe!"

"One moment! One moment! Immediately!"

I undressed quickly and carelessly, feeling like one of a troupe of
little schoolgirls let loose in a swimming-bath.

The Warm Room was not large. It had terra cotta painted walls with a
fringe of peacocks, and a glass roof, through which one could see the
sky, pale and unreal as a photographer's background screen. Some round
tables strewn with shabby fashion journals, a marble basin in the centre
of the room, filled with yellow lilies, and on the long, towel enveloped
chairs, a number of ladies, apparently languid as the flowers...I lay
back with a cloth over my head, and the air, smelling of jungles and
circuses and damp washing made me begin to dream...Yes, it might have
been very fascinating to have married an explorer...and lived in a
jungle, as long as he didn't shoot anything or take anything captive. I
detest performing beasts. Oh...those circuses at home...the tent in the
paddock and the children swarming over the fence to stare at the waggons
and at the clown making up, with his glass stuck on the waggon wheel--and
the steam organ playing the Honeysuckle and the Bee much too fast...over
and over. I know what this air reminds me of--a game of follow my leader
among the clothes hung out to dry...

The door opened. Two tall blonde women in red and white check gowns came
in and took the chairs opposite mine. One of them carried a box of
mandarins wrapped in silver paper and the other a manicure set. They were
very stout, with gay, bold faces, and quantities of exquisite whipped
fair hair.

Before sitting down they glanced round the room, looked the other women
up and down, turned to each other, grimaced, whispered something, and one
of them said, offering the box, "Have a mandarin?" At that they started
laughing--they lay back and shook, and each time they caught sight of
each other broke out afresh.

"Ah, that was too good," cried one, wiping her eyes very carefully, just
at the corners. "You and I, coming in here, quite serious, you know, very
correct--and looking round the room--and--and as a result of our careful
inspection--I offer you a mandarin. No, it's too funny. I must remember
that. It's good enough for a music hall. Have a mandarin?"

"But I cannot imagine," said the other, "why women look so hideous in
Turkish baths--like beef-steaks in chemises. Is it the women--or is it
the air? Look at that one, for instance--the skinny one, reading a book
and sweating at the moustache--and those two over in the corner,
discussing whether or not they ought to tell their non-existent babies
how babies come--and...Heavens! Look at this one coming in. Take the box,
dear. Have all the mandarins."

The newcomer was a short stout little woman with flat, white feet, and a
black mackintosh cap over her hair. She walked up and down the room,
swinging her arms, in affected unconcern, glancing contemptuously at the
laughing women, and rang the bell for the attendant. It was answered
immediately by Berthe, half naked and sprinkled with soapsuds. "Well,
what is it, Madame? I've no time..."

"Please bring me a hand towel," said the Mackintosh Cap, in German.

"Pardon? I do not understand. Do you speak French?"

"Non," said the Mackintosh Cap.

"Ber-the!" shrieked one of the blonde women, "have a mandarin. Oh, mon
Dieu, I shall die of laughing."

The Mackintosh Cap went through a pantomime of finding herself wet and
rubbing herself dry. "V ersteben Sie?"

"Mais non, Madame," said Berthe, watching with round eyes that snapped
with laughter, and she left the Mackintosh Cap, winked at the blonde
women, came over, felt them as though they had been a pair of prize
poulury, said "You are doing very well," and disappeared again.

The Mackintosh Cap sat down on the edge of a chair, snatched a fashion
journal, smacked over the crackling pages and pretended to read, while
the blonde women leaned back eating the mandarins and throwing the
peelings into the lily basin. A scent of fruit, fresh and penetrating,
hung on the air. I looked round at the other women. Yes, they were
hideous, lying back, red and moist, with dull eyes and lank hair, the
only little energy they had vented in shocked prudery at the behaviour of
the two blondes. Suddenly I discovered Mackintosh Cap staring at me over
the top of her fashion journal, so intently that I took flight and went
into the hot room. But in vain! Mackintosh Cap followed after and planted
herself in front of me.

"I know," she said, confident and confiding, "that you can speak German.
I saw it in your face just now. Wasn't that a scandal about the attendant
refusing me a towel? I shall speak to the management about that, and I
shall get my husband to write them a letter this evening. Things always
come better from a man, don't they? No," she said, rubbing her yellowish
arms, "I've never been in such a scandalous place--and four francs fifty
to pay! Naturally, I shall not give a tip. You wouldn't, would you? Not
after that scandal about a hand towel...I've a great mind to complain
about those women as well. Those two that keep on laughing and eating. Do
you know who they are?" She shook her head. "They're not respectable
women--you can tell at a glance. At least I can, any married woman can.
They're nothing but a couple of street women. I've never been so insulted
in my life. Laughing at me, mind you! The great big fat pigs like that!
And I haven't sweated at all properly, just because of them. I got so
angry that the sweat turned in instead of out; it does in excitement, you
know, sometimes, and now instead of losing my cold I wouldn't be
surprised if I brought on a fever."

I walked round the hot room in misery pursued by the Mackintosh Cap until
the two blonde women came in, and seeing her, burst into another fit of
laughter. To my rage and disgust Mackintosh Cap sidled up to me, smiled
meaningly, and drew down her mouth.

"I don't care," she said, in her hideous German voice. "I shouldn't lower
myself by paying any attention to a couple of street women. If my husband
knew he'd never get over it. Dreadfully particular he is. We've been
married six years. We come from Pfalzburg. It's a nice town. Four
children I have living, and it was really to get over the shock of the
fifth that we came here. The fifth," she whispered, padding after me,
"was born, a fine healthy child, and it never breathed! Well, after nine
months, a woman can't help being disappointed, can she?"

I moved towards the vapour room. "Are you going in there?" she said. "I
wouldn't if I were you. Those two have gone in. They may think you want
to strike up an acquaintance with them. You never know women like that."
At that moment they came out, wrapping themselves in the rough gowns, and
passing Mackintosh Cap like disdainful queens. "Are you going to take
your chemise off in the vapour room?" asked she. "Don't mind me, you
know. Woman is woman, and besides, if you'd rather, I won't look at you.
I know--I used to be like that. I wouldn't mind betting," she went on
savagely, "those filthy women had a good look at each other. Pooh! women
like that. You can't shock them. And don't they look dreadful? Bold, and
all that false hair. That manicure box one of them had was fitted up with
gold. Well, I don't suppose it was real, but I think it was disgusting to
bring it. One might at least cut one's nails in private, don't you think?
I cannot see," she said, "what men see in such women. No, a husband and
children and a home to look after, that's what a woman needs. That's what
my husband says. Fancy one of these hussies peeling potatoes or choosing
the meat! Are you going already?"

I flew to find Berthe, and all the time I was soaped and smacked and
sprayed and thrown in a cold water tank I could not get out of my mind
the ugly, wretched figure of the little German with a good husband and
four children, railing against the two fresh beauties who had never
peeled potatoes nor chosen the right meat. In the ante-room I saw them
once again. They were dressed in blue. One was pinning on a bunch of
violets, the other buttoning a pair of ivory suède gloves. In their
charming feathered hats and furs they stood talking. "Yes, there they
are," said a voice at my elbow.

And there was Mackintosh Cap, transformed, in a blue and white check
blouse and crochet collar, with the little waist and large hips of the
German woman and a terrible bird nest, which Pfalzburg doubtless called
Reise-but, on her head. "How do you suppose they can afford clothes like
that? The horrible, low creatures. No, they're enough to make a young
girl think twice." And as the two walked out of the ante-room, Mackintosh
Cap stared after them, her sallow face all mouth and eyes, like the face
of a hungry child before a forbidden table.

(1913)



SOMETHING CHILDISH BUT VERY NATURAL


Whether he had forgotten what it felt like, or his head had really grown
bigger since the summer before, Henry could not decide. But his straw hat
hurt him: it pinched his forehead and started a dull ache in the two
bones just over the temples. So he chose a corner seat in a third-class
"smoker," took off his hat and put it in the rack with his large black
cardboard portfolio and his Aunt B's Christmas-present gloves. The
carriage smelt horribly of wet india-rubber and soot. There were ten
minutes to spare before the train went, so Henry decided to go and have a
look at the book-stall. Sunlight darted through the glass roof of the
station in long beams of blue and gold; a little boy ran up and down
carrying a tray of primroses; there was something about the people--about
the women especially--something idle and yet eager. The most thrilling
day of the year, the first real day of Spring had unclosed its warm
delicious beauty even to London eyes. It had put a spangle in every
colour and a new tone in every voice, and city folks walked as though
they carried real live bodies under their clothes with real live hearts
pumping the stiff blood through.

Henry was a great fellow for books. He did not read many nor did he
possess above half-a-dozen. He looked at all in the Charing Cross Road
during lunch-time and at any odd time in London; the quantity with which
he was on nodding terms was amazing. By his clean neat handling of them
and by his nice choice of phrase when discussing them with one or another
bookseller you would have thought that he had taken his pap with a tome
propped before his nurse's bosom. But you would have been quite wrong.
That was only Henry's way with everything he touched or said. That
afternoon it was an anthology of English poetry, and he turned over the
pages until a title struck his eye--Something Childish but very Natural!

    Had I but two little wings,
    And were a little feathery bird,
    To you I'd fly, my dear,
    But thoughts like these are idle things,
    And I stay here.

    But in my sleep to you I fly,
    I'm always with you in my sleep,
    The world is all one's own,
    But then one wakes and where am I?
    All, all alone.

    Sleep stays not though a monarch bids,
    So I love to wake at break of day,
    For though my sleep be gone,
    Yet while' tis dark one shuts one's lids,
    And so, dreams on.

He could not have done with the little poem. It was not the words so much
as the whole air of it that charmed him! He might have written it lying
in bed, very early in the morning, and watching the sun dance on the
ceiling. "It is stilly like that," thought Henry. "I am sure he wrote it
when he was half-awake some time, for it's got a smile of a dream on it."
He stared at the poem and then looked away and repeated it by heart,
missed a word in the third verse and looked again, and again until he
became conscious of shouting and shuffling, and he looked up to see the
train moving slowly.

"God's thunder!" Henry dashed forward. A man with a flag and a whistle
had his hand on a door. He clutched Henry somehow...Henry was inside with
the door slammed, in a carriage that wasn't a "smoker," that had not a
trace of his straw hat or the black portfolio or his Aunt B's
Christmas-present gloves. Instead, in the opposite corner, close against
the wall, there sat a girl. Henry did not dare to look at her, but he
felt certain she was staring at him. "She must think I'm mad," he
thought, "dashing into a train without even a hat, and in the evening,
too." He felt so funny. He didn't know how to sit or sprawl. He put his
hands in his pockets and tried to appear quite indifferent and frown at a
large photograph of Bolton Abbey. But feeling her eyes on him he gave her
just the tiniest glance.

Quick she looked away out of the window, and then Henry, careful of her
slightest movement, went on looking. She sat pressed against the window,
her cheek and shoulder half hidden by a long wave of marigold-coloured
hair. One little hand in a grey cotton glove held a leather case on her
lap with the initials E. M. on it. The other hand she had slipped through
the window-strap, and Henry noticed a silver bangle on the wrist with a
Swiss cow-bell and a silver shoe and a fish. She wore a green coat and a
hat with a wreath round it. All this Henry saw while the title of the new
poem persisted in his brain--Something Childish but very Natural. "I
suppose she goes to some school in London," thought Henry. "She might be
in an office. Oh, no, she is too young. Besides she'd have her hair up if
she was. It isn't even down her back." He could not keep his eyes off
that beautiful waving hair.

"My eyes are like two drunken bees...' Now, I wonder if I read that or
made it up?"

That moment the girl turned round and, catching his glance, she blushed.
She bent her head to hide the red colour that flew in her cheeks, and
Henry, terribly embarrassed, blushed too. "I shall have to speak--have
to--have to!" He started putting up his hand to raise the hat that wasn't
there. He thought that funny; it gave him confidence.

"I'm--I'm most awfully sorry," he said, smiling at the girl's hat. "But I
can't go on sitting in the same carriage with you and not explaining why
I dashed in like that, without my hat even. I'm sure I gave you a fright,
and just now I was staring at you--but that's only an awful fault of
mine; I'm a terrible starer! If you'd like me to explain--how I got in
here--not about the staring, of course,"--he gave a little laugh--"I
will."

For a minute she said nothing, then in a low, shy voice--"It doesn't
matter."

The train had flung behind the roofs and chimneys. They were swinging
into the country, past little black woods and fading fields and pools of
water shining under an apricot evening sky. Henry's heart began to thump
and beat to the beat of the train. He couldn't leave it like that. She
sat so quiet, hidden in her fallen hair. He felt that it was absolutely
necessary that she should look up and understand him--understand him at
least. He leant forward and clasped his hands round his knees.

"You see I'd just put all my things--a portfolio--into a third-class
'smoker' and was having a look at the book-stall," he explained.

As he told the story she raised her head. He saw her grey eyes under the
shadow of her hat and her eyebrows like two gold feathers. Her lips were
faintly parted. Almost unconsciously he seemed to absorb the fact that
she was wearing a bunch of primroses and that her throat was white--the
shape of her face wonderfully delicate against all that burning hair.

"How beautiful she is! How simply beautiful she is!" sang Henry's heart,
and swelled with the words, bigger and bigger and trembling like a
marvellous bubble--so that he was afraid to breathe for fear of breaking
it.

"I hope there was nothing valuable in the portfolio," said she, very
grave.

"Oh, only some silly drawings that I was taking back from the office,"
answered Henry, airily. "And--I was rather glad to lose my hat. It had
been hurting me all day."

"Yes," she said, "it's left a mark," and she nearly smiled.

Why on earth should those words have made Henry feel so free suddenly and
so happy and so madly excited? What was happening between them? They said
nothing, but to Henry their silence was alive and warm. It covered him
from his head to his feet in a trembling wave. Her marvellous words,
"It's made a mark," had in some mysterious fashion established a bond
between them. They could not be utter strangers to each other if she
spoke so simply and so naturally. And now she was really smiling. The
smile danced in her eyes, crept over her cheeks to her lips and stayed
there. He leant back. The words flew from him.--"Isn't life wonderful!"

At that moment the train dashed into a tunnel. He heard her voice raised
against the noise. She leant forward.

"I don't think so. But then I've been a fatalist for a long time now"--a
pause--"months."

They were shattering through the dark. "Why?" called Henry.

"Oh..."

Then she shrugged, and smiled and shook her head, meaning she could not
speak against the noise. He nodded and leant back. They came out of the
tunnel into a sprinkle of lights and houses. He waited for her to
explain. But she got up and buttoned her coat and put her hands to her
hat, swaying a little. "I get out here," she said. That seemed quite
impossible to Henry.

The train slowed down and the lights outside grew brighter. She moved
towards his end of the carriage.

"Look here!" he stammered. "Shan't I see you again?" He got up, too, and
leant against the rack with one hand. "I must see you again." The train
was stopping.

She said breathlessly, "I come down from London every evening."

"You--you--you do--really?" His eagerness frightened her. He was quick to
curb it. Shall we or shall we not shake hands? raced through his brain.
One hand was on the door-handle, handle, the other held the little bag.
The train stopped. Without another word or glance she was gone.

Then came Saturday--a half day at the office--and Sunday between. By
Monday evening Henry was quite exhausted. He was at the station far too
early, with a pack of silly thoughts at his heels as it were driving him
up and down. "She didn't say she came by this train!" "And supposing I go
up and she cuts me." "There may be somebody with her." "Why do you
suppose she's ever thought of you again?" "What are you going to say if
you do see her?" He even prayed, "Lord if it be Thy will, let us meet."

But nothing helped. White smoke floated against the roof of the
station--dissolved and came again in swaying wreaths. Of a sudden, as he
watched it, so delicate and so silent, moving with such mysterious grace
above the crowd and the scuffle, he grew calm. He felt very tired--he
only wanted to sit down and shut his eyes--she was not coming--a forlorn
relief breathed in the words. And then he saw her quite near to him
walking towards the train with the same little leather case in her hand.
Henry waited. He knew, somehow, that she had seen him, but he did not
move until she came close to him and said in her low, shy voice--"Did you
get them again?"

"Oh, yes, thank you, I got them again," and with a funny half gesture he
showed her the portfolio and the gloves. They walked side by side to the
train and into an empty carriage. They sat down opposite to each other,
smiling timidly but not speaking, while the train moved slowly, and
slowly gathered speed and smoothness. Henry spoke first.

"It's so silly," he said, "not knowing your name." She put back a big
piece of hair that had fallen on her shoulder, and he saw how her hand in
the grey glove was shaking. Then he noticed that she was sitting very
stiffly with her knees pressed together--and he was, too--both of them
trying not to tremble so. She said "My name is Edna."

"And mine is Henry."

In the pause they took possession of each other's names and turned them
over and put them away, a shade less frightened after that.

"I want to ask you something else now," said Henry. He looked at Edna,
his head a little on one side. "How old are you?"

"Over sixteen," she said, "and you?"

"I'm nearly eighteen..."

"Isn't it hot?" she said suddenly, and pulled off her grey gloves and put
her hands to her cheeks and kept them there. Their eyes were not
frightened--they looked at each other with a sort of desperate calmness.
If only their bodies would not tremble so stupidly! Still half hidden by
her hair, Edna said:

"Have you ever been in love before?"

"No, never! Have you?"

"Oh, never in all my life." She shook her head. "I never even thought it
possible."

His next words came in a rush. "Whatever have you been doing since last
Friday evening? Whatever did you do all Saturday and all Sunday and
to-day?"

But she did not answer--only shook her head and smiled and said, "No, you
tell me."

"I?" cried Henry--and then he found he couldn't tell her either. He
couldn't climb back to those mountains of days, and he had to shake his
head, too.

"But it's been agony," he said, smiling brilliantly--"agony." At that she
took away her hands and started laughing, and Henry joined her. They
laughed until they were tired.

"It's so--so extraordinary," she said. "So suddenly, you know, and I feel
as if I'd known you for years."

"So do I..." said Henry. "I believe it must be the Spring. I believe I've
swallowed a butterfly--and it's fanning its wings just here." He put his
hand on his heart.

"And the really extraordinary thing is," said Edna, "that I had made up
my mind that I didn't care for--men at all. I mean all the girls at
College--"

"Were you at College?"

She nodded. "A training college, learning to be a secretary." She sounded
scornful.

"I'm in an office," said Henry. "An architect's office--such a funny
little place up one hundred and thirty stairs. We ought to be building
nests instead of houses, I always think.

"Do you like it?"

"No, of course I don't. I don't want to do anything, do you?"

"No, I hate it...And," she said, "my mother is a Hungarian--I believe
that makes me hate it even more."

That seemed to Henry quite natural. "It would," he said.

"Mother and I are exactly alike. I haven't a thing in common with my
father; he's just...a little man in the City--but mother has got wild
blood in her and she's given it to me. She hates our life just as much as
I do." She paused and frowned. "All the same, we don't get on a bit
together--that's funny--isn't it? But I'm absolutely alone at home."

Henry was listening--in a way he was listening, but there was something
else he wanted to ask her. He said, very shyly, "Would you--would you
take off your hat?"

She looked startled. "Take off my hat?"

"Yes--it's your hair. I'd give anything to see your hair properly."

She protested. "It isn't really..."

"Oh, it is," cried Henry, and then, as she took off the hat and gave her
head a little toss, "Oh, Edna! it's the loveliest thing in the world."

"Do you like it?" she said, smiling and very pleased. She pulled it round
her shoulders like a cape of gold. "People generally laugh at it. It's
such an absurd colour." But Henry would not believe that. She leaned her
elbows on her knees and cupped her chin in her hands. "That's how I often
sit when I'm angry and then I feel it burning me up...Silly?"

"No, no, not a bit," said Henry. "I knew you did. It's your sort of
weapon against all the dull horrid things."

"However did you know that? Yes, that's just it. But however did you
know?"

"Just knew," smiled Henry. "My God!" he cried, "what fools people are!
All the little pollies that you know and that I know. Just look at you
and me. Here we are--that's all there is to be said. I know about you and
you know about me--we've just found each other--quite simply--just by
being natural. That's all life is--something childish and very natural.
Isn't it?"

"Yes--yes," she said eagerly. "That's what I've always thought."

"It's people that make things so--silly. As long as you can keep away
from them you're safe and you're happy."

"Oh, I've thought that for a long time."

"Then you're just like me," said Henry. The wonder of that was so great
that he almost wanted to cry. Instead he said very solemnly: "I believe
we're the only two people alive who think as we do. In fact, I'm sure of
it. Nobody understands me. I feel as though I were living in a world of
strange beings--do you?"

"Always."

"We'll be in that loathsome tunnel again in a minute," said Henry. "Edna!
can I--just touch your hair?"

She drew back quickly. "Oh, no, please don't," and as they were going
into the dark she moved a little away from him.

"Edna! I've bought the tickets. The man at the concert hall didn't seem
at all surprised that I had the money. Meet me outside the gallery doors
at three, and wear that cream blouse and the corals--will you? I love
you. I don't like sending these letters to the shop. I always feel those
people with 'Letters received' in their window keep a kettle in their
back parlour that would steam open an elephant's ear of an envelope. But
it really doesn't matter, does it, darling? Can you get away on Sunday?
Pretend you are going to spend the day with one of the girls from the
office, and let's meet at some little place and walk or find a field
where we can watch the daisies uncurling. I do love you, Edna. But
Sundays without you are simply impossible. Don't get run over before
Saturday, and don't eat anything out of a tin or drink anything from a
public fountain. That's all, darling."

"My dearest, yes, I'll be there on Saturday--and I've arranged about
Sunday, too. That is one great blessing. I'm quite free at home. I have
just come in from the garden. It's such a lovely evening. Oh, Henry, I
could sit and cry, I love you so to-night. Silly--isn't it? I either feel
so happy I can hardly stop laughing or else so sad I can hardly stop
crying and both for the same reason. But we are so young to have found
each other, aren't we? I am sending you a violet. It is quite warm. I
wish you were here now, just for a minute even. Good-night, darling. I am
Edna."

"Safe," said Edna, "safe! And excellent places, aren't they, Henry?"

She stood up to take off her coat and Henry made a movement to help her.
"No--no--it's off." She tucked it under the seat. She sat down beside
him. "Oh, Henry, what have you got there? Flowers?"

"Only two tiny little roses." He laid them in her lap.

"Did you get my letter all right?" asked Edna, unpinning the paper.

"Yes," he said, "and the violet is growing beautifully. You should see my
room. I planted a little piece of it in every corner and one on my pillow
and one in the pocket of my pyjama jacket."

She shook her hair at him. "Henry, give me the programme."

"Here it is--you can read it with me. I'll hold it for you."

"No, let me have it."

"Well, then, I'll read it for you."

"No, you can have it after."

"Edna," he whispered.

"Oh, please don't," she pleaded. "Not here--the people."

Why did he want to touch her so much and why did she mind? Whenever he
was with her he wanted to hold her hand or take her arm when they walked
together, or lean against her--not hard--just lean lightly so that his
shoulder should touch her shoulder--and she wouldn't even have that. All
the time that he was away from her he was hungry, he craved the nearness
of her. There seemed to be comfort and warmth breathing from Edna that he
needed to keep him calm. Yes, that was it. He couldn't get calm with her
because she wouldn't let him touch her. But she loved him. He knew that.
Why did she feel so curiously about it? Every time he tried to or even
asked for her hand she shrank back and looked at him with pleading
frightened eyes as though he wanted to hurt her. They could say anything
to each other. And there wasn't any question of their belonging to each
other. And yet he couldn't touch her. Why, he couldn't even help her off
with her coat. Her voice dropped into his thoughts.

"Henry!" He leaned to listen, setting his lips. "I want to explain
something to you. I will--I will--I promise--after the concert."

"All right." He was still hurt.

"You're not sad, are you?" he said.

He shook his head.

"Yes, you are, Henry."

"No, really not." He looked at the roses lying in her hands.

"Well, are you happy?"

"Yes. Here comes the orchestra."

It was twilight when they came out of the hall. A blue net of light hung
over the streets and houses, and pink clouds floated in a pale sky. As
they walked away from the hall Henry felt they were very little and
alone. For the first time since he had known Edna his heart was heavy.

"Henry!" She stopped suddenly and stared at him. "Henry, I'm not coming
to the station with you. Don't--don't wait for me. Please, please leave
me."

"My God!" cried Henry, and started, "what's the
matter--Edna--darling--Edna, what have I done?"

"Oh, nothing--go away," and she turned and ran across the street into a
square and leaned up against the square railings--and hid her face in her
hands.

"Edna--Edna--my little love--you're crying. Edna, my baby girl!"

She leaned her arms along the railings and sobbed distractedly.

"Edna--stop--it's all my fault. I'm a fool--I'm a thundering idiot. I've
spoiled your afternoon. I've tortured you with my idiotic mad bloody
clumsiness. That's it. Isn't it, Edna? For God's sake."

"Oh," she sobbed, "I do hate hurting you so. Every time you ask me to
let--let you hold my hand or--or kiss me I could kill myself for not
doing it--for not letting you. I don't know why I don't even." She said
wildly. "It's not that I'm frightened of you--it's not that--it's only a
feeling, Henry, that I can't understand myself even. Give me your
handkerchief, darling." He pulled it from his pocket. "All through the
concert I've been haunted by this, and every time we meet I know it's
bound to come up. Somehow I feel if once we did that--you know--held each
other's hands and kissed it would be all changed--and I feel we wouldn't
be free like we are--we'd be doing something secret. We wouldn't be
children any more silly, isn't it? I'd feel awkward with you, Henry, and
I'd feel shy, and I do so feel that just because you and I are you and I,
we don't need that sort of thing." She turned and looked at him, pressing
her hands to her cheeks in the way he knew so well, and behind her as in
a dream he saw the sky and half a white moon and the trees of the square
with their unbroken buds. He kept twisting, twisting up in his hands the
concert programme. "Henry! You do understand me--don't you?"

"Yes, I think I do. But you're not going to be frightened any more, are
you?" He tried to smile. "We'll forget, Edna. I'll never mention it
again. We'll bury the bogy in this square--now--you and I--won't we?"

"But," she said, searching his face--"will it make you love me less?"

"Oh, no," he said. "Nothing could--nothing on earth could do that."

London became their play-ground. On Saturday afternoons they explored.
They found their own shops where they bought cigarettes and sweets for
Edna--and their own tea-shop with their own table--their own streets--and
one night when Edna was supposed to be at a lecture at the Polytechnic
they found their own village. It was the name that made them go there.
"There's white geese in that name," said Henry, telling it to Edna. "And
a river and little low houses with old men sitting outside them--old sea
captains with wooden legs winding up their watches, and there are little
shops with lamps in the windows."

It was too late for them to see the geese or the old men, but the river
was there and the houses and even the shops with lamps. In one a woman
sat working a sewing-machine on the counter. They heard the whirring hum
and they saw her big shadow filling the shop. "Too full for a single
customer," said Henry. "It is a perfect place."

The houses were small and covered with creepers and ivy. Some of them had
worn wooden steps leading up to the doors. You had to go down a little
flight of steps to enter some of the others; and just across the road--to
be seen from every window--was the river, with a walk beside it and some
high poplar trees.

"This is the place for us to live in," said Henry. "There's a house to
let, too. I wonder if it would wait if we asked it. I'm sure it would."

"Yes, I would like to live there," said Edna.

They crossed the road and she leaned against the trunk of a tree and
looked up at the empty house, with a dreamy smile.

"There is a little garden at the back, dear," said Henry, "a lawn with
one tree on it and some daisy bushes round the wall. At night the stars
shine in the tree like tiny candles. And inside there are two rooms
downstairs and a big room with folding doors upstairs and above that an
attic. And there are eight stairs to the kitchen--very dark, Edna. You
are rather frightened of them, you know. 'Henry, dear, would you mind
bringing the lamp? I just want to make sure that Euphemia has raked out
the fire before we go to bed.'"

"Yes," said Edna. "Our bedroom is at the very top--that room with the two
square windows. When it is quiet we can hear the river flowing and the
sound of the poplar trees far, far away, rustling and flowing in our
dreams, darling."

"You're not cold--are you?" he said, suddenly.

"No--no, only happy."

"The room with the folding doors is yours." Henry laughed. "It's a
mixture--it isn't a room at all. It's full of your toys and there's a big
blue chair in it where you sit curled up in front of the fire with the
flames in your curls--because though we're married you refuse to put your
hair up and only tuck it inside your coat for the church service. And
there's a rug on the floor for me to lie on, because I'm so lazy.
Euphemia--that's our servant--only comes in the day. After she's gone we
go down to the kitchen and sit on the table and eat an apple, or perhaps
we make some tea, just for the sake of hearing the kettle sing. That's
not joking. If you listen to a kettle right through it's like an early
morning in Spring."

"Yes, I know," she said. "All the different kinds of birds."

A little cat came through the railings of the empty house and into the
road. Edna called it and bent down and held out her hands--"Kitty!
Kitty!" The little cat ran to her and rubbed against her knees.

"If we're going for a walk just take the cat and put it inside the front
door," said Henry, still pretending. "I've got the key."

They walked across the road and Edna stood stroking the cat in her arms
while Henry went up the steps and pretended to open the door.

He came down again quickly. "Let's go away at once. It's going to turn
into a dream."

The night was dark and warm. They did not want to go home. "What I feel
so certain of is," said Henry, "that we ought to be living there, now. We
oughtn't to wait for things. What's age? You're as old as you'll ever be
and so am I. You know," he said, "I have a feeling often and often that
it's dangerous to wait for things--that if you wait for things they only
go further and further away."

"But, Henry,--money! You see we haven't any money."

"Oh, well,--perhaps if I disguised myself as an old man we could get a
job as caretakers in some large house--that would be rather fun. I'd make
up a terrific history of the house if anyone came to look over it and you
could dress up and be the ghost moaning and wringing your hands in the
deserted picture gallery, to frighten them off. Don't you ever feel that
money is more or less accidental--that if one really wants things it's
either there or it doesn't matter?"

She did not answer that--she looked up at the sky and said, "Oh dear, I
don't want to go home."

"Exactly--that's the whole trouble--and we oughtn't to go home. We ought
to be going back to the house and find an odd saucer to give the cat the
dregs of the milk-jug in. I'm not really laughing--I'm not even happy.
I'm lonely for you, Edna--I would give anything to lie down and cry" and
he added limply, "with my head in your lap and your darling cheek in my
hair."

"But, Henry," she said, coming closer, "you have faith, haven't you? I
mean you are absolutely certain that we shall have a house like that and
everything we want--aren't you?"

"Not enough--that's not enough. I want to be sitting on those very stairs
and taking off these very boots this very minute. Don't you? Is faith
enough for you?"

"If only we weren't so young" she said miserably. "And yet," she sighed,
"I'm sure I don't feel very young--I feel twenty at least."

Henry lay on his back in the little wood. When he moved the dead leaves
rustled beneath him, and above his head the new leaves quivered like
fountains of green water steeped in sunlight. Somewhere out of sight Edna
was gathering primroses. He had been so full of dreams that morning that
he could not keep pace with her delight in the flowers. "Yes, love, you
go and come back for me. I'm too lazy." She had thrown off her hat and
knelt down beside him, and by and by her voice and her footsteps had
grown fainter.

Now the wood was silent except for the leaves, but he knew that she was
not far away and he moved so that the tips of his fingers touched her
pink jacket. Ever since waking he had felt so strangely that he was not
really awake at all, but just dreaming. The time before, Edna was a dream
and now he and she were dreaming together and somewhere in some dark
place another dream waited for him. "No, that can't be true because I
can't ever imagine the world without us. I feel that we two together mean
something that's got to be there just as naturally as trees or birds or
clouds." He tried to remember what it had felt like without Edna, but he
could not get back to those days. They were hidden by her; Edna, with the
marigold hair and strange, dreamy smile filled him up to the brim. He
breathed her; he ate and drank her. He walked about with a shining ring
of Edna keeping the world away or touching whatever it lighted on with
its own beauty. "Long after you have stopped laughing," he told her, "I
can hear your laugh running up and down my veins--and yet--are we a
dream?" And suddenly he saw himself and Edna as two very small children
walking through the streets, looking through windows, buying things and
playing with them, talking to each other, smiling--he saw even their
gestures and the way they stood, so often, quite still, face to face--and
then he rolled over and pressed his face in the leaves--faint with
longing. He wanted to kiss Edna, and to put his arms round her and press
her to him and feel her cheek hot against his kiss and kiss her until
he'd no breath left and so stifle the dream.

"No, I can't go on being hungry like this," said Henry, and jumped up and
began to run in the direction she had gone. She had wandered a long way.
Down in a green hollow he saw her kneeling, and when she saw him she
waved and said--"Oh, Henry--such beauties! I've never seen such beauties.
Come and look." By the time he had reached her he would have cut off his
hand rather than spoil her happiness. How strange Edna was that day! All
the time she talked to Henry her eyes laughed; they were sweet and
mocking. Two little spots of colour like strawberries glowed on her
cheeks and "I wish I could feel tired," she kept saying. "I want to walk
over the whole world until I die. Henry--come along. Walk faster--Henry!
If I start flying suddenly, you'll promise to catch hold of my feet,
won't you? Otherwise I'll never come down." And "Oh," she cried, "I am so
happy. I'm so frightfully happy!" They came to a weird place, covered
with heather. It was early afternoon and the sun streamed down upon the
purple.

"Let's rest here a little," said Edna, and she waded into the heather and
lay down.

"Oh, Henry, it's so lovely. I can't see anything except the little bells
and the sky."

Henry knelt down by her and took some primroses out of her basket and
made a long chain to go round her throat. "I could almost fall asleep,"
said Edna. She crept over to his knees and lay hidden in her hair just
beside him.

"It's like being under the sea, isn't it, dearest, so sweet and so
still?"

"Yes," said Henry, in a strange husky voice.

"Now I'll make you one of violets." But Edna sat up. "Let's go in," she
said.

They came back to the road and walked a long way. Edna said, "No, I
couldn't walk over the world--I'm tired now." She trailed on the grass
edge of the road. "You and I are tired, Henry! How much further is it?"

"I don't know--not very far," said Henry, peering into the distance. Then
they walked in silence.

"Oh," she said at last, "it really is too far, Henry, I'm tired and I'm
hungry. Carry my silly basket of primroses." He took them without looking
at her.

At last they came to a village and a cottage with a notice "Teas
Provided."

"This is the place," said Henry. "I've often been here. You sit on the
little bench and I'll go and order the tea." She sat down on the bench,
in the pretty garden all white and yellow with spring flowers. A woman
came to the door and leaned against it watching them eat. Henry was very
nice to her, but Edna did not say a word. "You haven't been here for a
long spell," said the woman.

"No--the garden's looking wonderful."

"Fair," said she. "Is the young lady your sister?" Henry nodded Yes, and
took some jam.

"There's a likeness," said the woman. She came down into the garden and
picked a head of white jonquils and handed it to Edna. "I suppose you
don't happen to know anyone who wants a cottage," said she. "My sister's
taken ill and she left me hers. I want to let it."

"For a long time?" asked Henry, politely.

"Oh," said the woman vaguely, "that depends."

Said Henry, "Well--I might know of somebody--could we go and look at it?"

"Yes, it's just a step down the road, the little one with the apple trees
in front--I'll fetch you the key."

While she was away Henry turned to Edna and said, "Will you come?" She
nodded.

They walked down the road and in through the gate and up the grassy path
between the pink and white trees. It was a tiny place--two rooms
downstairs and two rooms upstairs. Edna leaned out of the top window, and
Henry stood at the doorway. "Do you like it?" he asked.

"Yes," she called, and then made a place for him at the window. "Come and
look. It's so sweet."

He came and leant out of the window. Below them were the apple trees
tossing in a faint wind that blew a long piece of Edna's hair across his
eyes. They did not move. It was evening--the pale green sky was sprinkled
with stars. "Look!" she said--"stars, Henry."

"There will be a moon in two T's," said Henry.

She did not seem to move and yet she was leaning against Henry's
shoulder; he put his arm round her--"Are all those trees down
there--apple?" she asked in a shaky voice.

"No, darling," said Henry. "Some of them are full of angels and some of
them are full of sugar almonds--but evening light is awfully deceptive."
She sighed. "Henry--we mustn't stay here any longer."

He let her go and she stood up in the dusky room and touched her hair.
"What has been the matter with you all day?" she said--and then did not
wait for an answer but ran to him and put her arms round his neck, and
pressed his head into the hollow of her shoulder. "Oh," she breathed, "I
do love you. Hold me, Henry." He put his arms round her, and she leaned
against him and looked into his eyes.

"Hasn't it been terrible, all to-day?" said Edna. "I knew what was the
matter and I've tried every way I could to tell you that I wanted you to
kiss me--that I'd quite got over the feeling."

"You're perfect, perfect, perfect," said Henry.

"The thing is," said Henry, "how am I going to wait until evening?" He
took his watch out of his pocket, went into the cottage and popped it
into a china jar on the mantelpiece. He'd looked at it seven times in one
hour, and now he couldn't remember what time it was. Well, he'd look once
again. Half-past four. Her train arrived at seven. He'd have to start for
the station at half-past six. Two hours more to wait. He went through the
cottage again--downstairs and upstairs. "It looks lovely," he said. He
went into the garden and picked a round bunch of white pinks and put them
in a vase on the little table by Edna's bed. "I don't believe this,"
thought Henry. "I don't believe this for a minute. It's too much. She'll
be here in two hours and we'll walk home, and then I'll take that white
jug off the kitchen table and go across to Mrs. Biddie's and get the
milk, and then come back, and when I come back she'll have lighted the
lamp in the kitchen and I'll look through the window and see her moving
about in the pool of lamplight. And then we shall have supper, and after
supper (Bags I washing up!) I shall put some wood on the fire and we'll
sit on the hearth-rug and watch it burning. There won't be a sound except
the wood and perhaps the wind will creep round the house once And then we
shall change our candles and she will go up first with her shadow on the
wall beside her, and she will call out, Good-night, Henry--and I shall
answer--Good-night, Edna. And then I shall dash upstairs and jump into
bed and watch the tiny bar of light from her room brush my door, and the
moment it disappears will shut my eyes and sleep until morning. Then
we'll have all to-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow night. Is she
thinking all this, too? Edna, come quickly!"

    Had I two little wings,
    And were a little feathery bird,
    To you I'd fly, my dear--

"No, no, dearest Because the waiting is a sort of Heaven, too, darling. If
you can understand that. Did you ever know a cottage could stand on
tip-toe. This one is doing it now."

He was downstairs and sat on the doorstep with his hands clasped round
his knees. That night when they found the village--and Edna said,
"Haven't you faith, Henry?" "I hadn't then. Now I have," he said, "I feel
just like God."

He leaned his head against the lintel. He could hardly keep his eyes
open, not that he was sleepy, but for some reason and a long time passed.

Henry thought he saw a big white moth flying down the road. It perched on
the gate. No, it wasn't a moth. It was a little girl in a pinafore. What
a nice little girl, and he smiled in his sleep, and she smiled, too, and
turned in her toes as she walked. "But she can't be living here," thought
Henry. "Because this is ours. Here she comes."

When she was quite close to him she took her hand from under her pinafore
and gave him a telegram and smiled and went away. There's a funny
present! thought Henry, staring at it. "Perhaps it's only a make-believe
one, and it's got one of those snakes inside it that fly up at you." He
laughed gently in the dream and opened it very carefully. "It's just a
folded paper." He took it out and spread it open.

The garden became full of shadows--they span a web of darkness over the
cottage and the trees and Henry and the telegram. But Henry did not move.

(1914)



AN INDISCREET JOURNEY


She is like St. Anne. Yes, the concierge is the image of St. Anne, with
that black cloth over her head, the wisps of grey hair hanging, and the
tiny smoking lamp in her hand. Really very beautiful, I thought, smiling
at St. Anne, who said severely: "Six o'clock. You have only just got
time. There is a bowl of milk on the writing table." I jumped out of my
pyjamas and into a basin of cold water like any English lady in any
French novel. The concierge, persuaded that I was on my way to prison
cells and death by bayonets, opened the shutters and the cold clear light
came through. A little steamer hooted on the river; a cart with two
horses at a gallop flung past. The rapid swirling water; the tall black
trees on the far side, grouped together like negroes conversing.
Sinister, very, I thought, as I buttoned on my age-old Burberry. (That
Burberry was very significant. It did not belong to me. I had borrowed it
from a friend. My eye lighted upon it hanging in her little dark hall.
The very thing! The perfect and adequate disguise--an old Burberry. Lions
have been faced in a Burberry. Ladies have been rescued from open boats
in mountainous seas wrapped in nothing else. An old Burberry seems to me
the sign and the token of the undisputed venerable traveller, I decided,
leaving my purple peg-top with the real seal collar and cuffs in
exchange.)

"You will never get there," said the concierge, watching me turn up the
collar. "Never! Never!" I ran down the echoing stairs--strange they
sounded, like a piano flicked by a sleepy housemaid--and on to the Quai.
"Why so fast, ma mignonne?" said a lovely little boy in coloured socks,
dancing in front of the electric lotus buds that curve over the entrance
to the Métro. Alas! there was not even time to blow him a kiss. When I
arrived at the big station I had only four minutes to spare, and the
platform entrance was crowded and packed with soldiers, their yellow
papers in one hand and big untidy bundles. The Commissaire of Police
stood on one side, a Nameless Official on the other. Will he let me pass?
Will he? He was an old man with a fat swollen face covered with big
warts. Horn-rimmed spectacles squatted on his nose. Trembling, I made an
effort. I conjured up my sweetest early-morning smile and handed it with
the papers. But the delicate thing fluttered against the horn spectacles
and fell. Nevertheless, he let me pass, and I ran, ran in and out among
the soldiers and up the high steps into the yellow-painted carriage.

"Does one go direct to X?" I asked the collector who dug at my ticket
with a pair of forceps and handed it back again. "No, Mademoiselle, you
must change at X.Y.Z."

"At--?"

"X.Y.Z."

Again I had not heard. "At what time do we arrive there if you please?"

"One o'clock." But that was no good to me. I hadn't a watch. Oh,
well--later.

Ah! the train had begun to move. The train was on my side. It swung out
of the station, and soon we were passing the vegetable gardens, passing
the tall blind houses to let, passing the servants beating carpets. Up
already and walking in the fields, rosy from the rivers and the
red-fringed pools, the sun lighted upon the swinging train and stroked my
muff and told me to take off that Burberry. I was not alone in the
carriage. An old woman sat opposite, her skirt turned back over her
knees, a bonnet of black lace on her head. In her fat hands, adorned with
a wedding and two mourning rings, she held a letter. Slowly, slowly she
sipped a sentence, and then looked up and out of the window, her lips
trembling a little, and then another sentence, and again the old face
turned to the light, tasting it...Two soldiers leaned out of the window,
their heads nearly touching--one of them was whistling, the other had his
coat fastened with some rusty safety-pins. And now there were soldiers
everywhere working on the railway line, leaning against trucks or
standing hands on hips, eyes fixed on the train as though they expected
at least one camera at every window. And now we were passing big wooden
sheds like riggedup dancing halls or seaside pavilions, each flying a
flag. In and out of them walked the Red Cross men; the wounded sat
against the walls sunning themselves. At all the bridges, the crossings,
the stations, a petit soldat, all boots and bayonet. Forlorn and desolate
he looked,--like a little comic picture waiting for the joke to be
written underneath. Is there really such a thing as war? Are all these
laughing voices really going to the war? These dark woods lighted so
mysteriously by the white stems of the birch and the ash--these watery
fields with the big birds flying over--these rivers green and blue in the
light--have battles been fought in places like these?

What beautiful cemeteries we are passing! They flash gay in the sun. They
seem to be full of cornflowers and poppies and daisies. How can there be
so many flowers at this time of the year? But they are not flowers at
all. They are bunches of ribbons tied on to the soldiers' graves I
glanced up and caught the old woman's eye. She smiled and folded the
letter. "It is from my son--the first we have had since October. I am
taking it to my daughter-in-law."

"...?"

"Yes, very good," said the old woman, shaking down her skirt and putting
her arm through the handle of her basket. "He wants me to send him some
handkerchieves and a piece of stout string."

What is the name of the station where I have to change? Perhaps I shall
never know. I got up and leaned my arms across the window rail, my feet
crossed. One cheek burned as in infancy on the way to the sea-side. When
the war is over I shall have a barge and drift along these rivers with a
white cat and a pot of mignonette to bear me company.

Down the side of the hill filed the troops, winking red and blue in the
light. Far away, but plainly to be seen, some more flew by on bicycles.
But really, ma France adorée, this uniform is ridiculous. Your soldiers
are stamped upon your bosom like bright irreverent transfers.

The train slowed down, stopped...Everybody was getting out except me. A
big boy, his sabots tied to his back with a piece of string, the inside
of his tin wine cup stained a lovely impossible pink, looked very
friendly. Does one change here perhaps for X? Another whose képi had come
out of a wet paper cracker swung my suit-case to earth. What darlings
soldiers are! "Merci bien, Monsieur, vous êtes tout à fait aimable..."
"Not this way," said a bayonet. "Nor this," said another. So I followed
the crowd. "Your passport, Mademoiselle..." "We, Sir Edward Grey..." I
ran through the muddy square and into the buffet.

A green room with a stove jutting out and tables on each side. On the
counter, beautiful with coloured bottles, a woman leans, her breasts in
her folded arms. Through an open door I can see a kitchen, and the cook
in a white coat breaking eggs into a bowl and tossing the shells into a
corner. The blue and red coats of the men who are eating hang upon the
walls. Their short swords and belts are piled upon chairs. Heavens! what
a noise. The sunny air seemed all broken up and trembling with it. A
little boy, very pale, swung from table to table, taking the orders, and
poured me out a glass of purple coffee. Ssssb, came from the eggs. They
were in a pan. The woman rushed from behind the counter and began to help
the boy. Toute de suite, tout' suite! she chirruped to the loud impatient
voices. There came a clatter of plates and the poppop of corks being
drawn.

Suddenly in the doorway I saw someone with a pail of fish--brown speckled
fish, like the fish one sees in a glass case, swimming through forests of
beautiful pressed sea-weed. He was an old man in a tattered jacket,
standing humbly, waiting for someone to attend to him. A thin beard fell
over his chest, his eyes under the tufted eyebrows were bent on the pail
he carried. He looked as though he had escaped from some holy picture,
and was entreating the soldiers' pardon for being there at all...

But what could I have done? I could not arrive at X with two fishes
hanging on a straw; and I am sure it is a penal offence in France to
throw fish out of railway-carriage windows, I thought, miserably climbing
into a smaller, shabbier train. Perhaps I might have taken them to--ah,
mon Dieu--I had forgotten the name of my uncle and aunt again! Buffard,
Buffon--what was it? Again I read the unfamiliar letter in the familiar
handwriting.

"My dear niece

"Now that the weather is more settled, your uncle and I would be charmed
if you would pay us a little visit. Telegraph me when you are coming. I
shall meet you outside the station if I am free. Otherwise our good
friend, Madame Grinçon, who lives in the little toll-house by the bridge,
juste en face de la gare, will conduct you to our home. Je vous embrasse
bien tendrement, Julie Boiffard."

A visiting card was enclosed: M. Paul Boiffard.

Boiffard--of course that was the name. Ma tante Julie et mon oncle
Paul--suddenly they were there with me, more real, more solid than any
relations I had ever known. I saw tante Julie bridling, with the
soup-tureen in her hands, and oncle Paul sitting at the table, with a red
and white napkin tied round his neck. Boiffard--Boiffard--I must remember
the name. Supposing the Commissaire Militaire should ask me who the
relations were I was going to and I muddled the name--Oh, how fatal!
Buffard--no, Boiffard. And then for the first time, folding Aunt Julie's
letter, I saw scrawled in a corner of the empty back page: Venez vite,
vite. Strange impulsive woman! My heart began to beat...

"Ah, we are not far off now," said the lady opposite. "You are going to
X, Mademoiselle?"

"Oui, Madame."

"I also...You have been there before?"

"No, Madame. This is the first time."

"Really, it is a strange time for a visit."

I smiled faintly, and tried to keep my eyes off her hat. She was quite an
ordinary little woman, but she wore a black velvet toque, with an
incredibly surprised looking sea-gull camped on the very top of it. Its
round eyes, fixed on me so inquiringly, were almost too much to bear. I
had a dreadful impulse to shoo it away, or to lean forward and inform her
of its presence...

"Excusez-moi, madame, but perhaps you have not remarked there is an
espèce de sea-gull coucbé sur votre chapeau."

Could the bird be there on purpose? I must not laugh...I must not laugh.
Had she ever looked at herself in a glass with that bird on her head?

"It is very difficult to get into X at present, to pass the station," she
said, and she shook her head with the sea-gull at me. "Ah, such an
affair. One must sign one's name and state one's business."

"Really, is it as bad as all that?"

"But naturally. You see the whole place is in the hands of the military,
and"--she shrugged--"they have to be strict. Many people do not get
beyond the station at all. They arrive. They are put in the waitingroom,
and there they remain."

Did I or did I not detect in her voice a strange, insulting relish?

"I suppose such strictness is absolutely necessary," I said coldly,
stroking my muff.

"Necessary," she cried. "I should think so. Why, mademoiselle, you cannot
imagine what it would be like otherwise! You know what women are like
about soldiers"--she raised a final hand--"mad, completely mad. But--" and
she gave a little laugh of triumph--"they could not get into X. Mon Dieu,
no! There is no question about that."

"I don't suppose they even try," said I.

"Don't you?" said the sea-gull.

Madame said nothing for a moment. "Of course the authorities are very
hard on the men. It means instant imprisonment, and then--off to the
firing-line without a word."

"What are you going to X for?" said the sea-gull. "What on earth are you
doing here?"

"Are you making a long stay in X, mademoiselle?"

She had won, she had won. I was terrified. A lamp-post swam past the
train with the fatal name upon it. I could hardly breathe--the train had
stopped. I smiled gaily at Madame and danced down the steps to the
platform...

It was a hot little room completely furnished with two colonels seated at
two tables. They were large grey-whiskered men with a touch of burnt red
on their cheeks. Sumptuous and omnipotent they looked. One smoked what
ladies love to call a heavy Egyptian cigarette, with a long creamy ash,
the other toyed with a gilded pen. Their heads rolled on their tight
collars, like big over-ripe fruits. I had a terrible feeling, as I handed
my passport and ticket, that a soldier would step forward and tell me to
kneel. I would have knelt without question.

"What's this?" said God i., querulously. He did not like my passport at
all. The very sight of it seemed to annoy him. He waved a dissenting hand
at it, with a "Non, je ne peux pas manger ça" air.

"But it won't do. It won't do at all, you know. Look,--read for
yourself," and he glanced with extreme distaste at my photograph, and
then with even greater distaste his pebble eyes looked at me.

"Of course the photograph is deplorable," I said, scarcely breathing with
terror, "but it has been viséd and viséd."

He raised his big bulk and went over to God ii.

"Courage!" I said to my muff and held it firmly, "Courage!"

God ii. held up a finger to me, and I produced Aunt Julie's letter and
her card. But he did not seem to feel the slightest interest in her. He
stamped my passport idly, scribbled a word on my ticket, and I was on the
platform again.

"That way--you pass out that way."

Terribly pale, with a faint smile on his lips, his hand at salute, stood
the little corporal. I gave no sign, I am sure I gave no sign. He stepped
behind me.

"And then follow me as though you do not see me," I heard him half
whisper, half sing.

How fast he went, through the slippery mud towards a bridge. He had a
postman's bag on his back, a paper parcel and the Matin in his hand. We
seemed to dodge through a maze of policemen, and I could not keep up at
all with the little corporal who began to whistle. From the toll-house
"our good friend, Madame Grinçon," her hands wrapped in a shawl, watched
our coming, and against the toll-house there leaned a tiny faded cab.
Montez vite, vite! said the little corporal, hurling my suit-case, the
postman's bag, the paper parcel and the Matin on to the floor.

"A-ie! A-ie! Do not be so mad. Do not ride yourself. You will be seen,"
wailed "our good friend, Madame Grinçon."

"Ah, je m'en f..." said the little corporal.

The driver jerked into activity. He lashed the bony horse and away we
flew, both doors, which were the complete sides of the cab, flapping and
banging

    "Bon jour, mon amie."
    "Bon jour, mon ami."

And then we swooped down and clutched at the banging doors. They would
not keep shut. They were fools of doors.

"Lean back, let me do it!" I cried.

"Policemen are as thick as violets everywhere."

At the barracks the horse reared up and stopped. A crowd of laughing
faces blotted the window.

"Prends ça, mon vieux," said the little corporal, handing the paper
parcel.

"It's all right," called someone.

We waved, we were off again. By a river, down a strange white street,
with little houses on either side, gay in the late sunlight.

"Jump out as soon as he stops again. The door will be open. Run straight
inside. I will follow. The man is already paid. I know you will like the
house. It is quite white, And the room is white, too, and the people
are--"

"White as snow."

We looked at each other. We began to laugh. "Now," said the little
corporal.

Out I flew and in at the door. There stood, presumably, my aunt Julie.
There in the background hovered, I supposed, my uncle Paul.

"Bon jour, madame!" "Bon jour, monsieur!"

"It is all right, you are safe," said my aunt Julie. Heavens, how I loved
her! And she opened the door of the white room and shut it upon us. Down
went the suit-case, the postman's bag, the Matin. I threw my passport up
into the air, and the little corporal caught it.

What an extraordinary thing. We had been there to lunch and to dinner
each day; but now in the dusk and alone I could not find it. I
clop-clopped in my borrowed sabots through the greasy mud, right to the
end of the village, and there was not a sign of it. I could not even
remember what it looked like, or if there was a name painted on the
outside, or any bottles or tables showing at the window. Already the
village houses were sealed for the night behind big wooden shutters.
Strange and mysterious they looked in the ragged drifting light and thin
rain, like a company of beggars perched on the hill-side, their bosoms
full of rich unlawful gold. There was nobody about but the soldiers. A
group of wounded stood under a lamp-post, petting a mangy, shivering dog.
Up the street came four big boys singing:

Dodo, mon homme, fais vit' dodo...

and swung off down the hill to their sheds behind the railway station.
They seemed to take the last breath of the day with them. I began to walk
slowly back.

"It must have been one of these houses. I remember it stood far back from
the road--and there were no steps, not even a porch--one seemed to walk
right through the window."

And then quite suddenly the waiting-boy came out of just such a place. He
saw me and grinned cheerfully, and began to whistle through his teeth.

"Bon soir, mon petit."

"Bon soir, madame." And he followed me up the café to our special table,
right at the far end by the window, and marked by a bunch of violets that
I had left in a glass there yesterday.

"You are two?" asked the waiting-boy, flicking the table with a red and
white cloth. His long swinging steps echoed over the bare floor. He
disappeared into the kitchen and came back to light the lamp that hung
from the ceiling under a spreading shade, like a haymaker's hat. Warm
light shone on the empty place that was really a barn, set out with
dilapidated tables and chairs. Into the middle of the room a black stove
jutted. At one side of it there was a table with a row of bottles on it,
behind which Madame sat and took the money and made entries in a red
book. Opposite her desk a door led into the kitchen. The walls were
covered with a creamy paper patterned all over with green and swollen
trees--hundreds and hundreds of trees reared their mushroom heads to the
ceiling. I began to wonder who had chosen the paper and why. Did Madame
think it was beautiful, or that it was a gay and lovely thing to eat
one's dinner at all seasons in the middle of a forest...On either side of
the clock there hung a picture: one, a young gentleman in black tights
wooing a pear-shaped lady in yellow over the back of a garden seat,
Premier Rencontre; two, the black and yellow in amorous confusion,
Triomphe d'Amour.

The clock ticked to a soothing lilt, C'est ça, c'est ça. In the kitchen
the waiting-boy was washing up. I heard the ghostly chatter of the
dishes.

And years passed. Perhaps the war is long since over--there is no village
outside at all--the streets are quiet under the grass. I have an idea
this is the sort of thing one will do on the very last day of all--sit in
an empty café and listen to a clock ticking until--.

Madame came through the kitchen door, nodded to me and took her seat
behind the table, her plump hands folded on the red book. Ping went the
door. A handful of soldiers came in, took off their coats and began to
play cards, chaffing and poking fun at the pretty waiting-boy, who threw
up his little round head, rubbed his thick fringe out of his eyes and
cheeked them back in his broken voice. Sometimes his voice boomed up from
his throat, deep and harsh, and then in the middle of a sentence it broke
and scattered in a funny squeaking. He seemed to enjoy it himself. You
would not have been surprised if he had walked into the kitchen on his
hands and brought back your dinner turning a catherine-wheel.

Ping went the door again. Two more men came in. They sat at the table
nearest Madame, and she leaned to them with a birdlike movement, her head
on one side. Oh, they had a grievance! The Lieutenant was a fool--nosing
about--springing out at them--and they'd only been sewing on buttons.
Yes, that was all--sewing on buttons, and up comes this young spark. "Now
then, what are you up to?" They mimicked the idiotic voice. Madame drew
down her mouth, nodding sympathy. The waiting-boy served them with
glasses. He took a bottle of some orangecoloured stuff and put it on the
table-edge. A shout from the card-players made him turn sharply, and
crash! over went the bottle, spilling on the table, the floor--smash! to
tinkling atoms. An amazed silence. Through it the drip-drip of the wine
from the table on to the floor. It looked very strange dropping so
slowly, as though the table were crying. Then there came a roar from the
card-players. "You'll catch it, my lad! That's the style! Now you've done
it!...Sept, huit, neuf." They started playing again. The waiting-boy
never said a word. He stood, his head bent, his hands spread out, and
then he knelt and gathered up the glass, piece by piece, and soaked the
wine up with a cloth. Only when Madame cried cheerfully, "You wait until
be finds out," did he raise his head.

"He can't say anything, if I pay for it," he muttered, his face jerking,
and he marched off into the kitchen with the soaking cloth.

"Il pleure de colére," said Madame delightedly, patting her hair with her
plump hands.

The café slowly filled. It grew very warm. Blue smoke mounted from the
tables and hung about the haymaker's hat in misty wreaths. There was a
suffocating smell of onion soup and boots and damp cloth. In the din the
door sounded again. It opened to let in a weed of a fellow, who stood
with his back against it, one hand shading his eyes.

"Hullo! you've got the bandage off?"

"How does it feel, mon vieux?"

"Let's have a look at them."

But he made no reply. He shrugged and walked unsteadily to a table, sat
down and leant against the wall. Slowly his hand fell. In his white face
his eyes showed, pink as a rabbit's. They brimmed and spilled, brimmed
and spilled. He dragged a white cloth out of his pocket and wiped them.

"It's the smoke," said someone. "It's the smoke tickles them up for you."

His comrades watched him a bit, watched his eyes fill again, again brim
over. The water ran down his face, off his chin on to the table. He
rubbed the place with his coat-sleeve, and then, as though forgetful,
went on rubbing, rubbing with his hand across the table, staring in front
of him. And then he started shaking his head to the movement of his hand.
He gave a loud strange groan and dragged out the cloth again.

"Huit, neuf, dix," said the card-players.

"P'tit, some more bread."

"Two coffees."

"Un Picon!"

The waiting-boy, quite recovered, but with scarlet cheeks, ran to and
fro. A tremendous quarrel flared up among the card-players, raged for two
minutes, and died in flickering laughter. "Ooof!" groaned the man with
the eyes, rocking and mopping. But nobody paid any attention to him
except Madame. She made a little grimace at her two soldiers.

"Mais vous savez, c'est un peu dégoûtant, ça," she said severely.

"Ab, oui, Madame," answered the soldiers, watching her bent head and
pretty hands, as she arranged for the hundredth time a frill of lace on
her lifted bosom.

"V'là monsieur!" cawed the waiting-boy over his shoulder to me. For some
silly reason I pretended not to hear, and I leaned over the table
smelling the violets, until the little corporal's hand closed over mine.

"Shall we have un peu de charcuterie to begin with?" he asked tenderly.

"In England," said the blue-eyed soldier, "you drink whiskey with your
meals. N'est-ce pas, mademoiselle? A little glass of whiskey neat before
eating. Whiskey and soda with your bifteks, and after, more whiskey with
hot water and lemon."

"Is it true, that?" asked his great friend who sat opposite, a big
red-faced chap with a black beard and large moist eyes and hair that
looked as though it had been cut with a sewingmachine.

"Well, not quite true," said I.

"Si, si," cried the blue-eyed soldier. "I ought to know. I'm in business.
English travellers come to my place, and it's always the same thing."

"Bah, I can't stand whiskey," said the little corporal. "It's too
disgusting the morning after. Do you remember, ma fille, the whiskey in
that little bar at Montmartre?"

"Souvenir tendre," sighed Blackbeard, putting two fingers in the breast
of his coat and letting his head fall. He was very drunk.

"But I know something that you've never tasted," said the blue-eyed
soldier pointing a finger at me; "something really good."

Cluck he went with his tongue. "É-patant! And the curious thing is that
you'd hardly know it from whiskey except that it's"--he felt with his
hand for the word--"finer, sweeter perhaps, not so sharp, and it leaves
you feeling gay as a rabbit next morning."

"What is it called?"

"Mirabelle!" He rolled the word round his mouth, under his tongue.
"Ah-ha, that's the stuff."

"I could eat another mushroom," said Blackbeard. "I would like another
mushroom very much. I am sure I could eat another mushroom if
Mademoiselle gave it to me out of her hand."

"You ought to try it," said the blue-eyed soldier, leaning both hands on
the table and speaking so seriously that I began to wonder how much more
sober he was than Blackbeard. "You ought to try it, and to-night. I would
like you to tell me if you don't think it's like whiskey."

"Perhaps they've got it here," said the little corporal, and he called
the waiting-boy. "P'tit!"

"Non, monsieur," said the boy, who never stopped smiling. He served us
with dessert plates painted with blue parrots and horned beetles.

"What is the name for this in English?" said Blackbeard, pointing. I told
him "Parrot."

"Ah, mon Dieu!...Pair-rot..." He put his arms round his plate. "I love
you, ma petite pair-rot. You are sweet, you are blonde, you are English.
You do not know the difference between whiskey and mirabelle."

The little corporal and I looked at each other, laughing. He squeezed up
his eyes when he laughed, so that you saw nothing but the long curly
lashes.

"Well, I know a place where they do keep it," said the blue-eyed soldier.
"Café des Amis. We'll go there--I'll pay--I'll pay for the whole lot of
us." His gesture embraced thousands of pounds.

But with a loud whirring noise the clock on the wall struck half-past
eight; and no soldier is allowed in a café after eight o'clock at night.

"It is fast," said the blue-eyed soldier. The little corporal's watch
said the same. So did the immense turnip that Blackbeard produced, and
carefully deposited on the head of one of the horned beetles.

"Ah, well, we'll take the risk," said the blue-eyed soldier, and he
thrust his arms into his immense cardboard coat. "It's worth it," he
said. "It's worth it. You just wait."

Outside, stars shone between wispy clouds, and the moon fluttered like a
candle flame over a pointed spire. The shadows of the dark plume-like
trees waved on the white houses. Not a soul to be seen. No sound to be
heard but the Hsh! Hsh! of a far-away train, like a big beast shuffling
in its sleep.

"You are cold," whispered the little corporal. "You are cold, ma fille."

"No, really not."

"But you are trembling."

"Yes, but I'm not cold."

"What are the women like in England?" asked Blackbeard. "After the war is
over I shall go to England. I shall find a little English woman and marry
her--and her pair-rot." He gave a loud choking laugh.

"Fool!" said the blue-eyed soldier, shaking him; and he leant over to me.
"It is only after the second glass that you really taste it," he
whispered. "The second little glass and then--ah!--then you know."

Café des Amis gleamed in the moonlight. We glanced quickly up and down
the road. We ran up the four wooden steps, and opened the ringing glass
door into a low room lighted with a hanging lamp, where about ten people
were dining. They were seated on two benches at a narrow table.

"Soldiers!" screamed a woman, leaping up from behind a white
soup-tureen--a scrag of a woman in a black shawl. "Soldiers! At this
hour! Look at that clock, look at it." And she pointed to the clock with
the dripping ladle.

"It's fast," said the blue-eyed soldier. It's fast, madame. And don't
make so much noise, I beg of you. We will drink and we will go."

"Will you?" she cried, running round the table and planting herself in
front of us. "That's just what you won't do. Coming into an honest
woman's house this hour of the night--making a scene--getting the police
after you. Ah, no! Ah, no! It's a disgrace, that's what it is."

"Sh!" said the little corporal, holding up his hand. Dead silence. In the
silence we heard steps passing.

"The police," whispered Blackbeard, winking at a pretty girl with rings
in her ears, who smiled back at him, saucy. "Sh!"

The faces lifted, listening. "How beautiful they are!" I thought. "They
are like a family party having supper in the New Testament..." The steps
died away.

"Serve you very well right if you had been caught," scolded the angry
woman. "I'm sorry on your account that the police didn't come. You
deserve it--you deserve it."

"A little glass of mirabelle and we will go," persisted the blue-eyed
soldier.

Still scolding and muttering she took four glasses from the cupboard and
a big bottle.

"But you're not going to drink in here. Don't you believe it." The little
corporal ran into the kitchen. "Not there! Not there!"

Idiot!" she cried. "Can't you see there's a window there, and a wall
opposite where the police come every evening to..."

"Sh!" Another scare.

"You are mad and you will end in prison,--all four of you," said the
woman. She flounced out of the room. We tiptoed after her into a dark
smelling scullery, full of pans of greasy water, of salad leaves and
meat-bones.

"There now," she said, putting down the glasses. "Drink and go!"

"Ah, at last!" The blue-eyed soldier's happy voice trickled through the
dark. "What do you think? Isn't it just as I said? Hasn't it got a taste
of excellent--ex-cellent whiskey?"

(1915)



SPRING PICTURES


I


It is raining. Big soft drops splash on the people's hands and cheeks;
immense warm drops like melted stars. "Here are roses! Here are lilies!
Here are violets!" caws the old hag in the gutter. But the lilies,
bunched together in a frill of green, look more like faded cauliflowers.
Up and down she drags the creaking barrow. A bad, sickly smell comes from
it. Nobody wants to buy. You must walk in the middle of the road, for
there is no room on the pavement. Every single shop brims over; every
shop shows a tattered frill of soiled lace and dirty ribbon to charm and
entice you. There are tables set out with toy cannons and soldiers and
Zeppelins and photograph frames complete with ogling beauties. There are
immense baskets of yellow straw hats piled up like pyramids of pastry,
and strings of coloured boots and shoes so small that nobody could wear
them. One shop is full of little squares of mackintosh, blue ones for
girls and pink ones for boys with Bébé printed in the middle of each...

"Here are lilies! Here are roses! Here are pretty violets!" warbles the
old hag, bumping into another barrow. But this barrow is still. It is
heaped with lettuces. Its owner, a fat old woman, sprawls across, fast
asleep, her nose in the lettuce roots...Who is ever going to buy anything
here...? The sellers are women. They sit on little canvas stools, dreamy
and vacant looking. Now and again one of them gets up and takes a feather
duster, like a smoky torch, and flicks it over a thing or two and then
sits down again. Even the old man in tangerine spectacles with a balloon
of a belly, who turns the revolving stand of 'comic' postcards round and
round cannot decide...

Suddenly, from the empty shop at the corner a piano strikes up, and a
violin and flute join in. The windows of the shop are scrawled over--New
Songs. First Floor. Entrance Free. But the windows of the first floor
being open, nobody bothers to go up. They hang about grinning as the
harsh voices float out into the warm rainy air. At the doorway there
stands a lean man in a pair of burst carpet slippers. He has stuck a
feather through the broken rim of his hat; with what an air he wears it!
The feather is magnificent. It is gold epaulettes, frogged coat, white
kid gloves, gilded cane. He swaggers under it and the voice rolls off his
chest, rich and ample.

"Come up! Come up! Here are the new songs! Each singer is an artiste of
European reputation. The orchestra is famous and second to none. You can
stay as long as you like. It is the chance of a lifetime, and once missed
never to return!" But nobody moves. Why should they? They know all about
those girls--those famous artistes. One is dressed in cream cashmere and
one in blue. Both have dark crimped hair and a pink rose pinned over the
ear...They know all about the pianist's button boots--the left foot--the
pedal foot--burst over the bunion on his big toe. The violinist's bitten
nails, the long, far too long cuffs of the flute player--all these things
are as old as the new songs.

For a long time the music goes on and the proud voice thunders. Then
somebody calls down the stairs and the showman, still with his grand air,
disappears. The voices cease. The piano, the violin and the flute dribble
into quiet. Only the lace curtain gives a wavy sign of life from the
first floor.

It is raining still; it is getting dusky...Here are roses! Here are
lilies! Who will buy my violets?...


II.


Hope! You misery--you sentimental, faded female! Break your last string
and have done with it. I shall go mad with your endless thrumming; my
heart throbs to it and every little pulse beats in time. It is morning. I
lie in the empty bed--the huge bed big as a field and as cold and
unsheltered. Through the shutters the sunlight comes up from the river
and flows over the ceiling in trembling waves. I hear from outside a
hammer tapping, and far below in the house a door swings open and shuts.
Is this my room? Are those my clothes folded over an armchair? Under the
pillow, sign and symbol of a lonely woman, ticks my watch. The bell
jangles. Ah! At last! I leap out of bed and run to the door. Play
faster--faster--Hope!

"Your milk, Mademoiselle," says the concierge, gazing at me severely.

"Ah, thank you," I cry, gaily swinging the milk bottle. "No letters for
me?"

"Nothing, mademoiselle."

"But the postman--he has called already?"

"A long half-hour ago, mademoiselle."

Shut the door. Stand in the little passage a moment. Listen--listen for
her hated twanging. Coax her--court her--implore her to play just once
that charming little thing for one string only. In vain.


III.


Across the river, on the narrow stone path that fringes the bank, a woman
is walking. She came down the steps from the Quay, walking slowly, one
hand on her hip. It is a beautiful evening; the sky is the colour of
lilac and the river of violet leaves. There are big bright trees along
the path full of trembling light, and the boats, dancing up and down,
send heavy curls of foam rippling almost to her feet. Now she has
stopped. Now she has turned suddenly. She is leaning up against a tree,
her hands over her face; she is crying. And now she is walking up and
down wringing her hands. Again she leans against the tree, her back
against it, her head raised and her hands clasped as though she leaned
against someone dear. Round her shoulders she wears a little grey shawl;
she covers her face with the ends of it and rocks to and fro.

But one cannot cry for ever, so at last she becomes serious and quiet,
patting her hair into place, smoothing her apron. She walks a step or
two. No, too soon, too soon! Again her arms fly up--she runs back--again
she is blotted against the tall tree. Squares of gold light show in the
houses; the street lamps gleam through the new leaves; yellow fans of
light follow the dancing boats. For a moment she is a blur against the
tree, white, grey and black, melting into the stones and the shadows. And
then she is gone.

(1915)



LATE AT NIGHT


(Virginia is seated by the fire. Her outdoor things are thrown on a
chair; her boots are faintly steaming in the fender.)

Virginia (laying the letter down): I don't like this letter at all--not
at all. I wonder if he means it to be so snubbing--or if it's just his
way. (Reads). "Many thanks for the socks. As I have had five pairs sent
me lately, I am sure you will be pleased to hear I gave yours to a friend
in my company." No; it can't be my fancy. He must have meant it; it is a
dreadful snub.

Oh, I wish I hadn't sent him that letter telling him to take care of
himself. I'd give anything to have that letter back. I wrote it on a
Sunday evening, too--that was so fatal. I never ought to write letters on
Sunday evenings--I always let myself go so. I can't think why Sunday
evenings always have such a funny effect on me. I simply yearn to have
someone to write to--or to love. Yes, that's it; they make me feel sad
and full of love. Funny, isn't it!

I must start going to church again; it's fatal sitting in front of the
fire and thinking. There are the hymns, too; one can let oneself go so
safely in the hymns. (She croons) "And then for those our Dearest and our
Best"--(but her eye lights on the next sentence in the letter). "It was
most kind of you to have knitted them yourself." Really! Really, that is
too much! Men are abominably arrogant! He actually imagines that I
knitted them myself. Why, I hardly know him; I've only spoken to him a
few times. Why on earth should I knit him socks? He must think I am far
gone to throw myself at his head like that. For it certainly is throwing
oneself at a man's head to knit him socks--if he's almost a stranger.
Buying him an odd pair is a different matter altogether. No; I shan't
write to him again--that's definite. And, besides, what would be the use?
I might get really keen on him and he'd never care a straw for me. Men
don't.

I wonder why it is that after a certain point I always seem to repel
people. Funny, isn't it! They like me at first; they think me uncommon,
or original; but then immediately I want to show them--even give them a
hint--that I like them, they seem to get frightened and begin to
disappear. I suppose I shall get embittered about it later on. Perhaps
they know somehow that I've got so much to give. Perhaps it's that that
frightens them. Oh, I feel I've got such boundless, boundless love to
give to somebody--I would care for somebody so utterly and so
completely--watch over them--keep everything horrible away--and make them
feel that if ever they wanted anything done I lived to do it. If only I
felt that somebody wanted me, that I was of use to somebody, I should
become a different person. Yes; that is the secret of life for me--to
feel loved, to feel wanted, to know that somebody leaned on me for
everything absolutely--for ever. And I am strong, and far, far richer
than most women. I am sure that most women don't have this tremendous
yearning to--express themselves. I suppose that's it--to come into
flower, almost. I'm all folded and shut away in the dark, and nobody
cares. I suppose that is why I feel this tremendous tenderness for plants
and sick animals and birds--it's one way of getting rid of this wealth,
this burden of love. And then, of course, they are so helpless--that's
another thing. But I have a feeling that if a man were really in love
with you he'd be just as helpless, too. Yes, I am sure that men are very
helpless...

I don't know why, I feel inclined to cry tonight. Certainly not because
of this letter; it isn't half important enough. But I keep wondering if
things will ever change or if I shall go on like this until I am
old--just wanting and wanting. I'm not as young as I was even now. I've
got lines, and my skin isn't a bit what it used to be. I never was really
pretty, not in the ordinary way, but I did have lovely skin and lovely
hair--and I walked well. I only caught sight of myself in a glass
to-day--stooping and shuffling along...I looked dowdy and elderly. Well,
no; perhaps not quite as bad as that; I always exaggerate about myself.
But I'm faddy about things now--that's a sign of age, I'm sure. The
wind--I can't bear being blown about in the wind now; and I hate having
wet feet. I never used to care about those things--I used almost to revel
in them--they made me feel so one with Nature in a way. But now I get
cross and I want to cry and I yearn for something to make me forget. I
suppose that's why women take to drink. Funny, isn't it!

The fire is going out. I'll burn this letter. What's it to me? Pooh! I
don't care. What is it to me? The five other women can send him socks!
And I don't suppose he was a bit what I imagined. I can just hear him
saying, "It was most kind of you, to have knitted them yourself." He has
a fascinating voice. I think it was his voice that attracted me to
him--and his hands; they looked so strong--they were such man's hands.
Oh, well, don't sentimentalise over it; burn it!...No, I can't now--the
fire's gone out. I'll go to bed. I wonder if he really meant to be
snubbing. Oh, I am tired. Often when I go to bed now I want to pull the
clothes over my head--and just cry. Funny, isn't it!

(1917)



TWO TUPPENNY ONES, PLEASE


Lady: Yes, there is, dear; there's plenty of room. If the lady next to me
would move her seat and sit opposite...Would you mind? So that my friend
may sit next to me...Thank you so much! Yes, dear, both the cars on war
work; I'm getting quite used to 'buses. Of course, if we go to the
theatre, I 'phone Cynthia. She's still got one car. Her chauffeur's been
called up...Ages ago...Killed by now, I think. I can't quite remember. I
don't like her new man at all. I don't mind taking any reasonable risk,
but he's so obstinate--he charges everything he sees. Heaven alone knows
what would happen if he rushed into something that wouldn't swerve aside.
But the poor creature's got a withered arm, and something the matter with
one of his feet, I believe she told me. I suppose that's what makes him
so careless. I mean--well!...Don't you know!...

Friend...?

Lady. Yes, she's sold it. My dear, it was far too small. There were only
ten bedrooms, you know. There were only ten bedrooms in that house.
Extraordinary! One wouldn't believe it from the outside--would one? And
with the governesses and the nurses--and so on. All the menservants had
to sleep out...You know what that means.

Friend...!!

Conductor. Fares, please. Pass your fares along.

Lady. How much is it? Tuppence, isn't it? Two tuppenny ones, please.
Don't bother--I've got some coppers, somewhere or other.

Friend...!

Lady. No, it's all right. I've got some--if only I can find them.

Conductor. Parse your fares, please.

Friend...!

Lady. Really? So I did. I remember now. Yes, I paid coming. Very well,
I'll let you, just this once. War time, my dear.

Conductor. 'Ow far do you want ter go?

Lady. To the Boltons.

Conductor. Another 'a'penny each.

Lady. No--oh, no! I only paid tuppence coming. Are you quite sure?

Conductor (savagely). Read it on the board for yourself.

Lady. Oh, very well. Here's another penny. (To friend): "Isn't it
extraordinary how disobliging these men are? After all, he's paid to do
his job. But they are nearly all alike. I've heard these motor 'buses
affect the spine after a time. I suppose that's it...You've heard about
Teddie--haven't you?"

Friend...

Lady. He's got his...He's got his...Now what is it? Whatever can it be?
How ridiculous of me!

Friend...?

Lady. Oh, no! He's been a Major for ages.

Friend...?

Lady. Colonel? Oh, no, my dear, it's something much higher than that. Not
his company--he's had his company a long time. Not his battalion...

Friend...?

Lady. Regiment! Yes, I believe it is his regiment. But what I was going
to say is he's been made a...Oh, how silly I am! What's higher than a
Brigadier-General? Yes, I believe that's it. Chief of Staff. Of course,
Mrs. T.'s frightfully gratified.

Friend...

Lady. Oh, my dear, everybody goes over the top nowadays. Whatever his
position may be. And Teddy is such a sport, I really don't see how...Too
dreadful--isn't it!

Friend...?

Lady. Didn't you know? She's at the War Office, and doing very well. I
believe she got a rise the other day. She's something to do with
notifying the deaths, or finding the missing. I don't know exactly what
it is. At any rate, she says it is too depressing for words, and she has
to read the most heartrending letters from parents, and so on. Happily,
they're a very cheery little group in her room--all officers' wives, and
they make their own tea, and get cakes in turn from Stewart's. She has
one afternoon a week off, when she shops or has her hair waved. Last time
she and I went to see Yvette's Spring Show.

Friend...?

Lady. No, not really. I'm getting frightfully sick of these coat-frocks,
aren't you? I mean, as I was saying to her, what is the use of paying an
enormous price for having one made by Yvette, when you can't really tell
the difference, in the long run, between it and one of those cheap
ready-made ones. Of course, one has the satisfaction for oneself of
knowing that the material is good, and so on--but it looks nothing. No; I
advised her to get a good coat and skirt. For, after all, a good coat and
skirt always tells. Doesn't it?

Friend...!

Lady. Yes, I didn't tell her that--but that's what I had in mind. She's
much too fat for those coat-frocks. She goes out far too much at the
hips. I half ordered a rather lovely indefinite blue one for myself,
trimmed with the new lobster red...I've lost my good Kate, you know.

Friend...!

Lady. Yes, isn't it annoying! Just when I got her more or less trained.
But she went off her head, like they all do nowadays, and decided that
she wanted to go into munitions. I told her when she gave notice that she
would go on the strict understanding that if she got a job (which I think
is highly improbable), she was not to come back and disturb the other
servants.

Conductor (savagely). Another penny each, if you're going on.

Lady. Oh, we're there. How extraordinary! I never should have noticed...

Friend...?

Lady. Tuesday? Bridge on Tuesday? No, dear, I'm afraid I can't manage
Tuesday. I trot out the wounded every Tuesday you know. I let cook take
them to the Zoo, or some place like that--don't you know. Wednesday--I'm
perfectly free on Wednesday.

Conductor. It'll be Wednesday before you get off the 'bus if you don't
'urry up.

Lady. That's quite enough, my man.

Friend...!!

(1917)



THE BLACK CAP


(A lady and her husband are seated at breakfast. He is quite calm,
reading the newspaper and eating; but she is strangely excited, dressed
for travelling, and only pretending to eat.)

She. Oh, if you should want your flannel shirts, they are on the
right-hand bottom shelf of the linen press.

He (at a board meeting of the Meat Export Company). No.

She. You didn't hear what I said. I said if you should want your flannel
shirts, they are on the right-hand bottom shelf of the linen press.

He (positively). I quite agree!

She. It does seem rather extraordinary that on the very morning that I am
going away you cannot leave the newspaper alone for five minutes.

He (mildly). My dear woman, I don't want you to go. In fact, I have asked
you not to go. I can't for the life of me see...

She. You know perfectly well that I am only going because I absolutely
must. I've been putting it off and putting it off, and the dentist said
last time...

He. Good! Good! Don't let's go over the ground again. We've thrashed it
out pretty thoroughly, haven't we?

Servant. Cab's here, m'm.

She. Please put my luggage in.

Servant. Very good, m'm.

(She gives a tremendous sigh.)

He. You haven't got too much time if you want to catch that train.

She. I know. I'm going. (In a changed tone.) Darling, don't let us part
like this. It makes me feel so wretched. Why is it that you always seem
to take a positive delight in spoiling my enjoyment?

He. I don't think going to the dentist is so positively enjoyable.

She. Oh, you know that's not what I mean. You're only saying that to hurt
me. You know you are begging the question.

He (laughing). And you are losing your train. You'll be back on Thursday
evening, won't you?

She (in a low, desperate voice). Yes, on Thursday evening. Good-bye,
then. (Comes over to him, and takes his head in her hands.) Is there
anything really the matter? Do at least look at me. Don't
you--care--at--all?

He. My darling girl! This is like an exit on the cinema.

She (letting her hands fall). Very well. Good-bye. (Gives a quick tragic
glance round the dining-room and goes.)

(On the way to the station.)

She. How strange life is! I didn't think I should feel like this at all.
All the glamour seems to have gone, somehow. Oh, I'd give anything for
the cab to turn round and go back. The most curious thing is that I feel
if he really had made me believe he loved me it would have been much
easier to have left him. But that's absurd. How strong the hay smells.
It's going to be a very hot day. I shall never see these fields again.
Never! never! But in another way I am glad that it happened like this; it
puts me so finally, absolutely in the right for ever! He doesn't want a
woman at all. A woman has no meaning for him. He's not the type of man to
care deeply for anybody except himself. I've become the person who
remembers to take the links out of his shirts before they go to the
wash--that is all! And that's not enough for me. I'm young--I'm too
proud. I'm not the type of woman to vegetate in the country and rave over
"our" own lettuces...

What you have been trying to do, ever since you married me is to make me
submit, to turn me into your shadow, to rely on me so utterly that you'd
only to glance up to find the right time printed on me somehow, as if I
were a clock. You have never been curious about me; you never wanted to
explore my soul. No; you wanted me to settle down to your peaceful
existence. Oh! how your blindness has outraged me--how I hate you for it!
I am glad--thankful--thankful to have left you! I'm not a green girl; I
am not conceited, but I do know my powers. It's not for nothing that I've
always longed for riches and passion and freedom, and felt that they were
mine by right. (She leans against the buttoned back of the cab and
murmurs.) "You are a Queen. Let mine be the joy of giving you your
kingdom." (She smiles at her little royal hands.) I wish my heart didn't
beat so hard. It really hurts me. It tires me so and excites me so. It's
like someone in a dreadful hurry beating against a door...This cab is
only crawling along; we shall never be at the station at this rate.
Hurry! Hurry! My love, I am coming as quickly as ever I can. Yes, I am
suffering just like you. It's dreadful, isn't it unbearable--this last
half-hour without each other...Oh, God! the horse has begun to walk
again. Why doesn't he beat the great strong brute of a thing...Our
wonderful life! We shall travel all over the world together. The whole
world shall be ours because of our love. Oh, be patient! I am coming as
fast as I possibly can...Ah, now it's downhill; now we really are going
faster. (An old man attempts to cross the road.) Get out of my way, you
old fool! He deserves to be run over...Dearest--dearest; I am nearly
there. Only be patient!

(At the station.)

Put it in a first-class smoker...There's plenty of time after all. A full
ten minutes before the train goes. No wonder he's not here. I mustn't
appear to be looking for him. But I must say I'm disappointed. I never
dreamed of being the first to arrive. I thought he would have been here
and engaged a carriage and bought papers and flowers...How curious! I
absolutely saw in my mind a paper of pink carnations...He knows how fond
I am of carnations. But pink ones are not my favourites. I prefer dark
red or pale yellow. He really will be late if he doesn't come now. The
guard has begun to shut the doors. Whatever can have happened? Something
dreadful. Perhaps at the last moment he has shot himself...I could not
bear the thought of ruining your life...But you are not ruining my life.
Ah, where are you? I shall have to get into the carriage...Who is this?
That's not him! It can't be--yes, it is. What on earth has he got on his
head? A black cap. But how awful! He's utterly changed. What can he be
wearing a black cap for? I wouldn't have known him. How absurd he looks
coming towards me, smiling, in that appalling cap!

He. My darling, I shall never forgive myself. But the most absurd,
tragic-comic thing happened. (They get into the carriage.) I lost my hat.
It simply disappeared. I had half the hotel looking for it. Not a sign!
So finally, in despair, I had to borrow this from another man who was
staying there. (The train moves off.) You're not angry. (Tries to take
her in his arms.)

She. Don't! We're not even out of the station yet.

He (ardently). Great God! What do I care if the whole world were to see
us? (Tries to take her in his arms.) My wonder! My joy!

She. Please don't! I hate being kissed in trains.

He (profoundly hurt). Oh, very well. You are angry. It's serious. You
can't get over the fact that I was late. But if you only knew the agony I
suffered...

She. How can you think I could be so small-minded? I am not angry at all.

He. Then why won't you let me kiss you?

She (laughing hysterically). You look so different somehow--almost a
stranger.

He (jumps up and looks at himself in the glass anxiously, and fatuously,
she decides). But it's all right, isn't it?

She. Oh, quite all right; perfectly all right. Oh, oh, oh! (She begins to
laugh and cry with rage.)

(They arrive).

She (while he gets a cab). I must get over this. It's an obsession. It's
incredible that anything should change a man so. I must tell him. Surely
it's quite simple to say: Don't you think now that you are in the city
you had better buy yourself a hat? But that will make him realise how
frightful the cap has been. And the extraordinary thing is that he
doesn't realise it himself. I mean if he has looked at himself in the
glass, and doesn't think that cap too ridiculous, how different our
points of view must be...How deeply different! I mean, if I had seen him
in the street I would have said I could not possibly love a man who wore
a cap like that. I couldn't even have got to know him. He isn't my style
at all. (She looks round.) Everybody is smiling at it. Well, I don't
wonder! The way it makes his ears stick out, and the way it makes him
have no back to his head at all.

He. The cab is ready, my darling. (They get in.)

He (tries to take her hand). The miracle that we two should be driving
together, so simply, like this.

(She arranges her veil.)

He (tries to take her hand, very ardent). I'll engage one room, my love.

She. Oh, no! Of course you must take two.

He. But don't you think it would be wiser not to create suspicion?

She. I must have my own room. (To herself.) You can hang your cap behind
your own door! (She begins to laugh hysterically.)

He. Ah! thank God! My queen is her happy self again!

(At the hotel.)

Manager. Yes, Sir, I quite understand. I think I've got the very thing
for you, Sir. Kindly step this way. (He takes them into a small
sitting-room, with a bedroom leading out of it.) This would suit you
nicely, wouldn't it? And if you liked, we could make you up a bed on the
sofa.

He. Oh, admirable! Admirable!

(The Manager goes).

She (furious). But I told you I wanted a room to myself. What a trick to
play upon me! I told you I did not want to share a room. How dare you
treat me like this? (She mimics.) Admirable! Admirable! I shall never
forgive you for that!

He (overcome). Oh, God, what is happening! I don't understand--I'm in the
dark. Why have you suddenly, on this day of days, ceased to love me? What
have I done? Tell me!

She (sinks on the sofa). I'm very tired. If you do love me, please leave
me alone. I--I only want to be alone for a little.

He (tenderly). Very well. I shall try to understand. I do begin to
understand. I'll go out for half-an-hour, and then, my love, you may feel
calmer. (He looks round, distracted.)

She. What is it?

He. My heart--you are sitting on my cap. (She gives a positive scream and
moves into the bedroom. He goes. She waits a moment, and then puts down
her veil, and takes up her suitcase.)

(In the taxi.)

She. Yes, Waterloo. (She leans back.) Ah, I've escaped--I've escaped! I
shall just be in time to catch the afternoon train home. Oh, it's like a
dream--I'll be home before supper. I'll tell him that the city was too
hot or the dentist away. What does it matter? I've a right to my own
home...It will be wonderful driving up from the station; the fields will
smell so delicious. There is cold fowl for supper left over from
yesterday, and orange jelly...I have been mad, but now I am sane again.
Oh, my husband!

(1917)



A SUBURBAN FAIRY TALE


Mr. and Mrs. B. sat at breakfast in the cosy red dining-room of their
"snug little crib just under half-an-hour's run from the City."

There was a good fire in the grate--for the dining-room was the
living-room as well--the two windows overlooking the cold empty garden
patch were closed, and the air smelled agreeably of bacon and eggs, toast
and coffee. Now that this rationing business was really over Mr. B. made
a point of a thoroughly good tuck-in before facing the very real perils
of the day. He didn't mind who knew it--he was a true Englishman about
his breakfast--he had to have it; he'd cave in without it, and if you
told him that these Continental chaps could get through half the
morning's work he did on a roll and a cup of coffee--you simply didn't
know what you were talking about.

Mr. B. was a stout youngish man who hadn't been able--worse luck--to
chuck his job and join the Army; he'd tried for four years to get another
chap to take his place but it was no go. He sat at the head of the table
reading the Daily Mail. Mrs. B. was a youngish plump little body, rather
like a pigeon. She sat opposite, preening herself behind the coffee set
and keeping an eye of warning love on little B. who perched between them,
swathed in a napkin and tapping the top of a soft-boiled egg.

Alas! Little B. was not at all the child that such parents had every
right to expect. He was no fat little trot, no dumpling, no firm little
pudding. He was under-sized for his age, with legs like macaroni, tiny
claws, soft, soft hair that felt like mouse fur, and big wide-open eyes.
For some strange reason everything in life seemed the wrong size for
Little B.--too big and too violent. Everything knocked him over, took the
wind out of his feeble sails and left him gasping and frightened. Mr. and
Mrs. B. were quite powerless to prevent this; they could only pick him up
after the mischief was done--and try to set him going again. And Mrs. B.
loved him as only weak children are loved--and when Mr. B. thought what a
marvellous little chap he was too--thought of the spunk of the little
man, he--well he--by George--he...

"Why aren't there two kinds of eggs?" said Little B. "Why aren't there
little eggs for children and big eggs like what this one is for
grown-ups?"

"Scotch hares," said Mr. B. "Fine Scotch hares for 5s. 3d. How about
getting one, old girl?"

"It would be a nice change, wouldn't it?" said Mrs. B. "Jugged."

And they looked across at each other and there floated between them the
Scotch hare in its rich gravy with stuffing balls and a white pot of
red-currant jelly accompanying it.

"We might have had it for the week-end," said Mrs. B. "But the butcher
has promised me a nice little sirloin and it seems a pity"...Yes, it did
and yet...Dear me, it was very difficult to decide. The hare would have
been such a change--on the other hand, could you beat a really nice
little sirloin?

"There's hare soup, too," said Mr. B. drumming his fingers on the table.
"Best soup in the world!"

"O-Oh!" cried Little B. so suddenly and sharply that it gave them quite a
start--"Look at the whole lot of sparrows flown on to our lawn"--he waved
his spoon. "Look at them," he cried. "Look!" And while he spoke, even
though the windows were closed, they heard a loud shrill cheeping and
chirping from the garden.

"Get on with your breakfast like a good boy, do," said his mother, and
his father said, "You stick to the egg, old man, and look sharp about
it."

"But look at them--look at them all hopping," he cried. "They don't keep
still not for a minute. Do you think they're hungry, father?"

Cheek-a-cheep-cheep-cheek! cried the sparrows.

"Best postpone it perhaps till next week," said Mr. B., "and trust to
luck they're still to be had then."

"Yes, perhaps that would be wiser," said Mrs. B.

Mr. B. picked another plum out of his paper.

"Have you bought any of those controlled dates yet?"

"I managed to get two pounds yesterday," said Mrs. B.

"Well a date pudding's a good thing," said Mr. B. And they looked across
at each other and there floated between them a dark round pudding covered
with creamy sauce. "It would be a nice change, wouldn't it?" said Mrs. B.

Outside on the grey frozen grass the funny eager sparrows hopped and
fluttered. They were never for a moment still. They cried, flapped their
ungainly wings. Little B., his egg finished, got down, took his bread and
marmalade to eat at the window.

"Do let us give them some crumbs," he said. "Do open the window, father,
and throw them something. Father, please!"

"Oh, don't nag, child," said Mrs. B., and his father said--"Can't go
opening windows, old man. You'd get your head bitten off."

"But they're hungry," cried Little B., and the sparrows' little
voices were like ringing of little knives being sharpened.
Cheek-a-cheep-cheep-cheek! they cried.

Little B. dropped his bread and marmalade inside the china flower pot in
front of the window. He slipped behind the thick curtains to see better,
and Mr. and Mrs. B. went on reading about what you could get now without
coupons--no more ration books after May--a glut of cheese--a glut of
it--whole cheeses revolved in the air between them like celestial bodies.

Suddenly as Little B. watched the sparrows on the grey frozen grass, they
grew, they changed, still flapping and squeaking. They turned into tiny
little boys, in brown coats, dancing, jigging outside, up and down
outside the window squeaking, "Want something to eat, want something to
eat!" Little B. held with both hands to the curtain. "Father," he
whispered, "Father! They're not sparrows. They're little boys. Listen,
Father!" But Mr. and Mrs. B. would not hear. He tried again. "Mother," he
whispered. "Look at the little boys. They're not sparrows, Mother!" But
nobody noticed his nonsense.

"All this talk about famine," cried Mr. B., "all a Fake, all a Blind."

With white shining faces, their arms flapping in the big coats, the
little boys danced. "Want something to eat--want something to eat."

"Father," muttered Little B. "Listen, Father! Mother, listen, please!"

"Really!" said Mrs. B. "The noise those birds are making! I've never
heard such a thing."

"Fetch me my shoes, old man," said Mr. B.

Cheek-a-cheep-cheep-cheek! said the sparrows.

Now where had that child got to? "Come and finish your nice cocoa, my
pet," said Mrs. B.

Mr. B. lifted the heavy cloth and whispered, "Come on, Rover," but no
little dog was there.

"He's behind the curtain," said Mrs. B.

"He never went out of the room," said Mr. B.

Mrs. B. went over to the window, and Mr. B. followed. And they looked
out. There on the grey frozen grass, with a white white face, the little
boy's thin arms flapping like wings, in front of them all, the smallest,
tiniest was Little B. Mr. and Mrs. B. heard his voice above all the
voices, "Want something to eat, want something to eat."

Somehow, somehow, they opened the window. "You shall! All of you. Come in
at once. Old man! Little man!"

But it was too late. The little boys were changed into sparrows again,
and away they flew--out of sight--out of call.

(1917)



CARNATION


On those hot days Eve--curious Eve--always carried a flower. She snuffed
it and snuffed it, twirled it in her fingers, laid it against her cheek,
held it to her lips, tickled Katie's neck with it, and ended, finally, by
pulling it to pieces and eating it, petal by petal.

"Roses are delicious, my dear Katie," she would say, standing in the dim
cloak room, with a strange decoration of flowery hats on the hat pegs
behind her--"but carnations are simply divine! They taste like--like--ah
well!" And away her little thin laugh flew, fluttering among those huge,
strange flower heads on the wall behind her. (But how cruel her little
thin laugh was! It had a long sharp beak and claws and two bead eyes,
thought fanciful Katie.)

To-day it was a carnation. She brought a carnation to the French class, a
deep, deep red one, that looked as though it had been dipped in wine and
left in the dark to dry. She held it on the desk before her, half shut
her eyes and smiled.

"Isn't it a darling?" said she. But--

"Un peu de silence, s'il vous plaît," came from M. Hugo. Oh, bother! It
was too hot! Frightfully hot! Grilling simply!

The two square windows of the French Room were open at the bottom and the
dark blinds drawn half way down. Although no air came in, the blind cord
swung out and back and the blind lifted. But really there was not a
breath from the dazzle outside.

Even the girls, in the dusky room, in their pale blouses, with stiff
butterfly-bow hair ribbons perched on their hair, seemed to give off a
warm, weak light, and M. Hugo's white waistcoat gleamed like the belly of
a shark.

Some of the girls were very red in the face and some were white. Vera
Holland had pinned up her black curls à la japonaise with a penholder and
a pink pencil; she looked charming. Francie Owen pushed her sleeves
nearly up to the shoulders, and then she inked the little blue vein in
her elbow, shut her arm together, and then looked to see the mark it
made; she had a passion for inking herself; she always had a face drawn
on her thumb nail, with black, forked hair. Sylvia Mann took off her
collar and tie, took them off simply, and laid them on the desk beside
her, as calm as if she were going to wash her hair in her bedroom at
home. She had a nerve! Jennie Edwards tore a leaf out of her notebook and
wrote "Shall we ask old Hugo-Wugo to give us a thrippenny vanilla on the
way home!!!" and passed it across to Connie Baker, who turned absolutely
purple and nearly burst out crying. All of them lolled and gaped, staring
at the round clock, which seemed to have grown paler, too; the hands
scarcely crawled.

"Un peu de silence, s'il vous plaît," came from M. Hugo. He held up a
puffy hand. "Ladies, as it is so 'ot we will take no more notes to-day,
but I will read you," and he paused and smiled a broad, gentle smile, "a
little French poetry."

"Go--od God!" moaned Francie Owen.

M. Hugo's smile deepened. "Well, Mees Owen, you need not attend. You can
paint yourself. You can 'ave my red ink as well as your black one."

How well they knew the little blue book with red edges that he tugged out
of his coat tail pocket! It had a green silk marker embroidered in
forget-me-nots. They often giggled at it when he handed the book round.
Poor old Hugo-Wugo! He adored reading poetry. He would begin, softly and
calmly, and then gradually his voice would swell and vibrate and gather
itself together, then it would be pleading and imploring and entreating,
and then rising, rising triumphant, until it burst into light, as it
were, and then--gradually again, it ebbed, it grew soft and warm and calm
and died down into nothingness.

The great difficulty was, of course, if you felt at all feeble, not to
get the most awful fit of the giggles. Not because it was funny, really,
but because it made you feel uncomfortable, queer, silly, and somehow
ashamed for old Hugo-Wugo. But--oh dear--if he was going to inflict it on
them in this heat...!

"Courage, my pet," said Eve, kissing the languid carnation.

He began, and most of the girls fell forward, over the desks, their heads
on their arms, dead at the first shot. Only Eve and Katie sat upright and
still. Katie did not know enough French to understand, but Eve sat
listening, her eyebrows raised, her eyes half veiled, and a smile that
was like the shadow of her cruel little laugh, like the wing shadows of
that cruel little laugh fluttering over her lips. She made a warm, white
cup of her fingers--the carnation inside. Oh, the scent! It floated
across to Katie. It was too much. Katie turned away to the dazzling light
outside the window.

Down below, she knew, there was a cobbled courtyard with stable buildings
round it. That was why the French Room always smelled faintly of ammonia.
It wasn't unpleasant; it was even part of the French language for
Katie--something sharp and vivid and--and--biting!

Now she could hear a man clatter over the cobbles and the jing-jang of
the pails he carried. And now Hoo-hor-her! Hoo-hor-her! as he worked the
pump, and a great gush of water followed. Now he was flinging the water
over something, over the wheels of a carriage, perhaps. And she saw the
wheel, propped up, clear of the ground, spinning round, flashing scarlet
and black, with great drops glancing off it. And all the while he worked
the man kept up a high bold whistling, that skimmed over the noise of the
water as a bird skims over the sea. He went away--he came back again
leading a cluttering horse.

Hoo-hor-her! Hoo-hor-her! came from the pump. Now he dashed the water
over the horse's legs and then swooped down and began brushing.

She saw him simply--in a faded shirt, his sleeves rolled up, his chest
bare, all splashed with water--and as he whistled, loud and free, and as
he moved, swooping and bending, Hugo-Wugo's voice began to warm, to
deepen, to gather together, to swing, to rise--somehow or other to keep
time with the man outside (Oh, the scent of Eve's carnation!) until they
became one great rushing, rising, triumphant thing, bursting into light,
and then--

The whole room broke into pieces.

"Thank you, ladies," cried M. Hugo, bobbing at his high desk, over the
wreckage.

And "Keep it, dearest," said Eve. "Souvenir tendre," and she popped the
carnation down the front of Katie's blouse.

(1917)



SEE-SAW


Spring. As the people leave the road for the grass their eyes become
fixed and dreamy like the eyes of people wading in the warm sea. There
are no daisies yet, but the sweet smell of the grass rises, rises in tiny
waves the deeper they go. The trees are in full leaf. As far as one can
see there are fans, hoops, tall rich plumes of various green. A light
wind shakes them, blowing them together, blowing them free again; in the
blue sky floats a cluster of tiny white clouds like a brood of ducklings.
The people wander over the grass--the old ones inclined to puff and
waddle after their long winter snooze; the young ones suddenly linking
hands and making for that screen of trees in the hollow or the shelter of
that clump of dark gorse tipped with yellow--walking very fast, almost
running, as though they had heard some lovely little creature caught in
the thicket crying to them to be saved.

On the top of a small green mound there is a very favourite bench. It has
a young chestnut growing beside it, shaped like a mushroom. Below the
earth has crumbled, fallen away, leaving three or four clayey
hollows--caves--caverns--and in one of them two little people had set up
house with a minute pickaxe, an empty match box, a blunted nail and a
shovel for furniture. He had red hair cut in a deep fringe, light blue
eyes, a faded pink smock and brown button shoes. Her flowery curls were
caught up with a yellow ribbon and she wore two dresses--her this week's
underneath and her last week's on top. This gave her rather a bulky air.

"If you don't get me no sticks for my fire," said she, "there won't be no
dinner." She wrinkled her nose and looked at him severely. "You seem to
forget I've got a fire to make." He took it very easy, balancing on his
toes--"Well--where's I to find any sticks?"

"Oh," said she--flinging up her hands--"anywhere of course--" And then
she whispered just loud enough for him to hear, "they needn't be real
ones--you know."

"Ooh," he breathed. And then he shouted in a loud distinct tone: "Well
I'll just go an' get a few sticks."

He came back in a moment with an armful.

"Is that a whole pennorth?" said she, holding out her skirts for them.

"Well," said he, "I don't know, because I had them give to me by a man
that was moving."

"Perhaps they're bits of what was broke," said she. "When we moved, two
of the pictures was broken and my Daddy lit the fire with them, and my
Mummy said--she said--" a tiny pause--"soldier's manners!"

"What's that?" said he.

"Good gracious!" She made great eyes at him. "Don't you know?"

"No," said he. "What does it mean?"

She screwed up a bit of her skirt, scrunched it, then looked away--"Oh,
don't bother me, child," said she.

He didn't care. He took the pickaxe and hacked a little piece out of the
kitchen floor.

"Got a newspaper?"

He plucked one out of the air and handed it to her. Ziz, ziz, ziz! She
tore it into three pieces--knelt down and laid the sticks over. "Matches,
please." The real box was a triumph, and the blunted nails. But
funny--Zip, zip, zip, it wouldn't light. They looked at each other in
consternation.

"Try the other side," said she. Zip. "Ah! that's better." There was a
great glow--and they sat down on the floor and began to make the pie.

To the bench beside the chestnut came two fat old babies and plumped
themselves down.

She wore a bonnet trimmed with lilac and tied with lilac velvet strings;
a black satin coat and a lace tie--and each of her hands, squeezed into
black kid gloves, showed a morsel of purplish flesh. The skin of his
swollen old face was tight and glazed--and he sat down clasping his huge
soft belly as though careful not to jolt or alarm it.

"Very hot," said he, and he gave a low, strange trumpeting cry with which
she was evidently familiar, for she gave no sign. She looked into the
lovely distance and quivered:

"Nellie cut her finger last night."

"Oh, did she?" said the old snorter. Then--"How did she do that?"

"At dinner," was the reply, "with a knife."

They both looked ahead of them--panting--then, "Badly?"

The weak worn old voice, the old voice that reminded one somehow of a
piece of faintly smelling dark lace, said, "Not very badly."

Again he gave that low strange cry. He took off his hat, wiped the rim
and put it on again.

The voice beside him said with a spiteful touch: "I think it was
carelessness"--and he replied, blowing out his cheeks: "Bound to be!"

But then a little bird flew on to a branch of the young chestnut above
them--and shook over the old heads a great jet of song.

He took off his hat, heaved himself up, and beat in its direction in the
tree. Away it flew.

"Don't want bird muck falling on us," said he, lowering his belly
carefully--carefully again.

The fire was made.

"Put your hand in the oven," said she, "an' see if it's hot."

He put his hand in, but drew it out again with a squeak, and danced up
and down. "It's ever so hot," said he.

This seemed to please her very much. She too got up and went over to him,
and touched him with a finger.

"Do you like playing with me?" And he said, in his small solid way, "Yes,
I do." At that she flung away from him and cried, "I'll never be done if
you keep on bothering me with these questions."

As she poked the fire he said: "Our dog's had kittens."

"Kittens!" She sat back on her heels--"Can a dog have kittens?"

"Of course they can," said he. "Little ones, you know."

"But cats have kittens," cried she. "Dogs don't, dogs have--" she
stopped, stared--looked for the word--couldn't find it--it was gone.
"They have--"

"Kittens," cried he. "Our dog's been an' had two."

She stamped her foot at him. She was pink with exasperation. "It's not
kittens," she wailed, "it's--"

"It is--it is--it is--" he shouted, waving the shovel.

She threw her top dress over her head, and began to cry. "It's
not--it's--it's..."

Suddenly, without a moment's warning, he lifted his pinafore and made
water.

At the sound she emerged.

"Look what you've been an' done," said she, too appalled to cry any more.
"You've put out my fire."

"Ah, never mind. Let's move. You can take the pickaxe and the match box."

They moved to the next cave. "It's much nicer here," said he.

"Off you go," said she, "and get me some sticks for my fire."

The two old babies above began to rumble, and obedient to the sign they
got up without a word and waddled away.

(1917)



THIS FLOWER


"But I tell you, my lord fool, out of this nettle danger, we pluck this
flower, safety."

As she lay there, looking up at the ceiling, she had her moment--yes, she
had her moment! And it was not connected with anything she had thought or
felt before, not even with those words the doctor had scarcely ceased
speaking. It was single, glowing, perfect; it was like--a pearl, too
flawless to match with another...Could she describe what happened?
Impossible. It was as though, even if she had not been conscious (and she
certainly had not been conscious all the time) that she was fighting
against the stream of life--the stream of life indeed!--she had suddenly
ceased to struggle. Oh, more than that! She had yielded, yielded
absolutely, down to every minutest pulse and nerve, and she had fallen
into the bright bosom of the stream and it had borne her...She was part
of her room--part of the great bouquet of southern anemones, of the white
net curtains that blew in stiff against the light breeze, of the mirrors,
the white silky rugs; she was part of the high, shaking, quivering
clamour, broken with little bells and crying voices that went streaming
by outside,--part of the leaves and the light.

Over. She sat up. The doctor had reappeared. This strange little figure
with his stethoscope still strung round his neck--for she had asked him
to examine her heart--squeezing and kneading his freshly washed hands,
had told her...

It was the first time she had ever seen him. Roy, unable, of course, to
miss the smallest dramatic opportunity, had obtained his rather shady
Bloomsbury address from the man in whom he always confided everything,
who, although he'd never met her, knew "all about them."

"My darling," Roy had said, "we'd better have an absolutely unknown man
just in case it's--well, what we don't either of us want it to be. One
can't be too careful in affairs of this sort. Doctors do talk. It's all
damned rot to say they don't." Then, "Not that I care a straw who on
earth knows. Not that I wouldn't--if you'd have me--blazon it on the
skies, or take the front page of the Daily Mirror and have our two names
on it, in a heart, you know--pierced by an arrow."

Nevertheless, of course, his love of mystery and intrigue, his passion
for "keeping our secret beautifully" (his phrase!) had won the day, and
off he'd gone in a taxi to fetch this rather sodden-looking little man.

She heard her untroubled voice saying, "Do you mind not mentioning
anything of this to Mr. King? If you'd tell him that I'm a little run
down and that my heart wants a rest. For I've been complaining about my
heart."

Roy had been really too right about the kind of man the doctor was. He
gave her a strange, quick, leering look, and taking off the stethoscope
with shaking fingers he folded it into his bag that looked somehow like a
broken old canvas shoe.

"Don't you worry, my dear," he said huskily. "I'll see you through."

Odious little toad to have asked a favour of! She sprang to her feet, and
picking up her purple cloth jacket, went over to the mirror. There was a
soft knock at the door, and Roy--he really did look pale, smiling his
half-smile--came in and asked the doctor what he had to say.

"Well," said the doctor, taking up his hat, holding it against his chest
and beating a tattoo on it, "all I've got to say is that Mrs.--h'm--Madam
wants a bit of a rest. She's a bit run down. Her heart's a bit strained.
Nothing else wrong."

In the street a barrel-organ struck up something gay, laughing, mocking,
gushing, with little trills, shakes, jumbles of notes.

    That's all I got to say, to say,
    That's all I got to say,

it mocked. It sounded so near she wouldn't have been surprised if the
doctor were turning the handle.

She saw Roy's smile deepen; his eyes took fire. He gave a little "Ah!" of
relief and happiness. And just for one moment he allowed himself to gaze
at her without caring a jot whether the doctor saw or not, drinking her
up with that gaze she knew so well, as she stood tying the pale ribbons
of her camisole and drawing on the little purple cloth jacket. He jerked
back to the doctor, "She shall go away. She shall go away to the sea at
once," said he, and then, terribly anxious, "What about her food?" At
that, buttoning her jacket in the long mirror, she couldn't help laughing
at him.

"That's all very well," he protested, laughing back delightedly at her
and at the doctor. "But if I didn't manage her food, doctor, she'd never
eat anything but caviare sandwiches and--and white grapes. About
wine--oughtn't she to have wine?"

Wine would do her no harm.

"Champagne," pleaded Roy. How he was enjoying himself!

"Oh, as much champagne as she likes," said the doctor, "and a brandy and
soda with her lunch if she fancies it."

Roy loved that; it tickled him immensely.

"Do you hear that?" he asked solemnly, blinking and sucking in his cheeks
to keep from laughing. "Do you fancy a brandy and soda?"

And, in the distance, faint and exhausted, the barrel-organ:

    A brandy and so-da,
    A brandy and soda, please!
    A brandy and soda, please!

The doctor seemed to hear that, too. He shook hands with her and Roy went
with him into the passage to settle his fee.

She heard the front door close and then--rapid, rapid steps along the
passage. This time he simply burst into her room, and she was in his
arms, crushed up small while he kissed her with warm quick kisses,
murmuring between them, "My darling, my beauty, my delight. You're mine,
you're safe." And then three soft groans. "Oh! Oh! Oh! the relief!" Still
keeping his arms round her he leant his head against her shoulder as
though exhausted. "If you knew how frightened I've been," he murmured. "I
thought we were in for it this time. I really did. And it would have been
so--fatal--so fatal!"


(1917)



THE WRONG HOUSE


"Two purl--two plain--woolinfrontoftheneedle--and knit two together."
Like an old song, like a song that she had sung so often that only to
breathe was to sing it, she murmured the knitting pattern. Another vest
was nearly finished for the mission parcel.

"It's your vests, Mrs. Bean, that are so acceptable. Look at these poor
little mites without a shred!" And the churchwoman showed her a
photograph of repulsive little black objects with bellies shaped like
lemons...

"Two purl--two plain." Down dropped the knitting on to her lap; she gave
a great long sigh, stared in front of her for a moment and then picked
the knitting up and began again. What did she think about when she sighed
like that? Nothing. It was a habit. She was always sighing. On the
stairs, particularly, as she went up and down, she stopped, holding her
dress up with one hand, the other hand on the bannister, staring at the
steps--sighing.

"Woolinfrontoftheneedle..." She sat at the dining-room window facing the
street. It was a bitter autumn day; the wind ran in the street like a
thin dog; the houses opposite looked as though they had been cut out with
a pair of ugly steel scissors and pasted on to the grey paper sky. There
was not a soul to be seen.

"Knit two together!" The clock struck three. Only three? It seemed dusk
already; dusk came floating into the room, heavy, powdery dusk settling
on the furniture, filming over the mirror. Now the kitchen clock struck
three--two minutes late--for this was the clock to go by and not the
kitchen clock. She was alone in the house. Dollicas was out shopping; she
had been gone since a quarter to two. Really, she got slower and slower!
What did she do with the time? One cannot spend more than a certain time
buying a chicken...And oh, that habit of hers of dropping the stove-rings
when she made up the fire! And she set her lips, as she had set her lips
for the past thirty-five years, at that habit of Dollicas'.

There came a faint noise from the street, a noise of horses' hooves. She
leaned further out to see. Good gracious! It was a funeral. First the
glass coach, rolling along briskly with the gleaming, varnished coffin
inside (but no wreaths), with three men in front and two standing at the
back, then some carriages, some with black horses, some with brown. The
dust came bowling up the road, half hiding the procession. She scanned
the houses opposite to see which had the blinds down. What horrible
looking men, too! laughing and joking. One leaned over to one side and
blew his nose with his black glove--horrible! She gathered up the
knitting, hiding her hands in it. Dollicas surely would have
known...There, they were passing...It was the other end...

What was this? What was happening? What could it mean? Help, God! Her old
heart leaped like a fish and then fell as the glass coach drew up outside
her door, as the outside men scrambled down from the front, swung off the
back, and the tallest of them, with a glance of surprise at the windows,
came quickly, stealthily, up the garden path.

"No!" she groaned. But yes, the blow fell, and for the moment it struck
her down. She gasped, a great cold shiver went through her, and stayed in
her hands and knees. She saw the man withdraw a step and again--that
puzzled glance at the blinds--then--

"No!" she groaned, and stumbling, catching hold of things, she managed to
get to the door before the blow fell again. She opened it, her chin
trembled, her teeth clacked; somehow or other she brought out, "The wrong
house!"

Oh! he was shocked. As she stepped back she saw behind him the black hats
clustered at the gate. "The wrong' ouse!" he muttered. She could only
nod. She was shutting the door again when he fished out of the tail of
his coat a black, brass-bound notebook and swiftly opened it. "No. 20
Shuttleworth Crescent?"

"S--street! Crescent round the corner." Her hand lifted to point, but
shook and fell.

He was taking off his hat as she shut the door and leaned against it,
whimpering in the dusky hall, "Go away! Go away!"

Clockety-clock-clock. Cluk! Cluk! Clockety-clock-cluk! sounded from
outside, and then a faint Cluk! Cluk! and then silence. They were gone.
They were out of sight. But still she stayed leaning against the door,
staring into the hall, staring at the hall-stand that was like a great
lobster with hat-pegs for feelers. But she thought of nothing; she did
not even think of what had happened. It was as if she had fallen into a
cave whose walls were darkness...

She came to herself with a deep inward shock, hearing the gate bang and
quick, short steps crunching the gravel; it was Dollicas hurrying round
to the back door. Dollicas must not find her there; and wavering,
wavering like a candle-flame, back she went into the dining-room to her
seat by the window.

Dollicas was in the kitchen. Klang! went one of the iron rings into the
fender. Then her voice, "I'm just putting on the teakettle'm." Since they
had been alone she had got into the way of shouting from one room to
another. The old woman coughed to steady herself. "Please bring in the
lamp," she cried.

"The lamp!" Dollicas came across the passage and stood in the doorway.
"Why, it's only just on four' m."

"Never mind," said Mrs. Bean dully.

"Bring it in!" And a moment later the elderly maid appeared, carrying the
gentle lamp in both hands. Her broad soft face had the look it always had
when she carried anything, as though she walked in her sleep. She set it
down on the table, lowered the wick, raised it, and then lowered it
again. Then she straightened up and looked across at her mistress.

"Why, 'm, whatever's that you're treading on?"

It was the mission vest.

"T't! T't!" As Dollicas picked it up she thought, "The old lady has been
asleep. She's not awake yet." Indeed the old lady looked glazed and
dazed, and when she took up the knitting she drew out a needle of
stitches and began to unwind what she had done.

"Don't forget the mace," she said. Her voice sounded thin and dry. She
was thinking of the chicken for that night's supper. And Dollicas
understood and answered, "It's a lovely young bird!"'as she pulled down
the blind before going back to her kitchen...

(1919)



SIXPENCE


Children are unaccountable little creatures. Why should a small boy like
Dicky, good as gold as a rule, sensitive, affectionate, obedient, and
marvellously sensible for his age, have moods when, without the slightest
warning, he suddenly went "mad dog," as his sisters called it, and there
was no doing anything with him?

"Dicky, come here! Come here, sir, at once! Do you hear your mother
calling you? Dicky!"

But Dicky wouldn't come. Oh, he heard right enough. A clear, ringing
little laugh was his only reply. And away he flew; hiding, running
through the uncut hay on the lawn, dashing past the woodshed, making a
rush for the kitchen garden, and there dodging, peering at his mother
from behind the mossy apple trunks, and leaping up and down like a wild
Indian.

It had begun at tea-time. While Dicky's mother and Mrs. Spears, who was
spending the afternoon with her, were quietly sitting over their sewing
in the drawing-room, this, according to the servant girl, was what had
happened at the children's tea. They were eating their first bread and
butter as nicely and quietly as you please, and the servant girl had just
poured out the milk and water, when Dicky had suddenly seized the bread
plate, put it upside down on his head, and clutched the bread knife.

"Look at me!" he shouted.

His startled sisters looked, and before the servant girl could get there,
the bread plate wobbled, slid, flew to the floor, and broke into shivers.
At this awful point the little girls lifted up their voices and shrieked
their loudest.

"Mother, come and look what he's done!"

"Dicky's broke a great big plate!"

"Come and stop him, mother!"

You can imagine how mother came flying. But she was too late. Dicky had
leapt out of his chair, run through the French windows on to the
verandah, and, well--there she stood--popping her thimble on and off,
helpless. What could she do? She couldn't chase after the child. She
couldn't stalk Dicky among the apples and damsons. That would be too
undignified. It was more than annoying, it was exasperating. Especially
as Mrs. Spears, Mrs. Spears of all people, whose two boys were so
exemplary, was waiting for her in the drawing-room.

"Very well, Dicky," she cried, "I shall have to think of some way of
punishing you."

"I don't care," sounded the high little voice, and again there came that
ringing laugh. The child was quite beside himself...

"Oh, Mrs. Spears, I don't know how to apologise for leaving you by
yourself like this."

"It's quite all right, Mrs. Bendall," said Mrs. Spears, in her soft,
sugary voice, and raising her eyebrows in the way she had. She seemed to
smile to herself as she stroked the gathers. "These little things will
happen from time to time. I only hope it was nothing serious."

"It was Dicky," said Mrs. Bendall, looking rather helplessly for her only
fine needle. And she explained the whole affair to Mrs. Spears.

"And the worst of it is, I don't know how to cure him. Nothing when he's
in that mood seems to have the slightest effect on him."

Mrs. Spears opened her pale eyes. "Not even a whipping?" said she.

But Mrs. Bendall, threading her needle, pursed up her lips. "We never
have whipped the children," she said. "The girls never seem to have
needed it. And Dicky is such a baby, and the only boy. Somehow..."

"Oh, my dear," said Mrs. Spears, and she laid her sewing down. "I don't
wonder Dicky has these little outbreaks. You don't mind my saying so? But
I'm sure you make a great mistake in trying to bring up children without
whipping them. Nothing really takes its place. And I speak from
experience, my dear. I used to try gentler measures"--Mrs. Spears drew in
her breath with a little hissing sound--"soaping the boys' tongues, for
instance, with yellow soap, or making them stand on the table for the
whole of Saturday afternoon. But no, believe me," said Mrs. Spears,
"there is nothing, there is nothing like handing them over to their
father."

Mrs. Bendall in her heart of hearts was dreadfully shocked to hear of
that yellow soap. But Mrs. Spears seemed to take it so much for granted,
that she did too.

"Their father," she said. "Then you don't whip them yourself?"

"Never." Mrs. Spears seemed quite shocked at the idea. "I don't think
it's the mother's place to whip the children. It's the duty of the
father. And, besides, he impresses them so much more."

"Yes, I can imagine that," said Mrs. Bendall, faintly.

"Now my two boys," Mrs. Spears smiled kindly, encouragingly, at Mrs.
Bendall, "would behave just like Dicky if they were not afraid to. As it
is..."

"Oh, your boys are perfect little models," cried Mrs. Bendall.

They were. Quieter, better-behaved little boys, in the presence of
grown-ups, could not be found. In fact, Mrs. Spears' callers often made
the remark that you never would have known that there was a child in the
house. There wasn't--very often.

In the front hall, under a large picture of fat, cheery old monks fishing
by the riverside, there was a thick, dark horsewhip that had belonged to
Mr. Spears' father. And for some reason the boys preferred to play out of
sight of this, behind the dog-kennel or in the tool-house, or round about
the dustbin.

"It's such a mistake," sighed Mrs. Spears; breathing softly, as she
folded her work, "to be weak with children when they are little. It's
such a sad mistake, and one so easy to make. It's so unfair to the child.
That is what one has to remember. Now Dicky's little escapade this
afternoon seemed to me as though he'd done it on purpose. It was the
child's way of showing you that he needed a whipping."

"Do you really think so?" Mrs. Bendall was a weak little thing, and this
impressed her very much.

"I do; I feel sure of it. And a sharp reminder now and then," cried Mrs.
Spears in quite a professional manner, "administered by the father, will
save you so much trouble in the future. Believe me, my dear." She put her
dry, cold hand over Mrs. Bendall's.

"I shall speak to Edward the moment he comes in," said Dicky's mother
firmly.

The children had gone to bed before the garden gate banged, and Dicky's
father staggered up the steep concrete steps carrying his bicycle. It had
been a bad day at the office. He was hot, dusty, tired out.

But by this time Mrs. Bendall had become quite excited over the new plan,
and she opened the door to him herself.

"Oh, Edward, I'm so thankful you have come home," she cried.

"Why, what's happened?" Edward lowered the bicycle and took off his hat.
A red angry pucker showed where the brim had pressed. "What's up?"

"Come--come into the drawing-room," said Mrs. Bendall, speaking very
fast. "I simply can't tell you how naughty Dicky has been. You have no
idea--you can't have at the office all day--how a child of that age can
behave. He's been simply dreadful. I have no control over him--none. I've
tried everything, Edward, but it's all no use. The only thing to do," she
finished breathlessly, "is to whip him--is for you to whip him, Edward."

In the corner of the drawing-room there was a what-not, and on the top
shelf stood a brown china bear with a painted tongue. It seemed in the
shadow to be grinning at Dicky's father, to be saying, "Hooray, this is
what you've come home to!"

"But why on earth should I start whipping him?" said Edward, staring at
the bear. "We've never done it before."

"Because," said his wife, "don't you see, it's the only thing to do. I
can't control the child..." Her words flew from her lips. They beat round
him, beat round his tired head. "We can't possibly afford a nurse. The
servant girl has more than enough to do. And his naughtiness is beyond
words. You don't understand, Edward; you can't, you're at the office all
day."

The bear poked out his tongue. The scolding voice went on. Edward sank
into a chair.

"What am I to beat him with?" he said weakly.

"Your slipper, of course," said his wife. And she knelt down to untie his
dusty shoes.

"Oh, Edward," she wailed, "you've still got your cycling clips on in the
drawing-room. No, really--"

"Here, that's enough," Edward nearly pushed her away. "Give me that
slipper." He went up the stairs. He felt like a man in a dark net. And
now he wanted to beat Dicky. Yes, damn it, he wanted to beat something.
My God, what a life! The dust was still in his hot eyes, his arms felt
heavy.

He pushed open the door of Dicky's slip of a room. Dicky was standing in
the middle of the floor in his night-shirt. At the sight of him Edward's
heart gave a warm throb of rage.

"Well, Dicky, you know what I've come for," said Edward.

Dicky made no reply.

"I've come to give you a whipping."

No answer.

"Lift up your nightshirt."

At that Dicky looked up. He flushed a deep pink. "Must I?" he whispered.

"Come on, now. Be quick about it," said Edward, and, grasping the
slipper, he gave Dicky three hard slaps.

"There, that'll teach you to behave properly to your mother."

Dicky stood there, hanging his head.

"Look sharp and get into bed," said his father.

Still he did not move. But a shaking voice said, "I've not done my teeth
yet, Daddy."

"Eh, what's that?"

Dicky looked up. His lips were quivering, but his eyes were dry. He
hadn't made a sound or shed a tear. Only he swallowed and said, huskily,
"I haven't done my teeth, Daddy."

But at the sight of that little face Edward turned, and, not knowing what
he was doing, he bolted from the room, down the stairs, and out into the
garden. Good God! What had he done? He strode along and hid in the shadow
of the pear tree by the hedge. Whipped Dicky--whipped his little man with
a slipper--and what the devil for? He didn't even know. Suddenly he
barged into his room--and there was the little chap in his nightshirt.
Dicky's father groaned and held on to the hedge. And he didn't cry. Never
a tear. If only he'd cried or got angry. But that "Daddy"! And again he
heard the quivering whisper. Forgiving like that without a word. But he'd
never forgive himself--never. Coward! Fool! Brute! And suddenly he
remembered the time when Dicky had fallen off his knee and sprained his
wrist while they were playing together. He hadn't cried then, either. And
that was the little hero he had just whipped.

Something's got to be done about this, thought Edward. He strode back to
the house, up the stairs, into Dicky's room. The little boy was lying in
bed. In the half light his dark head, with the square fringe, showed
plain against the pale pillow. He was lying quite still, and even now he
wasn't crying. Edward shut the door and leaned against it. What he wanted
to do was to kneel down by Dicky's bed and cry himself and beg to be
forgiven. But, of course, one can't do that sort of thing. He felt
awkward, and his heart was wrung.

"Not asleep yet, Dicky?" he said lightly.

"No, Daddy."

Edward came over and sat on his boy's bed, and Dicky looked at him
through his long lashes.

"Nothing the matter, little chap, is there?" said Edward, half
whispering.

"No-o, Daddy," came from Dicky.

Edward put out his hand, and carefully he took Dicky's hot little paw.

"You--you mustn't think any more of what happened just now, little man,"
he said huskily. "See? That's all over now. That's forgotten. That's
never going to happen again. See?"

"Yes, Daddy."

"So the thing to do now is to buck up, little chap," said Edward, "and to
smile." And he tried himself an extraordinary trembling apology for a
smile. "To forget all about it--to--eh? Little man...Old boy..."

Dicky lay as before. This was terrible. Dicky's father sprang up and went
over to the window. It was nearly dark in the garden. The servant girl
had run out, and she was snatching, twitching some white clothes off the
bushes and piling them over her arm. But in the boundless sky the evening
star shone, and a big gum tree, black against the pale glow, moved its
long leaves softly. All this he saw, while he felt in his trouser pocket
for his money. Bringing it out, he chose a new sixpence and went back to
Dicky.

"Here you are, little chap. Buy yourself something," said Edward softly,
laying the sixpence on Dicky's pillow.

But could even that--could even a whole sixpence--blot out what had been?

(1921)



POISON


The post was very late. When we came back from our walk after lunch it
still had not arrived.

"Pas encore, Madame," sang Annette, scurrying back to her cooking.

We carried our parcels into the dining-room. The table was laid. As
always, the sight of the table laid for two--for two people only--and yet
so finished, so perfect, there was no possible room for a third, gave me
a queer, quick thrill as though I'd been struck by that silver lightning
that quivered over the white cloth, the brilliant glasses, the shallow
bowl of freezias.

"Blow the old postman! Whatever can have happened to him?" said Beatrice.
"Put those things down, dearest."

"Where would you like them...?"

She raised her head; she smiled her sweet, teasing smile.

"Anywhere--Silly."

But I knew only too well that there was no such place for her, and I
would have stood holding the squat liqueur bottle and the sweets for
months, for years, rather than risk giving another tiny shock to her
exquisite sense of order.

"Here--I'll take them." She plumped them down on the table with her long
gloves and a basket of figs. "The Luncheon Table. Short story by--by--"
She took my arm. "Let's go on to the terrace--" and I felt her shiver.
"Ça sent," she said faintly, "de la cuisine..."

I had noticed lately--we had been living in the south for two
months--that when she wished to speak of food, or the climate, or,
playfully, of her love for me, she always dropped into French.

We perched on the balustrade under the awning. Beatrice leaned over
gazing down--down to the white road with its guard of cactus spears. The
beauty of her ear, just her ear, the marvel of it was so great that I
could have turned from regarding it to all that sweep of glittering sea
below and stammered: "You know--her ear! She has ears that are simply the
most..."

She was dressed in white, with pearls round her throat and
lilies-of-the-valley tucked into her belt. On the third finger of her
left hand she wore one pearl ring--no wedding ring.

"Why should I, mon ami? Why should we pretend? Who could possibly care?"

And of course I agreed, though privately, in the depths of my heart, I
would have given my soul to have stood beside her in a large, yes, a
large, fashionable church, crammed with people, with old reverend
clergymen, with The Voice that breathed o'er Eden, with palms and the
smell of scent, knowing there was a red carpet and confetti outside, and
somewhere, a wedding-cake and champagne and a satin shoe to throw after
the carriage--if I could have slipped our wedding-ring on to her finger.

Not because I cared for such horrible shows, but because I felt it might
possibly perhaps lessen this ghastly feeling of absolute freedom, her
absolute freedom, of course.

Oh, God! What torture happiness was--what anguish! I looked up at the
villa, at the windows of our room hidden so mysteriously behind the green
straw blinds. Was it possible that she ever came moving through the green
light and smiling that secret smile, that languid, brilliant smile that
was just for me? She put her arm round my neck; the other hand softly,
terribly, brushed back my hair.

"Who are you?" Who was she? She was--Woman.

...On the first warm evening in Spring, when lights shone like pearls
through the lilac air and voices murmured in the fresh-flowering gardens,
it was she who sang in the tall house with the tulle curtains. As one
drove in the moonlight through the foreign city hers was the shadow that
fell across the quivering gold of the shutters. When the lamp was
lighted, in the new-born stillness her steps passed your door. And she
looked out into the autumn twilight, pale in her furs, as the automobile
swept by...

In fact, to put it shortly, I was twenty-four at the time. And when she
lay on her back, with the pearls slipped under her chin, and sighed "I'm
thirsty, dearest. Donne-moi un orange," I would gladly, willingly, have
dived for an orange into the jaws of a crocodile--if crocodiles ate
oranges.

    "Had I two little feathery wings
    And were a little feathery bird..."

sang Beatrice.

I seized her hand. "You wouldn't fly away?"

"Not far. Not further than the bottom of the road."

"Why on earth there?"

She quoted: "He cometh not, she said..."

"Who? The silly old postman? But you're not expecting a letter."

"No, but it's maddening all the same. Ah!" Suddenly she laughed and
leaned against me. "There he is--look--like a blue beetle."

And we pressed our cheeks together and watched the blue beetle beginning
to climb.

"Dearest," breathed Beatrice. And the word seemed to linger in the air,
to throb in the air like the note of a violin.

"What is it?"

"I don't know," she laughed softly. "A wave of--a wave of affection, I
suppose."

I put my arm round her. "Then you wouldn't fly away?"

And she said rapidly and softly: "No! No! Not for worlds. Not really. I
love this place. I've loved being here. I could stay here for years, I
believe. I've never been so happy as I have these last two months, and
you've been so perfect to me, dearest, in every way."

This was such bliss--it was so extraordinary, so unprecedented, to hear
her talk like this that I had to try to laugh it off.

"Don't! You sound as if you were saying good-bye."

"Oh, nonsense, nonsense. You mustn't say such things even in fun!" She
slid her little hand under my white jacket and clutched my shoulder.
"You've been happy, haven't you?"

"Happy? Happy? Oh, God--if you knew what I feel at this moment...Happy!
My Wonder! My Joy!"

I dropped off the balustrade and embraced her, lifting her in my arms.
And while I held her lifted I pressed my face in her breast and muttered:
"You are mine?" And for the first time in all the desperate months I'd
known her, even counting the last month of--surely--Heaven--I believed
her absolutely when she answered:

"Yes, I am yours."

The creak of the gate and the postman's steps on the gravel drew us
apart. I was dizzy for the moment. I simply stood there, smiling, I felt,
rather stupidly. Beatrice walked over to the cane chairs.

"You go--go for the letters," said she.

I--well--I almost reeled away. But I was too late. Annette came running.
"Pas de lettres" said she.

My reckless smile in reply as she handed me the paper must have surprised
her. I was wild with joy. I threw the paper up into the air and sang out:

"No letters, darling!" as I came over to where the beloved woman was
lying in the long chair.

For a moment she did not reply. Then she said slowly as she tore off the
newspaper wrapper: "The world forgetting, by the world forgot."

There are times when a cigarette is just the very one thing that will
carry you over the moment. It is more than a confederate, even; it is a
secret, perfect little friend who knows all about it and understands
absolutely. While you smoke you look down at it--smile or frown, as the
occasion demands; you inhale deeply and expel the smoke in a slow fan.
This was one of those moments. I walked over to the magnolia and breathed
my fill of it. Then I came back and leaned over her shoulder. But quickly
she tossed the paper away on to the stone.

"There's nothing in it," said she. "Nothing. There's only some poison
trial. Either some man did or didn't murder his wife, and twenty thousand
people have sat in court every day and two million words have been wired
all over the world after each proceeding."

"Silly world!" said I, flinging into another chair. I wanted to forget
the paper, to return, but cautiously, of course, to that moment before
the postman came. But when she answered I knew from her voice the moment
was over for now. Never mind. I was content to wait--five hundred years,
if need be--now that I knew.

"Not so very silly," said Beatrice. "After all it isn't only morbid
curiosity on the part of the twenty thousand."

"What is it, darling?" Heavens knows I didn't care.

"Guilt!" she cried. "Guilt! Didn't you realise that? They're fascinated
like sick people are fascinated by anything--any scrap of news about
their own case. The man in the dock may be innocent enough, but the
people in court are nearly all of them poisoners. Haven't you ever
thought"--she was pale with excitement--"of the amount of poisoning that
goes on? It's the exception to find married people who don't poison each
other--married people and lovers. Oh," she cried, "the number of cups of
tea, glasses of wine, cups of coffee that are just tainted. The number
I've had myself, and drunk, either knowing or not knowing--and risked it.
The only reason why so many couples"--she laughed--"survive, is because
the one is frightened of giving the other the fatal dose. That dose takes
nerve! But it's bound to come sooner or later. There's no going back once
the first little dose has been given. It's the beginning of the end,
really--don't you agree? Don't you see what I mean?"

She didn't wait for me to answer. She unpinned the lilies-of-the-valley
and lay back, drawing them across her eyes.

"Both my husbands poisoned me," said Beatrice. "My first husband gave me
a huge dose almost immediately, but my second was really an artist in his
way. Just a tiny pinch, now and again, cleverly disguised--Oh, so
cleverly!--until one morning I woke up and in every single particle of
me, to the ends of my fingers and toes, there was a tiny grain. I was
just in time..."

I hated to hear her mention her husbands so calmly, especially to-day. It
hurt. I was going to speak, but suddenly she cried mournfully:

"Why! Why should it have happened to me? What have I done? Why have I
been all my life singled out by...It's a conspiracy."

I tried to tell her it was because she was too perfect for this horrible
world--too exquisite, too fine. It frightened people. I made a little
joke.

"But I--I haven't tried to poison you."

Beatrice gave a queer small laugh and bit the end of a lily stem.

"You!" said she. "You wouldn't hurt a fly!"

Strange. That hurt, though. Most horribly.

Just then Annette ran out with our apéritifs. Beatrice leaned forward and
took a glass from the tray and handed it to me. I noticed the gleam of
the pearl on what I called her pearl finger. How could I be hurt at what
she said?

"And you," I said, taking the glass, "you've never poisoned anybody."

That gave me an idea; I tried to explain.

"You--you do just the opposite. What is the name for one like you who,
instead of poisoning people, fills them--everybody, the postman, the man
who drives us, our boatman, the flower-seller, me--with new life, with
something of her own radiance, her beauty, her--"

Dreamily she smiled; dreamily she looked at me.

"What are you thinking of--my lovely darling?"

"I was wondering," she said, "whether, after lunch, you'd go down to the
post-office and ask for the afternoon letters. Would you mind, dearest?
Not that I'm expecting one--but--I just thought, perhaps--it's silly not
to have the letters if they're there. Isn't it? Silly to wait till
to-morrow." She twirled the stem of the glass in her fingers. Her
beautiful head was bent. But I lifted my glass and drank, sipped
rather--sipped slowly, deliberately, looking at that dark head and
thinking of--postmen and blue beetles and farewells that were not
farewells and...

Good God! Was it fancy? No, it wasn't fancy. The drink tasted chill,
bitter, queer.

(1921)



THE END

THE DOLL’S HOUSE


When dear old Mrs. Hay went back to town after staying with the Burnells
she sent the children a doll’s house. It was so big that the carter and
Pat carried it into the courtyard, and there it stayed, propped up on
two wooden boxes beside the feed-room door. No harm could come to it;
it was summer. And perhaps the smell of paint would have gone off by
the time it had to be taken in. For, really, the smell of paint coming
from that doll’s house (“Sweet of old Mrs. Hay, of course; most sweet
and generous!”)—but the smell of paint was quite enough to make any one
seriously ill, in Aunt Beryl’s opinion. Even before the sacking was taken
off. And when it was....

There stood the doll’s house, a dark, oily, spinach green, picked out
with bright yellow. Its two solid little chimneys, glued on to the roof,
were painted red and white, and the door, gleaming with yellow varnish,
was like a little slab of toffee. Four windows, real windows, were
divided into panes by a broad streak of green. There was actually a tiny
porch, too, painted yellow, with big lumps of congealed paint hanging
along the edge.

But perfect, perfect little house! Who could possibly mind the smell? It
was part of the joy, part of the newness.

“Open it quickly, some one!”

The hook at the side was stuck fast. Pat pried it open with his penknife,
and the whole house-front swung back, and—there you were, gazing at one
and the same moment into the drawing-room and dining-room, the kitchen
and two bedrooms. That is the way for a house to open! Why don’t all
houses open like that? How much more exciting than peering through the
slit of a door into a mean little hall with a hatstand and two umbrellas!
That is—isn’t it?—what you long to know about a house when you put your
hand on the knocker. Perhaps it is the way God opens houses at dead of
night when He is taking a quiet turn with an angel....

“O-oh!” The Burnell children sounded as though they were in despair.
It was too marvellous; it was too much for them. They had never seen
anything like it in their lives. All the rooms were papered. There were
pictures on the walls, painted on the paper, with gold frames complete.
Red carpet covered all the floors except the kitchen; red plush chairs
in the drawing-room, green in the dining-room; tables, beds with real
bedclothes, a cradle, a stove, a dresser with tiny plates and one big
jug. But what Kezia liked more than anything, what she liked frightfully,
was the lamp. It stood in the middle of the dining-room table, an
exquisite little amber lamp with a white globe. It was even filled all
ready for lighting, though, of course, you couldn’t light it. But there
was something inside that looked like oil, and that moved when you shook
it.

The father and mother dolls, who sprawled very stiff as though they
had fainted in the drawing-room, and their two little children asleep
upstairs, were really too big for the doll’s house. They didn’t look as
though they belonged. But the lamp was perfect. It seemed to smile at
Kezia, to say, “I live here.” The lamp was real.

The Burnell children could hardly walk to school fast enough the next
morning. They burned to tell everybody, to describe, to—well—to boast
about their doll’s house before the school-bell rang.

“I’m to tell,” said Isabel, “because I’m the eldest. And you two can join
in after. But I’m to tell first.”

There was nothing to answer. Isabel was bossy, but she was always right,
and Lottie and Kezia knew too well the powers that went with being
eldest. They brushed through the thick buttercups at the road edge and
said nothing.

“And I’m to choose who’s to come and see it first. Mother said I might.”

For it had been arranged that while the doll’s house stood in the
courtyard they might ask the girls at school, two at a time, to come and
look. Not to stay to tea, of course, or to come traipsing through the
house. But just to stand quietly in the courtyard while Isabel pointed
out the beauties, and Lottie and Kezia looked pleased....

But hurry as they might, by the time they had reached the tarred palings
of the boys’ playground the bell had begun to jangle. They only just
had time to whip off their hats and fall into line before the roll was
called. Never mind. Isabel tried to make up for it by looking very
important and mysterious and by whispering behind her hand to the girls
near her, “Got something to tell you at playtime.”

Playtime came and Isabel was surrounded. The girls of her class nearly
fought to put their arms round her, to walk away with her, to beam
flatteringly, to be her special friend. She held quite a court under
the huge pine trees at the side of the playground. Nudging, giggling
together, the little girls pressed up close. And the only two who stayed
outside the ring were the two who were always outside, the little
Kelveys. They knew better than to come anywhere near the Burnells.

For the fact was, the school the Burnell children went to was not at
all the kind of place their parents would have chosen if there had been
any choice. But there was none. It was the only school for miles. And
the consequence was all the children in the neighbourhood, the Judge’s
little girls, the doctor’s daughters, the store-keeper’s children, the
milkman’s, were forced to mix together. Not to speak of there being an
equal number of rude, rough little boys as well. But the line had to
be drawn somewhere. It was drawn at the Kelveys. Many of the children,
including the Burnells, were not allowed even to speak to them. They
walked past the Kelveys with their heads in the air, and as they set
the fashion in all matters of behaviour, the Kelveys were shunned by
everybody. Even the teacher had a special voice for them, and a special
smile for the other children when Lil Kelvey came up to her desk with a
bunch of dreadfully common-looking flowers.

They were the daughters of a spry, hardworking little washerwoman, who
went about from house to house by the day. This was awful enough. But
where was Mr. Kelvey? Nobody knew for certain. But everybody said he was
in prison. So they were the daughters of a washerwoman and a gaolbird.
Very nice company for other people’s children! And they looked it.
Why Mrs. Kelvey made them so conspicuous was hard to understand. The
truth was they were dressed in “bits” given to her by the people for
whom she worked. Lil, for instance, who was a stout, plain child, with
big freckles, came to school in a dress made from a green art-serge
table-cloth of the Burnells’, with red plush sleeves from the Logans’
curtains. Her hat, perched on top of her high forehead, was a grown-up
woman’s hat, once the property of Miss Lecky, the postmistress. It was
turned up at the back and trimmed with a large scarlet quill. What a
little guy she looked! It was impossible not to laugh. And her little
sister, our Else, wore a long white dress, rather like a nightgown, and
a pair of little boy’s boots. But whatever our Else wore she would have
looked strange. She was a tiny wishbone of a child, with cropped hair and
enormous solemn eyes—a little white owl. Nobody had ever seen her smile;
she scarcely ever spoke. She went through life holding on to Lil, with
a piece of Lil’s skirt screwed up in her hand. Where Lil went our Else
followed. In the playground, on the road going to and from school, there
was Lil marching in front and our Else holding on behind. Only when she
wanted anything, or when she was out of breath, our Else gave Lil a tug,
a twitch, and Lil stopped and turned round. The Kelveys never failed to
understand each other.

Now they hovered at the edge; you couldn’t stop them listening. When the
little girls turned round and sneered, Lil, as usual, gave her silly,
shamefaced smile, but our Else only looked.

And Isabel’s voice, so very proud, went on telling. The carpet made a
great sensation, but so did the beds with real bedclothes, and the stove
with an oven door.

When she finished Kezia broke in. “You’ve forgotten the lamp, Isabel.”

“Oh, yes,” said Isabel, “and there’s a teeny little lamp, all made of
yellow glass, with a white globe that stands on the dining-room table.
You couldn’t tell it from a real one.”

“The lamp’s best of all,” cried Kezia. She thought Isabel wasn’t making
half enough of the little lamp. But nobody paid any attention. Isabel was
choosing the two who were to come back with them that afternoon and see
it. She chose Emmie Cole and Lena Logan. But when the others knew they
were all to have a chance, they couldn’t be nice enough to Isabel. One by
one they put their arms round Isabel’s waist and walked her off. They had
something to whisper to her, a secret. “Isabel’s _my_ friend.”

Only the little Kelveys moved away forgotten; there was nothing more for
them to hear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Days passed, and as more children saw the doll’s house, the fame of it
spread. It became the one subject, the rage. The one question was, “Have
you seen Burnells’ doll’s house? Oh, ain’t it lovely!” “Haven’t you seen
it? Oh, I say!”

Even the dinner hour was given up to talking about it. The little girls
sat under the pines eating their thick mutton sandwiches and big slabs
of johnny cake spread with butter. While always, as near as they could
get, sat the Kelveys, our Else holding on to Lil, listening too, while
they chewed their jam sandwiches out of a newspaper soaked with large red
blobs....

“Mother,” said Kezia, “can’t I ask the Kelveys just once?”

“Certainly not, Kezia.”

“But why not?”

“Run away, Kezia; you know quite well why not.”

       *       *       *       *       *

At last everybody had seen it except them. On that day the subject rather
flagged. It was the dinner hour. The children stood together under the
pine trees, and suddenly, as they looked at the Kelveys eating out of
their paper, always by themselves, always listening, they wanted to be
horrid to them. Emmie Cole started the whisper.

“Lil Kelvey’s going to be a servant when she grows up.”

“O-oh, how awful!” said Isabel Burnell, and she made eyes at Emmie.

Emmie swallowed in a very meaning way and nodded to Isabel as she’d seen
her mother do on those occasions.

“It’s true—it’s true—it’s true,” she said.

Then Lena Logan’s little eyes snapped. “Shall I ask her?” she whispered.

“Bet you don’t,” said Jessie May.

“Pooh, I’m not frightened,” said Lena. Suddenly she gave a little squeal
and danced in front of the other girls. “Watch! Watch me! Watch me now!”
said Lena. And sliding, gliding, dragging one foot, giggling behind her
hand, Lena went over to the Kelveys.

Lil looked up from her dinner. She wrapped the rest quickly away. Our
Else stopped chewing. What was coming now?

“Is it true you’re going to be a servant when you grow up, Lil Kelvey?”
shrilled Lena.

Dead silence. But instead of answering, Lil only gave her silly,
shamefaced smile. She didn’t seem to mind the question at all. What a
sell for Lena! The girls began to titter.

Lena couldn’t stand that. She put her hands on her hips; she shot
forward. “Yah, yer father’s in prison!” she hissed, spitefully.

This was such a marvellous thing to have said that the little girls
rushed away in a body, deeply, deeply excited, wild with joy. Some one
found a long rope, and they began skipping. And never did they skip
so high, run in and out so fast, or do such daring things as on that
morning.

In the afternoon Pat called for the Burnell children with the buggy
and they drove home. There were visitors. Isabel and Lottie, who liked
visitors, went upstairs to change their pinafores. But Kezia thieved out
at the back. Nobody was about; she began to swing on the big white gates
of the courtyard. Presently, looking along the road, she saw two little
dots. They grew bigger, they were coming towards her. Now she could see
that one was in front and one close behind. Now she could see that they
were the Kelveys. Kezia stopped swinging. She slipped off the gate as if
she was going to run away. Then she hesitated. The Kelveys came nearer,
and beside them walked their shadows, very long, stretching right across
the road with their heads in the buttercups. Kezia clambered back on the
gate; she had made up her mind; she swung out.

“Hullo,” she said to the passing Kelveys.

They were so astounded that they stopped. Lil gave her silly smile. Our
Else stared.

“You can come and see our doll’s house if you want to,” said Kezia, and
she dragged one toe on the ground. But at that Lil turned red and shook
her head quickly.

“Why not?” asked Kezia.

Lil gasped, then she said, “Your ma told our ma you wasn’t to speak to
us.”

“Oh, well,” said Kezia. She didn’t know what to reply. “It doesn’t
matter. You can come and see our doll’s house all the same. Come on.
Nobody’s looking.”

But Lil shook her head still harder.

“Don’t you want to?” asked Kezia.

Suddenly there was a twitch, a tug at Lil’s skirt. She turned round. Our
Else was looking at her with big, imploring eyes; she was frowning; she
wanted to go. For a moment Lil looked at our Else very doubtfully. But
then our Else twitched her skirt again. She started forward. Kezia led
the way. Like two little stray cats they followed across the courtyard to
where the doll’s house stood.

“There it is,” said Kezia.

There was a pause. Lil breathed loudly, almost snorted; our Else was
still as a stone.

“I’ll open it for you,” said Kezia kindly. She undid the hook and they
looked inside.

“There’s the drawing-room and the dining-room, and that’s the—”

“Kezia!”

Oh, what a start they gave!

“Kezia!”

It was Aunt Beryl’s voice. They turned round. At the back door stood Aunt
Beryl, staring as if she couldn’t believe what she saw.

“How dare you ask the little Kelveys into the courtyard?” said her cold,
furious voice. “You know as well as I do, you’re not allowed to talk to
them. Run away, children, run away at once. And don’t come back again,”
said Aunt Beryl. And she stepped into the yard and shooed them out as if
they were chickens.

“Off you go immediately!” she called, cold and proud.

They did not need telling twice. Burning with shame, shrinking together,
Lil huddling along like her mother, our Else dazed, somehow they crossed
the big courtyard and squeezed through the white gate.

“Wicked, disobedient little girl!” said Aunt Beryl bitterly to Kezia, and
she slammed the doll’s house to.

The afternoon had been awful. A letter had come from Willie Brent, a
terrifying, threatening letter, saying if she did not meet him that
evening in Pulman’s Bush, he’d come to the front door and ask the reason
why! But now that she had frightened those little rats of Kelveys and
given Kezia a good scolding, her heart felt lighter. That ghastly
pressure was gone. She went back to the house humming.

When the Kelveys were well out of sight of Burnells’, they sat down to
rest on a big red drain-pipe by the side of the road. Lil’s cheeks were
still burning; she took off the hat with the quill and held it on her
knee. Dreamily they looked over the hay paddocks, past the creek, to the
group of wattles where Logan’s cows stood waiting to be milked. What were
their thoughts?

Presently our Else nudged up close to her sister. But now she had
forgotten the cross lady. She put out a finger and stroked her sister’s
quill; she smiled her rare smile.

“I seen the little lamp,” she said, softly.

Then both were silent once more.




HONEYMOON


And when they came out of the lace shop there was their own driver and
the cab they called their own cab waiting for them under a plane tree.
What luck! Wasn’t it luck? Fanny pressed her husband’s arm. These things
seemed always to be happening to them ever since they—came abroad. Didn’t
he think so too? But George stood on the pavement edge, lifted his stick,
and gave a loud “Hi!” Fanny sometimes felt a little uncomfortable about
the way George summoned cabs, but the drivers didn’t seem to mind, so it
must have been all right. Fat, good-natured, and smiling, they stuffed
away the little newspaper they were reading, whipped the cotton cover off
the horse, and were ready to obey.

“I say,” George said as he helped Fanny in, “suppose we go and have tea
at the place where the lobsters grow. Would you like to?”

“Most awfully,” said Fanny, fervently, as she leaned back, wondering why
the way George put things made them sound so very nice.

“R-right, _bien_.” He was beside her. “_Allay_,” he cried gaily, and off
they went.

Off they went, spanking along lightly, under the green and gold shade
of the plane trees, through the small streets that smelled of lemons
and fresh coffee, past the fountain square where women, with water-pots
lifted, stopped talking to gaze after them, round the corner past the
café, with its pink and white umbrellas, green tables, and blue siphons,
and so to the sea front. There a wind, light, warm, came flowing over
the boundless sea. It touched George, and Fanny it seemed to linger over
while they gazed at the dazzling water. And George said, “Jolly, isn’t
it?” And Fanny, looking dreamy, said, as she said at least twenty times a
day since they—came abroad: “Isn’t it extraordinary to think that here we
are quite alone, away from everybody, with nobody to tell us to go home,
or to—to order us about except ourselves?”

George had long since given up answering “Extraordinary!” As a rule he
merely kissed her. But now he caught hold of her hand, stuffed it into
his pocket, pressed her fingers, and said, “I used to keep a white mouse
in my pocket when I was a kid.”

“Did you?” said Fanny, who was intensely interested in everything George
had ever done. “Were you very fond of white mice?”

“Fairly,” said George, without conviction. He was looking at something,
bobbing out there beyond the bathing steps. Suddenly he almost jumped in
his seat. “Fanny!” he cried. “There’s a chap out there bathing. Do you
see? I’d no idea people had begun. I’ve been missing it all these days.”
George glared at the reddened face, the reddened arm, as though he could
not look away. “At any rate,” he muttered, “wild horses won’t keep me
from going in to-morrow.”

Fanny’s heart sank. She had heard for years of the frightful dangers of
the Mediterranean. It was an absolute death-trap. Beautiful, treacherous
Mediterranean. There it lay curled before them, its white, silky paws
touching the stones and gone again.... But she’d made up her mind long
before she was married that never would she be the kind of woman who
interfered with her husband’s pleasures, so all she said was, airily, “I
suppose one has to be very up in the currents, doesn’t one?”

“Oh, I don’t know,” said George. “People talk an awful lot of rot about
the danger.”

But now they were passing a high wall on the land side, covered with
flowering heliotrope, and Fanny’s little nose lifted. “Oh, George,” she
breathed. “The smell! The most divine....”

“Topping villa,” said George. “Look, you can see it through the palms.”

“Isn’t it rather large?” said Fanny, who somehow could not look at any
villa except as a possible habitation for herself and George.

“Well, you’d need a crowd of people if you stayed there long,” replied
George. “Deadly, otherwise. I say, it is ripping. I wonder who it belongs
to.” And he prodded the driver in the back.

The lazy, smiling driver, who had no idea, replied, as he always did on
these occasions, that it was the property of a wealthy Spanish family.

“Masses of Spaniards on this coast,” commented George, leaning back
again, and they were silent until, as they rounded a bend, the big,
bone-white hotel-restaurant came into view. Before it there was a small
terrace built up against the sea, planted with umbrella palms, set out
with tables, and at their approach, from the terrace, from the hotel,
waiters came running to receive, to welcome, Fanny and George, to cut
them off from any possible kind of escape.

“Outside?”

Oh, but of course they would sit outside. The sleek manager, who was
marvellously like a fish in a frock coat, skimmed forward.

“Dis way, sir. Dis way, sir. I have a very nice little table,” he gasped.
“Just the little table for you, sir, over in de corner. Dis way.”

So George, looking most dreadfully bored, and Fanny, trying to look as
though she’d spent years of life threading her way through strangers,
followed after.

“Here you are, sir. Here you will be very nice,” coaxed the manager,
taking the vase off the table, and putting it down again as if it
were a fresh little bouquet out of the air. But George refused to sit
down immediately. He saw through these fellows; he wasn’t going to be
done. These chaps were always out to rush you. So he put his hands in
his pockets, and said to Fanny, very calmly, “This all right for you?
Anywhere else you’d prefer? How about over there?” And he nodded to a
table right over the other side.

What it was to be a man of the world! Fanny admired him deeply, but all
she wanted to do was to sit down and look like everybody else.

“I—I like this,” said she.

“Right,” said George, hastily, and he sat down almost before Fanny, and
said quickly, “Tea for two and chocolate éclairs.”

“Very good, sir,” said the manager, and his mouth opened and shut as
though he was ready for another dive under the water. “You will not ’ave
toasts to start with? We ’ave very nice toasts, sir.”

“No,” said George, shortly. “You don’t want toast, do you, Fanny?”

“Oh, no, thank you, George,” said Fanny, praying the manager would go.

“Or perhaps de lady might like to look at de live lobsters in de tank
while de tea is coming?” And he grimaced and smirked and flicked his
serviette like a fin.

George’s face grew stony. He said “No” again, and Fanny bent over the
table, unbuttoning her gloves. When she looked up the man was gone.
George took off his hat, tossed it on to a chair, and pressed back his
hair.

“Thank God,” said he, “that’s chap’s gone. These foreign fellows bore me
stiff. The only way to get rid of them is simply to shut up as you saw
I did. Thank Heaven!” sighed George again, with so much emotion that if
it hadn’t been ridiculous Fanny might have imagined that he had been as
frightened of the manager as she. As it was she felt a rush of love for
George. His hands were on the table, brown, large hands that she knew so
well. She longed to take one of them and squeeze it hard. But, to her
astonishment, George did just that thing, leaning across the table, put
his hand over hers, and said, without looking at her, “Fanny, darling
Fanny.”

“Oh, George!” It was in that heavenly moment that Fanny heard a
_twing-twing-tootle-tootle_, and a light strumming. There’s going to
be music, she thought, but the music didn’t matter just then. Nothing
mattered except love. Faintly smiling she gazed into that faintly smiling
face, and the feeling was so blissful that she felt inclined to say
to George, “Let us stay here—where we are—at this little table. It’s
perfect, and the sea is perfect. Let us stay.” But instead her eyes grew
serious.

“Darling,” said Fanny. “I want to ask you something fearfully important.
Promise me you’ll answer. Promise.”

“I promise,” said George, too solemn to be quite as serious as she.

“It’s this.” Fanny paused a moment, looked down, looked up again. “Do
you feel,” she said, softly, “that you really know me now? But really,
really know _me_?”

It was too much for George. Know his Fanny? He gave a broad, childish
grin. “I should jolly well think I do,” he said, emphatically. “Why,
what’s up?”

Fanny felt he hadn’t quite understood. She went on quickly: “What I mean
is this. So often people, even when they love each other, don’t seem
to—to—it’s so hard to say—know each other perfectly. They don’t seem to
want to. And I think that’s awful. They misunderstand each other about
the most important things of all.” Fanny looked horrified. “George, we
couldn’t do that, could we? We never could.”

“Couldn’t be done,” laughed George, and he was just going to tell her how
much he liked her little nose, when the waiter arrived with the tea and
the band struck up. It was a flute, a guitar, and a violin, and it played
so gaily that Fanny felt if she wasn’t careful even the cups and saucers
might grow little wings and fly away. George absorbed three chocolate
éclairs, Fanny two. The funny-tasting tea—“Lobster in the kettle,”
shouted George above the music—was nice all the same, and when the tray
was pushed aside and George was smoking, Fanny felt bold enough to look
at the other people. But it was the band grouped under one of the dark
trees that fascinated her most. The fat man stroking the guitar was like
a picture. The dark man playing the flute kept raising his eyebrows as
though he was astonished at the sounds that came from it. The fiddler was
in shadow.

The music stopped as suddenly as it had begun. It was then she noticed a
tall old man with white hair standing beside the musicians. Strange she
hadn’t noticed him before. He wore a very high, glazed collar, a coat
green at the seams, and shamefully shabby button boots. Was he another
manager? He did not look like a manager, and yet he stood there gazing
over the table as though thinking of something different and far away
from all this. Who could he be?

Presently, as Fanny watched him, he touched the points of his collar with
his fingers, coughed slightly, and half-turned to the band. It began
to play again. Something boisterous, reckless, full of fire, full of
passion, was tossed into the air, was tossed to that quiet figure, which
clasped its hands, and still with that far-away look, began to sing.

“Good Lord!” said George. It seemed that everybody was equally
astonished. Even the little children eating ices stared, with their
spoons in the air.... Nothing was heard except a thin, faint voice, the
memory of a voice, singing something in Spanish. It wavered, beat on,
touched the high notes, fell again, seemed to implore, to entreat, to beg
for something, and then the tune changed, and it was resigned, it bowed
down, it knew it was denied.

Almost before the end a little child gave a squeak of laughter, but
everybody was smiling—except Fanny and George. Is life like this too?
thought Fanny. There are people like this. There is suffering. And she
looked at that gorgeous sea, lapping the land as though it loved it, and
the sky, bright with the brightness before evening. Had she and George
the right to be so happy? Wasn’t it cruel? There must be something else
in life which made all these things possible. What was it? She turned to
George.

But George had been feeling differently from Fanny. The poor old boy’s
voice was funny in a way, but, God, how it made you realize what a
terrific thing it was to be at the beginning of everything, as they were,
he and Fanny! George, too, gazed at the bright, breathing water, and his
lips opened as if he could drink it. How fine it was! There was nothing
like the sea for making a chap feel fit. And there sat Fanny, his Fanny,
leaning forward, breathing so gently.

“Fanny!” George called to her.

As she turned to him something in her soft, wondering look made George
feel that for two pins he would jump over the table and carry her off.

“I say,” said George, rapidly, “let’s go, shall we? Let’s go back to the
hotel. Come. Do, Fanny darling. Let’s go now.”

The band began to play. “Oh, God!” almost groaned George. “Let’s go
before the old codger begins squawking again.”

And a moment later they were gone.




A CUP OF TEA


Rosemary Fell was not exactly beautiful. No, you couldn’t have called
her beautiful. Pretty? Well, if you took her to pieces.... But why be so
cruel as to take anyone to pieces? She was young, brilliant, extremely
modern, exquisitely well dressed, amazingly well read in the newest of
the new books, and her parties were the most delicious mixture of the
really important people and ... artists—quaint creatures, discoveries of
hers, some of them too terrifying for words, but others quite presentable
and amusing.

Rosemary had been married two years. She had a duck of a boy. No, not
Peter—Michael. And her husband absolutely adored her. They were rich,
really rich, not just comfortably well off, which is odious and stuffy
and sounds like one’s grandparents. But if Rosemary wanted to shop she
would go to Paris as you and I would go to Bond Street. If she wanted to
buy flowers, the car pulled up at that perfect shop in Regent Street,
and Rosemary inside the shop just gazed in her dazzled, rather exotic
way, and said: “I want those and those and those. Give me four bunches
of those. And that jar of roses. Yes, I’ll have all the roses in the
jar. No, no lilac. I hate lilac. It’s got no shape.” The attendant bowed
and put the lilac out of sight, as though this was only too true; lilac
was dreadfully shapeless. “Give me those stumpy little tulips. Those
red and white ones.” And she was followed to the car by a thin shopgirl
staggering under an immense white paper armful that looked like a baby in
long clothes....

One winter afternoon she had been buying something in a little antique
shop in Curzon Street. It was a shop she liked. For one thing, one
usually had it to oneself. And then the man who kept it was ridiculously
fond of serving her. He beamed whenever she came in. He clasped his
hands; he was so gratified he could scarcely speak. Flattery, of course.
All the same, there was something....

“You see, madam,” he would explain in his low respectful tones, “I love
my things. I would rather not part with them than sell them to someone
who does not appreciate them, who has not that fine feeling which is so
rare....” And, breathing deeply he unrolled a tiny square of blue velvet
and pressed it on the glass counter with his pale finger-tips.

Today it was a little box. He had been keeping it for her. He had shown
it to nobody as yet. An exquisite little enamel box with a glaze so fine
it looked as though it had been baked in cream. On the lid a minute
creature stood under a flowery tree, and a more minute creature still
had her arms around his neck. Her hat, really no bigger than a geranium
petal, hung from a branch; it had green ribbons. And there was a pink
cloud like a watchful cherub floating above their heads. Rosemary took
her hands out of her long gloves. She always took off her gloves to
examine such things. Yes, she liked it very much. She loved it; it was
a great duck. She must have it. And, turning the creamy box, opening
and shutting it, she couldn’t help noticing how charming her hands were
against the blue velvet. The shopman, in some dim cavern of his mind, may
have dared to think so too. For he took a pencil, leant over the counter,
and his pale bloodless fingers crept timidly towards those rosy, flashing
ones, as he murmured gently: “If I may venture to point out to madam, the
flowers on the little lady’s bodice.”

“Charming!” Rosemary admired the flowers. But what was the price? For
a moment the shopman did not seem to hear. Then a murmur reached her.
“Twenty-eight guineas, madame.”

“Twenty-eight guineas.” Rosemary gave no sign. She laid the little box
down; she buttoned her gloves again. Twenty-eight guineas. Even if one is
rich.... She looked vague. She stared at a plump tea-kettle like a plump
hen above the shopman’s head, and her voice was dreamy as she answered:
“Well, keep it for me—will you? I’ll....”

But the shopman had already bowed as though keeping it for her was all
any human being could ask. He would be willing, of course, to keep it for
her for ever.

The discreet door shut with a click. She was outside on the step,
gazing at the winter afternoon. Rain was falling, and with the rain it
seemed the dark came too, spinning down like ashes. There was a cold
bitter taste in the air, and the new-lighted lamps looked sad. Sad were
the lights in the houses opposite. Dimly they burned as if regretting
something. And people hurried by, hidden under their hateful umbrellas.
Rosemary felt a strange pang. She pressed her muff to her breast; she
wished she had the little box, too, to cling to. Of course, the car was
there. She’d only to cross the pavement. But still she waited. There
are moments, horrible moments in life, when one emerges from shelter
and looks out, and it’s awful. One oughtn’t to give way to them. One
ought to go home and have an extra-special tea. But at the very instant
of thinking that, a young girl, thin, dark, shadowy—where had she come
from?—was standing at Rosemary’s elbow and a voice like a sigh, almost
like a sob, breathed: “Madame, may I speak to you a moment?”

“Speak to me?” Rosemary turned. She saw a little battered creature with
enormous eyes, someone quite young, no older than herself, who clutched
at her coat-collar with reddened hands, and shivered as though she had
just come out of the water.

“M-madame,” stammered the voice. “Would you let me have the price of a
cup of tea?”

“A cup of tea?” There was something simple, sincere in that voice; it
wasn’t in the least the voice of a beggar. “Then have you no money at
all?” asked Rosemary.

“None, madam,” came the answer.

“How extraordinary!” Rosemary peered through the dusk, and the girl
gazed back at her. How more than extraordinary! And suddenly it seemed
to Rosemary such an adventure. It was like something out of a novel by
Dostoevsky, this meeting in the dusk. Supposing she took the girl home?
Supposing she did do one of those things she was always reading about
or seeing on the stage, what would happen? It would be thrilling. And
she heard herself saying afterwards to the amazement of her friends: “I
simply took her home with me,” as she stepped forward and said to that
dim person beside her: “Come home to tea with me.”

The girl drew back startled. She even stopped shivering for a moment.
Rosemary put out a hand and touched her arm. “I mean it,” she said,
smiling. And she felt how simple and kind her smile was. “Why won’t you?
Do. Come home with me now in my car and have tea.”

“You—you don’t mean it, madam,” said the girl, and there was pain in her
voice.

“But I do,” cried Rosemary. “I want you to. To please me. Come along.”

The girl put her fingers to her lips and her eyes devoured Rosemary.
“You’re—you’re not taking me to the police station?” she stammered.

“The police station!” Rosemary laughed out. “Why should I be so cruel?
No, I only want to make you warm and to hear—anything you care to tell
me.”

Hungry people are easily led. The footman held the door of the car open,
and a moment later they were skimming through the dusk.

“There!” said Rosemary. She had a feeling of triumph as she slipped her
hand through the velvet strap. She could have said, “Now I’ve got you,”
as she gazed at the little captive she had netted. But of course she
meant it kindly. Oh, more than kindly. She was going to prove to this
girl that—wonderful things did happen in life, that—fairy godmothers
were real, that—rich people had hearts, and that women _were_ sisters.
She turned impulsively, saying: “Don’t be frightened. After all, why
shouldn’t you come back with me? We’re both women. If I’m the more
fortunate, you ought to expect....”

But happily at that moment, for she didn’t know how the sentence was
going to end, the car stopped. The bell was rung, the door opened, and
with a charming, protecting, almost embracing movement, Rosemary drew the
other into the hall. Warmth, softness, light, a sweet scent, all those
things so familiar to her she never even thought about them, she watched
that other receive. It was fascinating. She was like the little rich
girl in her nursery with all the cupboards to open, all the boxes to
unpack.

“Come, come upstairs,” said Rosemary, longing to begin to be generous.
“Come up to my room.” And, besides, she wanted to spare this poor little
thing from being stared at by the servants; she decided as they mounted
the stairs she would not even ring for Jeanne, but take off her things by
herself. The great thing was to be natural!

And “There!” cried Rosemary again, as they reached her beautiful big
bedroom with the curtains drawn, the fire leaping on her wonderful
lacquer furniture, her gold cushions and the primrose and blue rugs.

The girl stood just inside the door; she seemed dazed. But Rosemary
didn’t mind that.

“Come and sit down,” she cried, dragging her big chair up to the fire,
“in this comfy chair. Come and get warm. You look so dreadfully cold.”

“I daren’t, madam,” said the girl, and she edged backwards.

“Oh, please,”—Rosemary ran forward—“you mustn’t be frightened, you
mustn’t, really. Sit down, and when I’ve taken off my things we shall
go into the next room and have tea and be cosy. Why are you afraid?” And
gently she half pushed the thin figure into its deep cradle.

But there was no answer. The girl stayed just as she had been put, with
her hands by her sides and her mouth slightly open. To be quite sincere,
she looked rather stupid. But Rosemary wouldn’t acknowledge it. She leant
over her, saying: “Won’t you take off your hat? Your pretty hair is all
wet. And one is so much more comfortable without a hat, isn’t one?”

There was a whisper that sounded like “Very good, madam,” and the crushed
hat was taken off.

“Let me help you off with your coat, too,” said Rosemary.

The girl stood up. But she held on to the chair with one hand and let
Rosemary pull. It was quite an effort. The other scarcely helped her at
all. She seemed to stagger like a child, and the thought came and went
through Rosemary’s mind, that if people wanted helping they must respond
a little, just a little, otherwise it became very difficult indeed. And
what was she to do with the coat now? She left it on the floor, and the
hat too. She was just going to take a cigarette off the mantelpiece when
the girl said quickly, but so lightly and strangely: “I’m very sorry,
madam, but I’m going to faint. I shall go off, madam, if I don’t have
something.”

“Good heavens, how thoughtless I am!” Rosemary rushed to the bell.

“Tea! Tea at once! And some brandy immediately!”

The maid was gone again, but the girl almost cried out. “No, I don’t want
no brandy. I never drink brandy. It’s a cup of tea I want, madam.” And
she burst into tears.

It was a terrible and fascinating moment. Rosemary knelt beside her chair.

“Don’t cry, poor little thing,” she said. “Don’t cry.” And she gave the
other her lace handkerchief. She really was touched beyond words. She put
her arm round those thin, bird-like shoulders.

Now at last the other forgot to be shy, forgot everything except that
they were both women, and gasped out: “I can’t go on no longer like this.
I can’t bear it. I shall do away with myself. I can’t bear no more.”

“You shan’t have to. I’ll look after you. Don’t cry any more. Don’t you
see what a good thing it was that you met me? We’ll have tea and you’ll
tell me everything. And I shall arrange something. I promise. _Do_ stop
crying. It’s so exhausting. Please!”

The other did stop just in time for Rosemary to get up before the tea
came. She had the table placed between them. She plied the poor little
creature with everything, all the sandwiches, all the bread and butter,
and every time her cup was empty she filled it with tea, cream and sugar.
People always said sugar was so nourishing. As for herself she didn’t
eat; she smoked and looked away tactfully so that the other should not be
shy.

And really the effect of that slight meal was marvellous. When the
tea-table was carried away a new being, a light, frail creature with
tangled hair, dark lips, deep, lighted eyes, lay back in the big chair
in a kind of sweet langour, looking at the blaze. Rosemary lit a fresh
cigarette; it was time to begin.

“And when did you have your last meal?” she asked softly.

But at that moment the door-handle turned.

“Rosemary, may I come in?” It was Philip.

“Of course.”

He came in. “Oh, I’m so sorry,” he said, and stopped and stared.

“It’s quite all right,” said Rosemary smiling. “This is my friend, Miss——”

“Smith, madam,” said the languid figure, who was strangely still and
unafraid.

“Smith,” said Rosemary. “We are going to have a little talk.”

“Oh, yes,” said Philip. “Quite,” and his eye caught sight of the coat
and hat on the floor. He came over to the fire and turned his back to
it. “It’s a beastly afternoon,” he said curiously, still looking at that
listless figure, looking at its hands and boots, and then at Rosemary
again.

“Yes, isn’t it?” said Rosemary enthusiastically. “Vile.”

Philip smiled his charming smile. “As a matter of fact,” said he, “I
wanted you to come into the library for a moment. Would you? Will Miss
Smith excuse us?”

The big eyes were raised to him, but Rosemary answered for her. “Of
course she will.” And they went out of the room together.

“I say,” said Philip, when they were alone. “Explain. Who is she? What
does it all mean?”

Rosemary, laughing, leaned against the door and said: “I picked her up in
Curzon Street. Really. She’s a real pick-up. She asked me for the price
of a cup of tea, and I brought her home with me.”

“But what on earth are you going to do with her?” cried Philip.

“Be nice to her,” said Rosemary quickly. “Be frightfully nice to her.
Look after her. I don’t know how. We haven’t talked yet. But show
her—treat her—make her feel——”

“My darling girl,” said Philip, “you’re quite mad, you know. It simply
can’t be done.”

“I knew you’d say that,” retorted Rosemary. “Why not? I want to. Isn’t
that a reason? And besides, one’s always reading about these things. I
decided——”

“But,” said Philip slowly, and he cut the end of a cigar, “she’s so
astonishingly pretty.”

“Pretty?” Rosemary was so surprised that she blushed. “Do you think so?
I—I hadn’t thought about it.”

“Good Lord!” Philip struck a match. “She’s absolutely lovely. Look again,
my child. I was bowled over when I came into your room just now. However
... I think you’re making a ghastly mistake. Sorry, darling, if I’m crude
and all that. But let me know if Miss Smith is going to dine with us in
time for me to look up _The Milliner’s Gazette_.”

“You absurd creature!” said Rosemary, and she went out of the library,
but not back to her bedroom. She went to her writing-room and sat down at
her desk. Pretty! Absolutely lovely! Bowled over! Her heart beat like a
heavy bell. Pretty! Lovely! She drew her cheque book towards her. But no,
cheques would be no use, of course. She opened a drawer and took out five
pound notes, looked at them, put two back, and holding the three squeezed
in her hand, she went back to her bedroom.

Half an hour later Philip was still in the library, when Rosemary came in.

“I only wanted to tell you,” said she, and she leaned against the door
again and looked at him with her dazzled exotic gaze, “Miss Smith won’t
dine with us tonight.”

Philip put down the paper. “Oh, what’s happened? Previous engagement?”

Rosemary came over and sat down on his knee. “She insisted on going,”
said she, “so I gave the poor little thing a present of money. I couldn’t
keep her against her will, could I?” she added softly.

Rosemary had just done her hair, darkened her eyes a little, and put on
her pearls. She put up her hands and touched Philip’s cheeks.

“Do you like me?” said she, and her tone, sweet, husky, troubled him.

“I like you awfully,” he said, and he held her tighter. “Kiss me.”

There was a pause.

Then Rosemary said dreamily, “I saw a fascinating little box today. It
cost twenty-eight guineas. May I have it?”

Philip jumped her on his knee. “You may, little wasteful one,” said he.

But that was not really what Rosemary wanted to say.

“Philip,” she whispered, and she pressed his head against her bosom, “am
I _pretty_?”




TAKING THE VEIL


It seemed impossible that anyone should be unhappy on such a beautiful
morning. Nobody was, decided Edna, except herself. The windows were flung
wide in the houses. From within there came the sound of pianos, little
hands chased after each other and ran away from each other, practising
scales. The trees fluttered in the sunny gardens, all bright with spring
flowers. Street boys whistled, a little dog barked; people passed by,
walking so lightly, so swiftly, they looked as though they wanted to
break into a run. Now she actually saw in the distance a parasol,
peach-coloured, the first parasol of the year.

Perhaps even Edna did not look quite as unhappy as she felt. It is not
easy to look tragic at eighteen, when you are extremely pretty, with the
cheeks and lips and shining eyes of perfect health. Above all, when you
are wearing a French blue frock and your new spring hat trimmed with
cornflowers. True, she carried under her arm a book bound in horrid
black leather. Perhaps the book provided a gloomy note, but only by
accident; it was the ordinary Library binding. For Edna had made going to
the Library an excuse for getting out of the house to think, to realise
what had happened, to decide somehow what was to be done now.

An awful thing had happened. Quite suddenly, at the theatre last night,
when she and Jimmy were seated side by side in the dress-circle, without
a moment’s warning—in fact, she had just finished a chocolate almond
and passed the box to him again—she had fallen in love with an actor.
But—fallen—in—love....

The feeling was unlike anything she had ever imagined before. It wasn’t
in the least pleasant. It was hardly thrilling. Unless you can call
the most dreadful sensation of hopeless misery, despair, agony and
wretchedness, thrilling. Combined with the certainty that if that actor
met her on the pavement after, while Jimmy was fetching their cab, she
would follow him to the ends of the earth, at a nod, at a sign, without
giving another thought to Jimmy or her father and mother or her happy
home and countless friends again....

The play had begun fairly cheerfully. That was at the chocolate almond
stage. Then the hero had gone blind. Terrible moment! Edna had cried
so much she had to borrow Jimmy’s folded, smooth-feeling handkerchief
as well. Not that crying mattered. Whole rows were in tears. Even the
men blew their noses with a loud trumpeting noise and tried to peer at
the program instead of looking at the stage. Jimmy, most mercifully
dry-eyed—for what would she have done without his handkerchief?—squeezed
her free hand, and whispered “Cheer up, darling girl!” And it was then
she had taken a last chocolate almond to please him and passed the box
again. Then, there had been that ghastly scene with the hero alone on the
stage in a deserted room at twilight, with a band playing outside and the
sound of cheering coming from the street. He had tried—ah! how painfully,
how pitifully—to grope his way to the window. He had succeeded at last.
There he stood holding the curtain while one beam of light, just one
beam, shone full on his raised sightless face, and the band faded away
into the distance....

It was—really, it was absolutely—oh, the most—it was simply—in fact, from
that moment Edna knew that life could never be the same. She drew her
hand away from Jimmy’s, leaned back, and shut the chocolate box for ever.
This at last was love!

Edna and Jimmy were engaged. She had had her hair up for a year and a
half; they had been publicly engaged for a year. But they had known
they were going to marry each other ever since they walked in the
Botanical Gardens with their nurses, and sat on the grass with a wine
biscuit and a piece of barley-sugar each for their tea. It was so much
an accepted thing that Edna had worn a wonderfully good imitation of an
engagement-ring out of a cracker all the time she was at school. And up
till now they had been devoted to each other.

But now it was over. It was so completely over that Edna found it
difficult to believe that Jimmy did not realize it too. She smiled
wisely, sadly, as she turned into the gardens of the Convent of the
Sacred Heart and mounted the path that led through them to Hill Street.
How much better to know it now than to wait until after they were
married! Now it was possible that Jimmy would get over it. No, it was no
use deceiving herself; he would never get over it! His life was wrecked,
was ruined; that was inevitable. But he was young.... Time, people said,
Time might make a little, just a little difference. In forty years when
he was an old man, he might be able to think of her calmly—perhaps. But
she,—what did the future hold for her?

Edna had reached the top of the path. There under a new-leafed tree,
hung with little bunches of white flowers, she sat down on a green bench
and looked over the Convent flower-beds. In the one nearest to her there
grew tender stocks, with a border of blue, shell-like pansies, with
at one corner a clump of creamy freezias, their light spears of green
criss-crossed over the flowers. The Convent pigeons were tumbling high in
the air, and she could hear the voice of Sister Agnes who was giving a
singing lesson. _Ah-me_, sounded the deep tones of the nun, and _Ah-me_,
they were echoed....

If she did not marry Jimmy, of course she would marry nobody. The man she
was in love with, the famous actor—Edna had far too much common-sense not
to realize that would never be. It was very odd. She didn’t even want it
to be. Her love was too intense for that. It had to be endured, silently;
it had to torment her. It was, she supposed, simply that kind of love.

“But, Edna!” cried Jimmy. “Can you never change? Can I never hope again?”

Oh, what sorrow to have to say it, but it must be said. “No, Jimmy, I
will never change.”

Edna bowed her head; and a little flower fell on her lap, and the voice
of Sister Agnes cried suddenly _Ah-no_, and the echo came, _Ah-no_....

At that moment the future was revealed. Edna saw it all. She was
astonished; it took her breath away at first. But, after all, what could
be more natural? She would go into a convent.... Her father and mother
do everything to dissuade her, in vain. As for Jimmy, his state of mind
hardly bears thinking about. Why can’t they understand? How can they add
to her suffering like this? The world is cruel, terribly cruel! After
a last scene when she gives away her jewellery and so on to her best
friends—she so calm, they so broken-hearted—into a convent she goes. No,
one moment. The very evening of her going is the actor’s last evening
at Port Willin. He receives by a strange messenger a box. It is full of
white flowers. But there is no name, no card. Nothing? Yes, under the
roses, wrapped in a white handkerchief, Edna’s last photograph with,
written underneath,

    The world forgetting, by the world forgot.

Edna sat very still under the trees; she clasped the black book in
her fingers as though it were her missal. She takes the name of Sister
Angela. Snip! Snip! All her lovely hair is cut off. Will she be allowed
to send one curl to Jimmy? It is contrived somehow. And in a blue gown
with a white head-band Sister Angela goes from the convent to the chapel,
from the chapel to the convent with something unearthly in her look, in
her sorrowful eyes, and in the gentle smile with which they greet the
little children who run to her. A saint! She hears it whispered as she
paces the chill, wax-smelling corridors. A saint! And visitors to the
chapel are told of the nun whose voice is heard above the other voices,
of her youth, her beauty, of her tragic, tragic love. “There is a man in
this town whose life is ruined....”

A big bee, a golden furry fellow, crept into a freezia, and the delicate
flower leaned over, swung, shook; and when the bee flew away it fluttered
still as though it were laughing. Happy, careless flower!

Sister Angela looked at it and said, “Now it is winter.” One night,
lying in her icy cell she hears a cry. Some stray animal is out there in
the garden, a kitten or a lamb or—well, whatever little animal might be
there. Up rises the sleepless nun. All in white, shivering but fearless,
she goes and brings it in. But next morning, when the bell rings for
matins, she is found tossing in high fever ... in delirium ... and she
never recovers. In three days all is over. The service has been said in
the chapel, and she is buried in the corner of the cemetery reserved for
the nuns, where there are plain little crosses of wood. Rest in Peace,
Sister Angela....

Now it is evening. Two old people leaning on each other come slowly to
the grave and kneel down sobbing, “Our daughter! Our only daughter!”
Now there comes another. He is all in black; he comes slowly. But when
he is there and lifts his black hat, Edna sees to her horror his hair
is snow-white. Jimmy! Too late, too late! The tears are running down
his face; he is crying _now_. Too late, too late! The wind shakes the
leafless trees in the churchyard. He gives one awful bitter cry.

Edna’s black book fell with a thud to the garden path. She jumped up,
her heart beating. My darling! No, it’s not too late. It’s all been a
mistake, a terrible dream. Oh, that white hair! How could she have done
it? She has not done it. Oh, heavens! Oh, what happiness! She is free,
young, and nobody knows her secret. Everything is still possible for
her and Jimmy. The house they have planned may still be built, the
little solemn boy with his hands behind his back watching them plant
the standard roses may still be born. His baby sister.... But when Edna
got as far as his baby sister, she stretched out her arms as though the
little love came flying through the air to her, and gazing at the garden,
at the white sprays on the tree, at those darling pigeons blue against
the blue, and the Convent with its narrow windows, she realized that now
at last for the first time in her life—she had never imagined any feeling
like it before—she knew what it was to be in love, but—in—love!




THE FLY


“Y’are very snug in here,” piped old Mr. Woodifield, and he peered out
of the great, green leather armchair by his friend the boss’s desk as a
baby peers out of its pram. His talk was over; it was time for him to
be off. But he did not want to go. Since he had retired, since his ...
stroke, the wife and the girls kept him boxed up in the house every day
of the week except Tuesday. On Tuesday he was dressed up and brushed and
allowed to cut back to the City for the day. Though what he did there
the wife and girls couldn’t imagine. Made a nuisance of himself to his
friends, they supposed.... Well, perhaps so. All the same, we cling to
our last pleasures as the tree clings to its last leaves. So there sat
old Woodifield, smoking a cigar and staring almost greedily at the boss,
who rolled in his office chair, stout, rosy, five years older than he,
and still going strong, still at the helm. It did one good to see him.

Wistfully, admiringly, the old voice added, “It’s snug in here, upon my
word!”

“Yes, it’s comfortable enough,” agreed the boss, and he flipped the
_Financial Times_ with a paper-knife. As a matter of fact he was proud of
his room; he liked to have it admired, especially by old Woodifield. It
gave him a feeling of deep, solid satisfaction to be planted there in the
midst of it in full view of that frail old figure in the muffler.

“I’ve had it done up lately,” he explained, as he had explained for the
past—how many?—weeks. “New carpet,” and he pointed to the bright red
carpet with a pattern of large white rings. “New furniture,” and he
nodded towards the massive bookcase and the table with legs like twisted
treacle. “Electric heating!” He waved almost exultantly towards the five
transparent, pearly sausages glowing so softly in the tilted copper pan.

But he did not draw old Woodifield’s attention to the photograph over the
table of a grave-looking boy in uniform standing in one of those spectral
photographers’ parks with photographers’ storm-clouds behind him. It was
not new. It had been there for over six years.

“There was something I wanted to tell you,” said old Woodifield, and his
eyes grew dim remembering. “Now what was it? I had it in my mind when I
started out this morning.” His hands began to tremble, and patches of red
showed above his beard.

Poor old chap, he’s on his last pins, thought the boss. And, feeling
kindly, he winked at the old man, and said jokingly, “I tell you what.
I’ve got a little drop of something here that’ll do you good before you
go out into the cold again. It’s beautiful stuff. It wouldn’t hurt a
child.” He took a key off his watch-chain, unlocked a cupboard below his
desk, and drew forth a dark, squat bottle. “That’s the medicine,” said
he. “And the man from whom I got it told me on the strict Q.T. it came
from the cellars at Windsor Cassel.”

Old Woodifield’s mouth fell open at the sight. He couldn’t have looked
more surprised if the boss had produced a rabbit.

“It’s whisky, ain’t it?” he piped, feebly.

The boss turned the bottle and lovingly showed him the label. Whisky it
was.

“D’you know,” said he, peering up at the boss wonderingly, “they won’t
let me touch it at home.” And he looked as though he was going to cry.

“Ah, that’s where we know a bit more than the ladies,” cried the boss,
swooping across for two tumblers that stood on the table with the
water-bottle, and pouring a generous finger into each. “Drink it down.
It’ll do you good. And don’t put any water with it. It’s sacrilege to
tamper with stuff like this. Ah!” He tossed off his, pulled out his
handkerchief, hastily wiped his moustaches, and cocked an eye at old
Woodifield, who was rolling his in his chaps.

The old man swallowed, was silent a moment, and then said faintly, “It’s
nutty!”

But it warmed him; it crept into his chill old brain—he remembered.

“That was it,” he said, heaving himself out of his chair. “I thought
you’d like to know. The girls were in Belgium last week having a look at
poor Reggie’s grave, and they happened to come across your boy’s. They’re
quite near each other, it seems.”

Old Woodifield paused, but the boss made no reply. Only a quiver in his
eyelids showed that he heard.

“The girls were delighted with the way the place is kept,” piped the old
voice. “Beautifully looked after. Couldn’t be better if they were at
home. You’ve not been across, have yer?”

“No, no!” For various reasons the boss had not been across.

“There’s miles of it,” quavered old Woodifield, “and it’s all as neat as
a garden. Flowers growing on all the graves. Nice broad paths.” It was
plain from his voice how much he liked a nice broad path.

The pause came again. Then the old man brightened wonderfully.

“D’you know what the hotel made the girls pay for a pot of jam?” he
piped. “Ten francs! Robbery, I call it. It was a little pot, so Gertrude
says, no bigger than a half-crown. And she hadn’t taken more than a
spoonful when they charged her ten francs. Gertrude brought the pot away
with her to teach ’em a lesson. Quite right, too; it’s trading on our
feelings. They think because we’re over there having a look around we’re
ready to pay anything. That’s what it is.” And he turned towards the door.

“Quite right, quite right!” cried the boss, though what was quite right
he hadn’t the least idea. He came round by his desk, followed the
shuffling footsteps to the door, and saw the old fellow out. Woodifield
was gone.

For a long moment the boss stayed, staring at nothing, while the
grey-haired office messenger, watching him, dodged in and out of his
cubby-hole like a dog that expects to be taken for a run. Then: “I’ll see
nobody for half an hour, Macey,” said the boss. “Understand? Nobody at
all.”

“Very good, sir.”

The door shut, the firm heavy steps recrossed the bright carpet, the fat
body plumped down in the spring chair, and leaning forward, the boss
covered his face with his hands. He wanted, he intended, he had arranged
to weep....

It had been a terrible shock to him when old Woodifield sprang that
remark upon him about the boy’s grave. It was exactly as though the earth
had opened and he had seen the boy lying there with Woodifield’s girls
staring down at him. For it was strange. Although over six years had
passed away, the boss never thought of the boy except as lying unchanged,
unblemished in his uniform, asleep for ever. “My son!” groaned the boss.
But no tears came yet. In the past, in the first months and even years
after the boy’s death, he had only to say those words to be overcome by
such grief that nothing short of a violent fit of weeping could relieve
him. Time, he had declared then, he had told everybody, could make no
difference. Other men perhaps might recover, might live their loss down,
but not he. How was it possible? His boy was an only son. Ever since his
birth the boss had worked at building up this business for him; it had no
other meaning if it was not for the boy. Life itself had come to have no
other meaning. How on earth could he have slaved, denied himself, kept
going all those years without the promise for ever before him of the
boy’s stepping into his shoes and carrying on where he left off?

And that promise had been so near being fulfilled. The boy had been in
the office learning the ropes for a year before the war. Every morning
they had started off together; they had come back by the same train. And
what congratulations he had received as the boy’s father! No wonder; he
had taken to it marvellously. As to his popularity with the staff, every
man jack of them down to old Macey couldn’t make enough of the boy. And
he wasn’t in the least spoilt. No, he was just his bright, natural self,
with the right word for everybody, with that boyish look and his habit of
saying, “Simply splendid!”

But all that was over and done with as though it never had been. The day
had come when Macey had handed him the telegram that brought the whole
place crashing about his head. “Deeply regret to inform you....” And he
had left the office a broken man, with his life in ruins.

Six years ago, six years.... How quickly time passed! It might have
happened yesterday. The boss took his hands from his face; he was
puzzled. Something seemed to be wrong with him. He wasn’t feeling as
he wanted to feel. He decided to get up and have a look at the boy’s
photograph. But it wasn’t a favorite photograph of his; the expression
was unnatural. It was cold, even stern-looking. The boy had never looked
like that.

At that moment the boss noticed that a fly had fallen into his broad
inkpot, and was trying feebly but desperately to clamber out again.
Help! help! said those struggling legs. But the sides of the inkpot were
wet and slippery; it fell back again and began to swim. The boss took
up a pen, picked the fly out of the ink, and shook it on to a piece of
blotting-paper. For a fraction of a second it lay still on the dark patch
that oozed round it. Then the front legs waved, took hold, and, pulling
its small sodden body up it began the immense task of cleaning the ink
from its wings. Over and under, over and under, went a leg along a wing,
as the stone goes over and under the scythe. Then there was a pause,
while the fly, seeming to stand on the tips of its toes, tried to expand
first one wing and then the other. It succeeded at last, and, sitting
down, it began, like a minute cat, to clean its face. Now one could
imagine that the little front legs rubbed against each other lightly,
joyfully. The horrible danger was over; it had escaped; it was ready for
life again.

But just then the boss had an idea. He plunged his pen back into the
ink, leaned his thick wrist on the blotting paper, and as the fly tried
its wings down came a great heavy blot. What would it make of that? What
indeed! The little beggar seemed absolutely cowed, stunned, and afraid
to move because of what would happen next. But then, as if painfully,
it dragged itself forward. The front legs waved, caught hold, and, more
slowly this time, the task began from the beginning.

He’s a plucky little devil, thought the boss, and he felt a real
admiration for the fly’s courage. That was the way to tackle things;
that was the right spirit. Never say die; it was only a question of....
But the fly had again finished its laborious task, and the boss had just
time to refill his pen, to shake fair and square on the new-cleaned
body yet another dark drop. What about it this time? A painful moment of
suspense followed. But behold, the front legs were again waving; the boss
felt a rush of relief. He leaned over the fly and said to it tenderly,
“You artful little b....” And he actually had the brilliant notion of
breathing on it to help the drying process. All the same, there was
something timid and weak about its efforts now, and the boss decided that
this time should be the last, as he dipped the pen into the inkpot.

It was. The last blot on the soaked blotting-paper, and the draggled fly
lay in it and did not stir. The back legs were stuck to the body; the
front legs were not to be seen.

“Come on,” said the boss. “Look sharp!” And he stirred it with his pen—in
vain. Nothing happened or was likely to happen. The fly was dead.

The boss lifted the corpse on the end of the paper-knife and flung it
into the waste-paper basket. But such a grinding feeling of wretchedness
seized him that he felt positively frightened. He started forward and
pressed the bell for Macey.

“Bring me some fresh blotting-paper,” he said, sternly, “and look sharp
about it.” And while the old dog padded away he fell to wondering what it
was he had been thinking about before. What was it? It was.... He took
out his handkerchief and passed it inside his collar. For the life of him
he could not remember.




THE CANARY


... You see that big nail to the right of the front door? I can scarcely
look at it even now and yet I could not bear to take it out. I should
like to think it was there always even after my time. I sometimes hear
the next people saying, “There must have been a cage hanging from there.”
And it comforts me; I feel he is not quite forgotten.

... You cannot imagine how wonderfully he sang. It was not like the
singing of other canaries. And that isn’t just my fancy. Often, from the
window, I used to see people stop at the gate to listen, or they would
lean over the fence by the mock-orange for quite a long time—carried
away. I suppose it sounds absurd to you—it wouldn’t if you had heard
him—but it really seemed to me that he sang whole songs with a beginning
and an end to them.

For instance, when I’d finished the house in the afternoon, and changed
my blouse and brought my sewing on to the veranda here, he used to hop,
hop, hop from one perch to another, tap against the bars as if to attract
my attention, sip a little water just as a professional singer might, and
then break into a song so exquisite that I had to put my needle down to
listen to him. I can’t describe it; I wish I could. But it was always the
same, every afternoon, and I felt that I understood every note of it.

... I loved him. How I loved him! Perhaps it does not matter so very
much what it is one loves in this world. But love something one must.
Of course there was always my little house and the garden, but for some
reason they were never enough. Flowers respond wonderfully, but they
don’t sympathize. Then I loved the evening star. Does that sound foolish?
I used to go into the backyard, after sunset, and wait for it until it
shone above the dark gum tree. I used to whisper “There you are, my
darling.” And just in that first moment it seemed to be shining for me
alone. It seemed to understand this ... something which is like longing,
and yet it is not longing. Or regret—it is more like regret. And yet
regret for what? I have much to be thankful for.

... But after he came into my life I forgot the evening star; I did not
need it any more. But it was strange. When the Chinaman who came to
the door with birds to sell held him up in his tiny cage, and instead
of fluttering, fluttering, like the poor little goldfinches, he gave a
faint, small chirp, I found myself saying, just as I had said to the star
over the gum tree, “There you are, my darling.” From that moment he was
mine.

... It surprises me even now to remember how he and I shared each other’s
lives. The moment I came down in the morning and took the cloth off his
cage he greeted me with a drowsy little note. I knew it meant “Missus!
Missus!” Then I hung him on the nail outside while I got my three young
men their breakfasts, and I never brought him in until we had the house
to ourselves again. Then, when the washing-up was done, it was quite a
little entertainment. I spread a newspaper over a corner of the table and
when I put the cage on it he used to beat with his wings despairingly,
as if he didn’t know what was coming. “You’re a regular little actor,”
I used to scold him. I scraped the tray, dusted it with fresh sand,
filled his seed and water tins, tucked a piece of chickweed and half a
chili between the bars. And I am perfectly certain he understood and
appreciated every item of this little performance. You see by nature he
was exquisitely neat. There was never a speck on his perch. And you’d
only to see him enjoy his bath to realize he had a real small passion
for cleanliness. His bath was put in last. And the moment it was in he
positively leapt into it. First he fluttered one wing, then the other,
then he ducked his head and dabbled his breast feathers. Drops of water
were scattered all over the kitchen, but still he would not get out. I
used to say to him, “Now that’s quite enough. You’re only showing off.”
And at last out he hopped and, standing on one leg, he began to peck
himself dry. Finally he gave a shake, a flick, a twitter and he lifted
his throat—Oh, I can hardly bear to recall it. I was always cleaning the
knives at the time. And it almost seemed to me the knives sang too, as I
rubbed them bright on the board.

... Company, you see—that was what he was. Perfect company. If you have
lived alone you will realize how precious that is. Of course there were
my three young men who came in to supper every evening, and sometimes
stayed in the dining-room afterwards reading the paper. But I could not
expect them to be interested in the little things that made my day. Why
should they be? I was nothing to them. In fact, I overheard them one
evening talking about me on the stairs as “the Scarecrow.” No matter. It
doesn’t matter. Not in the least. I quite understand. They are young. Why
should I mind? But I remember feeling so especially thankful that I was
not quite alone that evening. I told him, after they had gone out. I said
“Do you know what they call Missus?” And he put his head on one side and
looked at me with his little bright eye until I could not help laughing.
It seemed to amuse him.

... Have you kept birds? If you haven’t all this must sound, perhaps,
exaggerated. People have the idea that birds are heartless, cold little
creatures, not like dogs or cats. My washerwoman used to say on Mondays
when she wondered why I didn’t keep “a nice fox terrier,” “There’s no
comfort, Miss, in a canary.” Untrue. Dreadfully untrue. I remember
one night. I had had a very awful dream—dreams can be dreadfully
cruel—even after I had woken up I could not get over it. So I put on my
dressing-gown and went down to the kitchen for a glass of water. It was
a winter night and raining hard. I suppose I was still half asleep, but
through the kitchen window, that hadn’t a blind, it seemed to me the dark
was staring in, spying. And suddenly I felt it was unbearable that I had
no one to whom I could say “I’ve had such a dreadful dream,” or—or “Hide
me from the dark.” I even covered my face for a minute. And then there
came a little “Sweet! Sweet!” His cage was on the table, and the cloth
had slipped so that a chink of light shone through. “Sweet! Sweet!” said
the darling little fellow again, softly, as much as to say, “I’m here,
Missus! I’m here!” That was so beautifully comforting that I nearly cried.

... And now he’s gone. I shall never have another bird, another pet of
any kind. How could I? When I found him, lying on his back, with his eye
dim and his claws wrung, when I realised that never again should I hear
my darling sing, something seemed to die in me. My heart felt hollow,
as if it was his cage. I shall get over it. Of course. I must. One can
get over anything in time. And people always say I have a cheerful
disposition. They are quite right. I thank my God I have.

... All the same, without being morbid, and giving way to—to memories and
so on, I must confess that there does seem to me something sad in life.
It is hard to say what it is. I don’t mean the sorrow that we all know,
like illness and poverty and death. No, it is something different. It is
there, deep down, deep down, part of one, like one’s breathing. However
hard I work and tire myself I have only to stop to know it is there,
waiting. I often wonder if everybody feels the same. One can never know.
But isn’t it extraordinary that under his sweet, joyful little singing it
was just this sadness—ah, what is it?—that I heard?




A MARRIED MAN’S STORY


It is evening. Supper is over. We have left the small, cold dining-room,
we have come back to the sitting-room where there is a fire. All is as
usual. I am sitting at my writing table which is placed across a corner
so that I am behind it, as it were, and facing the room. The lamp with
the green shade is alight; I have before me two large books of reference,
both open, a pile of papers ... all the paraphernalia, in fact, of an
extremely occupied man. My wife, with her little boy on her lap, is in
a low chair before the fire. She is about to put him to bed before she
clears away the dishes and piles them up in the kitchen for the servant
girl to-morrow morning. But the warmth, the quiet, and the sleepy baby,
have made her dreamy. One of his red woollen boots is off, one is on. She
sits, bent forward, clasping the little bare foot, staring into the glow,
and as the fire quickens, falls, flares again, her shadow—an immense
_Mother and Child_—is here and gone again upon the wall....

Outside it is raining. I like to think of that cold drenched window
behind the blind, and beyond, the dark bushes in the garden, their
broad leaves bright with rain, and beyond the fence, the gleaming road
with the two hoarse little gutters singing against each other, and the
wavering reflections of the lamps, like fishes’ tails. While I am here,
I am there, lifting my face to the dim sky, and it seems to me it must
be raining all over the world—that the whole earth is drenched, is
sounding with a soft quick patter or hard steady drumming, or gurgling
and something that is like sobbing and laughing mingled together, and
that light playful splashing that is of water falling into still lakes
and flowing rivers. And all at one and the same moment I am arriving
in a strange city, slipping under the hood of the cab while the driver
whips the cover off the breathing horse, running from shelter to shelter,
dodging someone, swerving by someone else. I am conscious of tall houses,
their doors and shutters sealed against the night, of dripping balconies
and sodden flower-pots. I am brushing through deserted gardens and
falling into moist smelling summer-houses (you know how soft and almost
crumbling the wood of a summer-house is in the rain), I am standing on
the dark quayside, giving my ticket into the wet red hand of the old
sailor in an oilskin. How strong the sea smells! How loudly the tied-up
boats knock against one another! I am crossing the wet stackyard, hooded
in an old sack, carrying a lantern, while the house-dog, like a soaking
doormat, springs, shakes himself over me. And now I am walking along a
deserted road—it is impossible to miss the puddles, and the trees are
stirring—stirring.

But one could go on with such a catalogue for ever—on and on—until one
lifted the single arum lily leaf and discovered the tiny snails clinging,
until one counted ... and what then? Aren’t those just the signs, the
traces of my feeling? The bright green streaks made by someone who walks
over the dewy grass? Not the feeling itself. And as I think that, a
mournful glorious voice begins to sing in my bosom. Yes, perhaps that
is nearer what I mean. What a voice! What power! What velvety softness!
Marvellous!

Suddenly my wife turns round quickly. She knows—how long has she
known?—that I am not “working.” It is strange that with her full, open
gaze, she should smile so timidly—and that she should say in such a
hesitating voice, “What are you thinking?”

I smile and draw two fingers across my forehead in the way I have.
“Nothing,” I answer softly.

At that she stirs, and still trying not to make it sound important, she
says, “Oh, but you must have been thinking of something!”

Then I really meet her gaze, meet it fully, and I fancy her face quivers.
Will she never grow accustomed to these simple—one might say—everyday
little lies? Will she never learn not to expose herself—or to build up
defences?

“Truly, I was thinking of nothing.”

There! I seem to see it dart at her. She turns away, pulls the other red
sock off the baby, sits him up, and begins to unbutton him behind. I
wonder if that little soft rolling bundle sees anything, feels anything?
Now she turns him over on her knee, and in this light, his soft arms and
legs waving, he is extraordinarily like a young crab. A queer thing is
I can’t connect him with my wife and myself; I’ve never accepted him as
ours. Each time when I come into the hall and see the perambulator, I
catch myself thinking: “H’m, someone has brought a baby!” Or, when his
crying wakes me at night, I feel inclined to blame my wife for having
brought the baby in from outside. The truth is, that though one might
suspect her of strong maternal feelings, my wife doesn’t seem to me the
type of woman who bears children in her own body. There’s an immense
difference! Where is that ... animal ease and playfulness, that quick
kissing and cuddling one has been taught to expect of young mothers? She
hasn’t a sign of it. I believe that when she ties its bonnet she feels
like an aunt and not a mother. But of course I may be wrong; she may be
passionately devoted ... I don’t think so. At any rate, isn’t it a trifle
indecent to feel like this about one’s own wife? Indecent or not, one has
these feelings. And one other thing. How can I reasonably expect my wife,
_a broken-hearted woman_, to spend her time tossing the baby? But that is
beside the mark. She never even began to toss when her heart was whole.

And now she has carried the baby to bed. I hear her soft, deliberate
steps moving between the dining-room and the kitchen, there and back
again, to the tune of the clattering dishes. And now all is quiet. What
is happening now? Oh, I know just as surely as if I’d gone to see—she is
standing in the middle of the kitchen facing the rainy window. Her head
is bent, with one finger she is tracing something—nothing—on the table.
It is cold in the kitchen; the gas jumps; the tap drips; it’s a forlorn
picture. And nobody is going to come behind her, to take her in his arms,
to kiss her soft hair, to lead her to the fire and to rub her hands warm
again. Nobody is going to call her or to wonder what she is doing out
there. And she knows it. And yet, being a woman, deep down, deep down,
she really does expect the miracle to happen; she really could embrace
that dark, dark deceit, rather than live—like this.


§

To live like this.... I write those words, very carefully, very
beautifully. For some reason I feel inclined to sign them, or to write
underneath—Trying a New Pen. But seriously, isn’t it staggering to
think what may be contained in one innocent-looking little phrase? It
tempts me—it tempts me terribly. Scene. The supper-table. My wife has
just handed me my tea. I stir it, lift the spoon, idly chase and then
carefully capture a speck of tea-leaf, and having brought it ashore, I
murmur, quite gently, “How long shall we continue to live—like—this?” And
immediately there is that famous “blinding flash and deafening roar. Huge
pieces of débris (I must say I like débris) are flung into the air ...
and when the dark clouds of smoke have drifted away....” But this will
never happen; I shall never know it. It will be found upon me “intact” as
they say. “Open my heart and you will see....”

Why? Ah, there you have me! There is the most difficult question of all
to answer. Why do people stay together? Putting aside “for the sake
of the children,” and “the habit of years” and “economic reasons” as
lawyers’ nonsense—it’s not much more—if one really does try to find out
why it is that people don’t leave each other, one discovers a mystery.
It is because they can’t; they are bound. And nobody on earth knows
what are the bonds that bind them except those two. Am I being obscure?
Well, the thing itself isn’t so frightfully crystal clear, is it? Let me
put it like this. Supposing you are taken, absolutely, first into his
confidence and then into hers. Supposing you know all there is to know
about the situation. And having given it not only your deepest sympathy
but your most honest impartial criticism, you declare, very calmly, (but
not without the slightest suggestion of relish—for there is—I swear there
is—in the very best of us—something that leaps up and cries “A-ahh!”
for joy at the thought of destroying), “Well, my opinion is that you
two people ought to part. You’ll do no earthly good together. Indeed,
it seems to me, it’s the duty of either to set the other free.” What
happens then? He—and she—agree. It is their conviction too. You are only
saying what they have been thinking all last night. And away they go to
act on your advice, immediately.... And the next time you hear of them
they are still together. You see—you’ve reckoned without the unknown
quantity—which is their secret relation to each other—and that they can’t
disclose even if they want to. Thus far you may tell and no further. Oh,
don’t misunderstand me! It need not necessarily have anything to do with
their sleeping together.... But this brings me to a thought I’ve often
half entertained. Which is that human beings, as we know them, don’t
choose each other at all. It is the owner, the second self inhabiting
them, who makes the choice for his own particular purposes, and—this
may sound absurdly far-fetched—it’s the second self in the other which
responds. Dimly—dimly—or so it has seemed to me—we realize this, at any
rate to the extent that we realize the hopelessness of trying to escape.
So that, what it all amounts to is—if the impermanent selves of my wife
and me are happy—_tant mieux pour nous_—if miserable—_tant pis_.... But
I don’t know, I don’t know. And it may be that it’s something entirely
individual in me—this sensation (yes, it is even a sensation) of how
extraordinarily _shell-like_ we are as we are—little creatures, peering
out of the sentry-box at the gate, ogling through our glass case at the
entry, wan little servants, who never can say for certain, even, if the
master is out or in....

The door opens.... My wife. She says, “I am going to bed.”

And I look up vaguely, and vaguely say, “You are going to bed.”

“Yes.” A tiny pause. “Don’t forget—will you?—to turn out the gas in the
hall.”

And again I repeat, “The gas in the hall.”

There was a time—the time before—when this habit of mine—it really has
become a habit now—it wasn’t one then—was one of our sweetest jokes
together. It began, of course, when on several occasions I really was
deeply engaged and I didn’t hear. I emerged only to see her shaking her
head and laughing at me, “You haven’t heard a word!”

“No. What did you say?”

Why should she think that so funny and charming? She did; it delighted
her. “Oh, my darling, it’s so like you! It’s so—so—” And I knew she
loved me for it. I knew she positively looked forward to coming in and
disturbing me, and so—as one does—I played up. I was guaranteed to be
wrapped away every evening at 10.30 p.m. But now? For some reason I feel
it would be crude to stop my performance. It’s simplest to play on. But
what is she waiting for to-night? Why doesn’t she go? Why prolong this?
She is going. No, her hand on the door-knob, she turns round again, and
she says in the most curious, small, breathless voice, “You’re not cold?”

Oh, it’s not fair to be as pathetic as that! That was simply damnable. I
shuddered all over before I managed to bring out a slow “No-o!” while my
left hand ruffles the reference pages.

She is gone; she will not come back again to-night. It is not only I who
recognize that; the room changes too. It relaxes, like an old actor.
Slowly the mask is rubbed off; the look of strained attention changes to
an air of heavy sullen brooding. Every line, every fold breathes fatigue.
The mirror is quenched; the ash whitens; only my sly lamp burns on....
But what a cynical indifference to me it all shows! Or should I perhaps
be flattered? No, we understand each other. You know those stories of
little children who are suckled by wolves and accepted by the tribe, and
how for ever after they move freely among their fleet, grey brothers?
Something like that has happened to me. But wait! That about the wolves
won’t do. Curious! Before I wrote it down, while it was still in my head,
I was delighted with it. It seemed to express, and more, to suggest, just
what I wanted to say. But written, I can smell the falseness immediately
and the ... source of the smell is in that word fleet. Don’t you agree?
Fleet, grey brothers! “Fleet.” A word I never use. When I wrote “wolves”
it skimmed across my mind like a shadow and I couldn’t resist it. Tell
me! Tell me! Why is it so difficult to write simply—and not only simply
but _sotto voce_, if you know what I mean? That is how I long to write.
No fine effects—no bravura. But just the plain truth, as only a liar can
tell it.


§

I light a cigarette, lean back, inhale deeply—and find myself wondering
if my wife is asleep. Or is she lying in her cold bed, staring into the
dark, with those trustful, bewildered eyes? Her eyes are like the eyes
of a cow that is being driven along a road. “Why am I being driven—what
harm have I done?” But I really am not responsible for that look; it’s
her natural expression. One day, when she was turning out a cupboard,
she found a little old photograph of herself, taken when she was a girl
at school. In her confirmation dress, she explained. And there were the
eyes, even then. I remember saying to her, “Did you always look so sad?”
Leaning over my shoulder, she laughed lightly, “Do I look sad? I think
it’s just ... me.” And she waited for me to say something about it. But
I was marvelling at her courage at having shown it to me at all. It was
a hideous photograph! And I wondered again if she realized how plain she
was, and comforted herself with the idea that people who loved each other
didn’t criticize but accepted everything, or if she really rather liked
her appearance and expected me to say something complimentary.

Oh, that was base of me! How could I have forgotten all the numberless
times when I have known her to turn away to avoid the light, press her
face into my shoulders. And, above all, how could I have forgotten the
afternoon of our wedding day when we sat on the green bench in the
Botanical Gardens and listened to the band, how, in an interval between
two pieces, she suddenly turned to me and said in the voice in which one
says, “Do you think the grass is damp?” or “Do you think it’s time for
tea?” ... “Tell me, do you think physical beauty is so very important?”
I don’t like to think how often she had rehearsed that question. And do
you know what I answered? At that moment, as if at my command there came
a great gush of hard, bright sound from the band, and I managed to shout
above it cheerfully, “I didn’t hear what you said.” Devilish! Wasn’t
it? Perhaps not wholly. She looked like the poor patient who hears the
surgeon say, “It will certainly be necessary to perform the operation—but
not now!”


§

But all this conveys the impression that my wife and I were never really
happy together. Not true! Not true! We were marvellously, radiantly
happy. We were a model couple. If you had seen us together, any time, any
place, if you had followed us, tracked us down, spied, taken us off our
guard, you still would have been forced to confess, “I have never seen a
more ideally suited pair.” Until last autumn.

But really to explain what happened then I should have to go back
and back, I should have to dwindle until my two hands clutched the
banisters, the stair-rail was higher than my head, and I peered through
to watch my father padding softly up and down. There were coloured
windows on the landings. As he came up, first his bald head was scarlet;
then it was yellow. How frightened I was! And when they put me to bed,
it was to dream that we were living inside one of my father’s big
coloured bottles. For he was a chemist. I was born nine years after my
parents were married. I was an only child, and the effect to produce even
me—small, withered bud I must have been—sapped all my mother’s strength.
She never left the room again. Bed, sofa, window, she moved between the
three. Well I can see her, on the window days, sitting, her cheek in her
hand, staring out. Her room looked over the street. Opposite there was a
wall plastered with advertisements for travelling shows and circuses and
so on. I stand beside her, and we gaze at the slim lady in a red dress
hitting a dark gentleman over the head with a parasol, or at the tiger
peering through the jungle while the clown, close by, balances a bottle
on his nose, or at a little golden-haired girl sitting on the knee of
an old black man in a broad cotton hat.... She says nothing. On sofa
days there is a flannel dressing gown that I loathe, and a cushion that
keeps on slipping off the hard sofa. I pick it up. It has flowers and
writing sewn on. I ask what the writing says, and she whispers, “Sweet
Repose!” In bed her fingers plait, in tight little plaits, the fringe of
the quilt, and her lips are thin. And that is all there is of my mother,
except the last queer “episode” that comes later.

My father.... Curled up in the corner on the lid of a round box that held
sponges, I stared at my father so long, it’s as though his image, cut off
at the waist by the counter, has remained solid in my memory. Perfectly
bald, polished head, shaped like a thin egg, creased, creamy cheeks,
little bags under his eyes, large pale ears like handles. His manner was
discreet, sly, faintly amused and tinged with impudence. Long before I
could appreciate it, I knew the mixture.... I even used to copy him in my
corner, bending forward, with a small reproduction of his faint sneer. In
the evening his customers were, chiefly, young women; some of them came
in every day for his famous five-penny pick-me-up. Their gaudy looks,
their voices, their free ways, fascinated me. I longed to be my father,
handing them across the counter the little glass of bluish stuff they
tossed off so greedily. God knows what it was made of. Years after I
drank some, just to see what it tasted like, and I felt as though someone
had given me a terrific blow on the head; I felt stunned.

One of those evenings I remember vividly. It was cold; it must have
been autumn, for the flaring gas was lighted after my tea. I sat in my
corner and my father was mixing something; the shop was empty. Suddenly
the bell jangled and a young woman rushed in, crying so loud, sobbing so
hard, that it didn’t sound real. She wore a green cape trimmed with fur
and a hat with cherries dangling. My father came from behind the screen.
But she didn’t stop herself at first. She stood in the middle of the
shop and wrung her hands and moaned; I’ve never heard such crying since.
Presently she managed to gasp out, “Give me a pick-me-up!” Then she
drew a long breath, trembled away from him and quavered, “I’ve had _bad
news_!” And in the flaring gaslight I saw the whole side of her face was
puffed up and purple; her lip was cut, and her eyelid looked as though
it was gummed fast over the wet eye. My father pushed the glass across
the counter, and she took the purse out of her stocking and paid him. But
she couldn’t drink; clutching the glass, she stared in front of her as if
she could not believe what she saw. Each time she put her head back the
tears spurted out again. Finally she put the glass down. It was no use.
Holding the cape with one hand, she ran in the same way out of the shop
again. My father gave no sign. But long after she had gone I crouched
in my corner, and when I think back it’s as though I felt my whole body
vibrating—“So that’s what it is outside,” I thought. “That’s what it’s
like out there.”


§

Do you remember your childhood? I am always coming across these
marvellous accounts by writers who declare that they remember
“everything.” I certainly don’t. The dark stretches, the blanks, are much
bigger than the bright glimpses. I seem to have spent most of my time
like a plant in a cupboard. Now and again, when the sun shone, a careless
hand thrust me out on the window-sill, and a careless hand whipped me in
again—and that was all. But what happened in the darkness—I wonder? Did
one grow? pale stem ... timid leaves ... white reluctant bud. No wonder I
was hated at school. Even the masters shrank from me. I somehow knew that
my soft hesitating voice disgusted them. I knew, too, how they turned
away from my shocked, staring eyes. I was small and thin, and I smelled
of the shop; my nickname was Gregory Powder. School was a tin building,
stuck on the raw hillside. There were dark red streaks like blood in the
oozing clay banks of the playground. I hide in the dark passage, where
the coats hang, and am discovered there by one of the masters. “What
are you doing there in the dark?” His terrible voice kills me; I die
before his eyes. I am standing in a ring of thrust-out heads; some are
grinning, some look greedy, some are spitting. And it is always cold. Big
crushed-up clouds press across the sky; the rusty water in the school
tank is frozen; the bell sounds numb. One day they put a dead bird in my
overcoat pocket. I found it just when I reached home. Oh, what a strange
flutter there was at my heart when I drew out that terribly soft, cold
little body, with the legs thin as pins and the claws wrung. I sat on the
back door step in the yard and put the bird in my cap. The feathers round
the neck looked wet, and there was a tiny tuft just above the closed eyes
that stood up too. How tightly the beak was shut! I could not see the
mark where it was divided. I stretched out one wing and touched the soft,
secret down underneath; I tried to make the claws curl round my little
finger. But I didn’t feel sorry for it—no! I wondered. The smoke from our
kitchen chimney poured downwards, and flakes of soot floated—soft, light
in the air. Through a big crack in the cement yard a poor-looking plant
with dull, reddish flowers had pushed its way. I looked at the dead bird
again.... And that is the first time that I remember singing—rather ...
listening to a silent voice inside a little cage that was me.


§

But what has all this to do with my married happiness? How can all this
affect my wife and me? Why—to tell what happened last autumn—do I run
all this way back into the Past? The Past—what is the Past? I might
say the star-shaped flake of soot on a leaf of the poor-looking plant,
and the bird lying on the quilted lining of my cap, and my father’s
pestle and my mother’s cushion belong to it. But that is not to say they
are any less mine than they were when I looked upon them with my very
eyes, and touched them with these fingers. No, they are more; they are
a living part of me. Who am I, in fact, as I sit here at this table,
but my own past? If I deny that, I am nothing. And if I were to try to
divide my life into childhood, youth, early manhood and so on, it would
be a kind of affectation; I should know I was doing it just because of
the pleasantly important sensation it gives one to rule lines, and to
use green ink for childhood, red for the next stage, and purple for
the period of adolescence. For one thing I have learnt, one thing I do
believe is, Nothing Happens Suddenly. Yes, that is my religion, I suppose.

My mother’s death, for instance. Is it more distant from me today than
it was then? It is just as close, as strange, as puzzling, and in spite
of all the countless times I have recalled the circumstances, I know no
more now than I did then, whether I dreamed them, or whether they really
occurred. It happened when I was thirteen and I slept in a little strip
of a room on what was called the half-landing. One night I woke up with a
start to see my mother, in her night-gown, without even the hated flannel
dressing-gown, sitting on my bed. But the strange thing which frightened
me was, she wasn’t looking at me. Her head was bent; the short, thin tail
of hair lay between her shoulders; her hands were pressed between her
knees, and my bed shook; she was shivering. It was the first time I had
ever seen her out of her own room. I said, or I think I said, “Is that
you, Mother?” And as she turned round, I saw in the moonlight how queer
she looked. Her face looked small—quite different. She looked like one
of the boys at the school baths, who sits on a step, shivering just like
that, and wants to go in and yet is frightened.

“Are you awake?” she said. Her eyes opened; I think she smiled. She
leaned towards me. “I’ve been poisoned,” she whispered. “Your father’s
poisoned me.” And she nodded. Then, before I could say a word, she was
gone; I thought I heard the door shut. I sat quite still, I couldn’t
move, I think I expected something else to happen. For a long time I
listened for something; there wasn’t a sound. The candle was by my
bed, but I was too frightened to stretch out my hand for the matches.
But even while I wondered what I ought to do, even while my heart
thumped—everything became confused. I lay down and pulled the blankets
round me. I fell asleep, and the next morning my mother was found dead of
failure of the heart.

Did that visit happen? Was it a dream? Why did she come to tell me? Or
why, if she came, did she go away so quickly? And her expression—so
joyous under the frightened look—was that real? I believed it fully the
afternoon of the funeral, when I saw my father dressed up for his part,
hat and all. That tall hat so gleaming black and round was like a cork
covered with black sealing-wax, and the rest of my father was awfully
like a bottle, with his face for the label—_Deadly Poison_. It flashed
into my mind as I stood opposite him in the hall. And Deadly Poison, or
old D. P., was my private name for him from that day.


§

Late, it grows late. I love the night. I love to feel the tide of
darkness rising, slowly and slowly washing, turning over and over,
lifting, floating, all that lies strewn upon the dark beach, all that
lies hid in rocky hollows. I love, I love this strange feeling of
drifting—whither? After my mother’s death I hated to go to bed. I used
to sit on the window-sill, folded up, and watch the sky. It seemed to me
the moon moved much faster than the sun. And one big, bright green star
I chose for my own. My star! But I never thought of it beckoning to me,
or twinkling merrily for my sake. Cruel, indifferent, splendid—it burned
in the airy night. No matter—it was mine! But, growing close up against
the window, there was a creeper with small, bunched-up pink and purple
flowers. These did know me. These, when I touched them at night, welcomed
my fingers; the little tendrils, so weak, so delicate, knew I would not
hurt them. When the wind moved the leaves I felt I understood their
shaking. When I came to the window, it seemed to me the flowers said
among themselves, “The boy is here.”

As the months passed, there was often a light in my father’s room below.
And I heard voices and laughter. “He’s got some woman with him,” I
thought. But it meant nothing to me. Then the gay voice, the sound of
laughter, gave me the idea it was one of the girls who used to come to
the shop in the evenings—and gradually I began to imagine which girl it
was. It was the dark one in the red coat and skirt, who once had given me
a penny. A merry face stooped over me—warm breath tickled my neck—there
were little beads of black on her long lashes, and when she opened her
arms to kiss me, there came a marvellous wave of scent! Yes, that was the
one.

Time passed, and I forgot the moon and my green star and my shy creeper—I
came to the window to wait for the light in my father’s window, to listen
for the laughing voice, until one night I dozed and I dreamed she came
again—again she drew me to her, something soft, scented, warm and merry
hung over me like a cloud. But when I tried to see, her eyes only mocked
me, her red lips opened and she hissed, “Little sneak! Little sneak!” But
not as if she were angry,—as if she understood, and her smile somehow was
like a rat—hateful!

The night after, I lighted the candle and sat down at the table instead.
By and by, as the flame steadied, there was a small lake of liquid wax,
surrounded by a white, smooth wall. I took a pin and made little holes
in this wall and then sealed them up faster than the wax could escape.
After a time I fancied the candle flame joined in the game; it leapt up,
quivered, wagged; it even seemed to laugh. But while I played with the
candle and smiled and broke off the tiny white peaks of wax that rose
above the wall and floated them on my lake, a feeling of awful dreariness
fastened on me—yes, that’s the word. It crept up from my knees to my
thighs, into my arms; I ached all with misery. And I felt so strangely
that I couldn’t move. Something bound me there by the table—I couldn’t
even let the pin drop that I held between my finger and thumb. For a
moment I came to a stop, as it were.

Then the shrivelled case of the bud split and fell, the plant in the
cupboard came into flower. “Who am I?” I thought. “What is all this?” And
I looked at my room, at the broken bust of the man called Hahnemann on
top of the cupboard, at my little bed with the pillow like an envelope.
I saw it all, but not as I had seen before.... Everything lived,
everything. But that was not all. I was equally alive and—it’s the only
way I can express it—the barriers were down between us—I had come into my
own world!


§

The barriers were down. I had been all my life a little outcast; but
until that moment no one had “accepted” me; I had lain in the cupboard—or
the cave forlorn. But now I was taken, I was accepted, claimed. I did not
consciously turn away from the world of human beings; I had never known
it; but I from that night did beyond words consciously turn towards my
silent brothers....




THE DOVES’ NEST


After lunch Milly and her mother were sitting as usual on the balcony
beyond the salon, admiring for the five hundredth time the stocks, the
roses, the small, bright grass beneath the palms, and the oranges against
a wavy line of blue, when a card was brought them by Marie. Visitors
at the Villa Martin were very rare. True, the English clergyman, Mr.
Sandiman, had called, and he had come a second time with his wife to tea.
But an awful thing had happened on that second occasion. Mother had made
a mistake. She had said “More tea, Mr. Sandybags?” Oh, what a frightful
thing to have happened! How could she have done it? Milly still flamed
at the thought. And he had evidently not forgiven them; he’d never come
again. So this card put them both into a flutter.

_Mr. Walter Prodger_, they read. And then an American address, so very
much abbreviated that neither of them understood it. Walter Prodger? But
they’d never heard of him. Mother looked from the card to Milly.

“Prodger, dear?” she asked mildly, as though helping Milly to a slice of
a never-before-tasted pudding.

And Milly seemed to be holding her plate back in the way she answered
“I—don’t—know, Mother.”

“These are the occasions,” said Mother, becoming a little flustered,
“when one does so feel the need of our dear English servants. Now if I
could just say, ‘What is he like, Annie?’ I should know whether to see
him or not. But he may be some common man, selling something—one of those
American inventions for peeling things, you know, dear. Or he may even be
some kind of foreign sharper.” Mother winced at the hard, bright little
word as though she had given herself a dig with her embroidery scissors.

But here Marie smiled at Milly and murmured “C’est un très beau Monsieur.”

“What does she say, dear?”

“She says he looks very nice, Mother.”

“Well, we’d better——” began Mother. “Where is he now I wonder.”

Marie answered “In the vestibule, Madame.”

In the hall! Mother jumped up, seriously alarmed. In the hall, with all
those valuable little foreign things that didn’t belong to them scattered
over the tables.

“Show him in, Marie. Come, Milly, come dear. We will see him in the
salon. Oh, why isn’t Miss Anderson here?” almost wailed Mother.

But Miss Anderson, Mother’s new companion, never was on the spot when
she was wanted. She had been engaged to be a comfort, a support to them
both. Fond of travelling, a cheerful disposition, a good packer and so
on. And then, when they had come all this way and taken the Villa Martin
and moved in, she had turned out to be a Roman Catholic. Half her time,
more than half, was spent wearing out the knees of her skirts in cold
churches. It was really too....

The door opened. A middle-aged clean-shaven, very well dressed stranger
stood bowing before them. His bow was stately. Milly saw it pleased
Mother very much; she bowed her Queen Alexandra bow back. As for Milly,
she never could bow. She smiled, feeling shy, but deeply interested.

“Have I the pleasure,” said the stranger very courteously, with a strong
American accent, “of speaking with Mrs. Wyndham Fawcett?”

“I am Mrs. Fawcett,” said Mother, graciously, “and this is my daughter,
Mildred.”

“Pleased to meet you, Miss Fawcett.” And the stranger shot a fresh, chill
hand at Milly, who grasped it just in time before it was gone again.

“Won’t you sit down?” said Mother, and she waved faintly at all the gilt
chairs.

“Thank you, I will,” said the stranger.

Down he sat, still solemn, crossing his legs, and, most surprisingly, his
arms as well. His face looked at them over his dark arms as over a gate.

“Milly, sit down, dear.”

So Milly sat down, too, on the Madame Recamier couch, and traced a filet
lace flower with her finger. There was a little pause. She saw the
stranger swallow; Mother’s fan opened and shut.

Then he said “I took the liberty of calling, Mrs. Fawcett, because
had the pleasure of your husband’s acquaintance in the States when he
was lecturing there some years ago. I should like very much to renoo
our—well—I venture to hope we might call it friendship. Is he with
you at present? Are you expecting him out? I noticed his name was not
mentioned in the local paper. But I put that down to a foreign custom,
perhaps—giving precedence to the lady.”

And here the stranger looked as though he might be going to smile.

But as a matter of fact it was extremely awkward. Mother’s mouth shook.
Milly squeezed her hands between her knees, but she watched hard from
under her eyebrows. Good, noble little Mummy! How Milly admired her as
she heard her say, gently and quite simply, “I am sorry to say my husband
died two years ago.”

Mr. Prodger gave a great start. “Did he?” He thrust out his under lip,
frowned, pondered. “I am truly sorry to hear that, Mrs. Fawcett. I hope
you’ll believe me when I say I had no idea your husband had ... passed
over.”

“Of course.” Mother softly stroked her skirt.

“I do trust,” said Mr. Prodger, more seriously still, “that my inquiry
didn’t give you too much pain.”

“No, no. It’s quite all right,” said the gentle voice.

But Mr. Prodger insisted. “You’re sure? You’re positive?”

At that Mother raised her head and gave him one of her still, bright,
exalted glances that Milly knew so well. “I’m not in the least hurt,” she
said, as one might say it from the midst of the fiery furnace.

Mr. Prodger looked relieved. He changed his attitude and continued. “I
hope this regrettable circumstance will not deprive me of your——”

“Oh, certainly not. We shall be delighted. We are always so pleased to
know any one who——” Mother gave a little bound, a little flutter. She
flew from her shadowy branch on to a sunny one. “Is this your first visit
to the Riviera?”

“It is,” said Mr. Prodger. “The fact is I was in Florence until recently.
But I took a heavy cold there——”

“Florence so damp,” cooed Mother.

“And the doctor recommended I should come here for the sunshine before I
started for home.”

“The sun is so very lovely here,” agreed Mother, enthusiastically.

“Well, I don’t think we get too much of it,” said Mr. Prodger, dubiously,
and two lines showed at his lips. “I seem to have been sitting around in
my hotel more days than I care to count.”

“Ah, hotels are so very trying,” said Mother, and she drooped
sympathetically at the thought of a lonely man in an hotel.... “You are
alone here?” she asked, gently, just in case ... one never knew ... it
was better to be on the safe, the tactful side.

But her fears were groundless.

“Oh, yes, I’m alone,” cried Mr. Prodger, more heartily than he had spoken
yet, and he took a speck of thread off his immaculate trouser leg.
Something in his voice puzzled Milly. What was it?

“Still, the scenery is so very beautiful,” said Mother, “that one really
does not feel the need of friends. I was only saying to my daughter
yesterday I could live here for years without going outside the garden
gate. It is all so beautiful.”

“Is that so?” said Mr. Prodger, soberly. He added, “You have a very
charming villa.” And he glanced round the salon. “Is all this antique
furniture genuine, may I ask?”

“I believe so,” said Mother. “I was certainly given to understand it
was. Yes, we love our villa. But of course it is very large for two,
that is to say three, ladies. My companion, Miss Anderson, is with us.
But unfortunately she is a Roman Catholic, and so she is out most of the
time.”

Mr. Prodger bowed as one who agreed that Roman Catholics were very seldom
in.

“But I am so fond of space,” continued Mother, “and so is my daughter. We
both love large rooms and plenty of them—don’t we, Milly?”

This time Mr. Prodger looked at Milly quite cordially and remarked, “Yes,
young people like plenty of room to run about.”

He got up, put one hand behind his back, slapped the other upon it and
went over to the balcony.

“You’ve a view of the sea from here,” he observed.

The ladies might well have noticed it; the whole Mediterranean swung
before the windows.

“We are so fond of the sea,” said Mother, getting up, too.

Mr. Prodger looked towards Milly. “Do you see those yachts, Miss Fawcett?”

Milly saw them.

“Do you happen to know what they’re doing?” asked Mr. Prodger.

What they were doing? What a funny question! Milly stared and bit her lip.

“They’re racing!” said Mr. Prodger, and this time he did actually smile
at her.

“Oh, yes, of course,” stammered Milly. “Of course they are.” She knew
that.

“Well, they’re not always at it,” said Mr. Prodger, good-humouredly. And
he turned to Mother and began to take a ceremonious farewell.

“I wonder,” hesitated Mother, folding her little hands and eyeing him,
“if you would care to lunch with us—if you would not be too dull with two
ladies. We should be so very pleased.”

Mr. Prodger became intensely serious again. He seemed to brace himself
to meet the luncheon invitation. “Thank you very much, Mrs. Fawcett. I
should be delighted.”

“That will be very nice,” said Mother, warmly. “Let me see. Today is
Monday—isn’t it, Milly? Would Wednesday suit you?”

Mr. Prodger replied, “It would suit me excellently to lunch with you on
Wednesday, Mrs. Fawcett. At _mee-dee_, I presume, as they call it here.”

“Oh, no! We keep our English times. At one o’clock,” said Mother.

And that being arranged, Mr. Prodger became more and more ceremonious and
bowed himself out of the room.

Mother rang for Marie to look after him, and a moment later the big glass
hall-door shut.

“Well!” said Mother. She was all smiles. Little smiles like butterflies,
alighting on her lips and gone again. “That was an adventure, Milly,
wasn’t it, dear? And I thought he was such a very charming man, didn’t
you?”

Milly made a little face at Mother and rubbed her eye.

“Of course you did. You must have, dear. And his appearance was so
satisfactory—wasn’t it?” Mother was obviously enraptured. “I mean he
looked so very well kept. Did you notice his hands? Every nail shone like
a diamond. I must say I do like to see....”

She broke off. She came over to Milly and patted her big collar straight.

“You do think it was right of me to ask him to lunch—don’t you, dear?”
said Mother pathetically.

Mother made her feel so big, so tall. But she was tall. She could pick
Mother up in her arms. Sometimes, rare moods came when she did. Swooped
on Mother who squeaked like a mouse and even kicked. But not lately. Very
seldom now....

“It was so strange,” said Mother. There was the still, bright, exalted
glance again. “I suddenly seemed to hear Father say to me ‘Ask him to
lunch.’ And then there was some—warning.... I think it was about the
wine. But that I didn’t catch—very unfortunately,” she added, mournfully.
She put her hand on her breast; she bowed her head. “Father is still so
near,” she whispered.

Milly looked out of the window. She hated Mother going on like this. But
of course she couldn’t say anything. Out of the window there was the sea
and the sunlight silver on the palms, like water dripping from silver
oars. Milly felt a yearning—what was it?—it was like a yearning to fly.

But Mother’s voice brought her back to the salon, to the gilt chairs, the
gilt couches, sconces, cabinets, the tables with the heavy-sweet flowers,
the faded brocade, the pink-spotted Chinese dragons on the mantelpiece
and the two Turks’ heads in the fireplace that supported the broad logs.

“I think a leg of lamb would be nice, don’t you, dear?” said Mother. “The
lamb is so very small and delicate just now. And men like nothing so
much as plain roast meat. Yvonne prepares it so nicely, too, with that
little frill of paper lace round the top of the leg. It always reminds
me of something—I can’t think what. But it certainly makes it look very
attractive indeed.”


§

Wednesday came. And the flutter that Mother and Milly had felt over the
visiting card extended to the whole villa. Yes, it was not too much to
say that the whole villa thrilled and fluttered at the idea of having a
man to lunch. Old, flat-footed Yvonne came waddling back from market with
a piece of gorgonzola in so perfect a condition that when she found Marie
in the kitchen she flung down her great basket, snatched the morsel up
and held it, rustling in its paper, to her quivering bosom.

“J’ai trouvé un morceau de gorgonzola,” she panted, rolling up her eyes
as though she invited the heavens themselves to look down upon it. “J’ai
un morceau de gorgonzola ici pour un prince, ma fille.” And hissing the
word “prr-ince” like lightning, she thrust the morsel under Marie’s
nose. Marie, who was a delicate creature, almost swooned at the shock.

“Do you think,” cried Yvonne, scornfully, “that I would ever buy such
cheese _pour ces dames_? Never. Never. _Jamais de ma vie._” Her sausage
finger wagged before her nose, and she minced in a dreadful imitation of
Mother’s French, “We have none of us large appetites, Yvonne. We are very
fond of boiled eggs and mashed potatoes and a nice, plain salad. Ah-Bah!”
With a snort of contempt she flung away her shawl, rolled up her sleeves,
and began unpacking the basket. At the bottom there was a flat bottle
which, sighing, she laid aside.

“De quoi pour mes cors,” said she.

And Marie, seizing a bottle of Sauterne and bearing it off to the
dining-room murmured, as she shut the kitchen door behind her, “Et voilà
pour les cors de Monsieur!”

The dining-room was a large room panelled in dark wood. It had a massive
mantelpiece and carved chairs covered in crimson damask. On the heavy,
polished table stood an oval glass dish decorated with little gilt swags.
This dish, which it was Marie’s duty to keep filled with fresh flowers,
fascinated her. The sight of it gave her a _frisson_. It reminded her
always, as it lay solitary on the dark expanse, of a little tomb. And
one day, passing through the long windows on to the stone terrace and
down the steps into the garden she had the happy thought of so arranging
the flowers that they would be appropriate to one of the ladies on a
future tragic occasion. Her first creation had been terrible. _Tomb of
Mademoiselle Anderson_ in black pansies, lily-of-the-valley, and a frill
of heliotrope. It gave her a most intense, curious pleasure to hand Miss
Anderson the potatoes at lunch, and at the same time to gaze beyond her
at her triumph. It was like (_O ciel!_), it was like handing potatoes to
a corpse.

The _Tomb of Madame_ was on the contrary almost gay. Foolish little
flowers, half yellow, half blue, hung over the edge, wisps of green
trailed across, and in the middle there was a large scarlet rose. _Cœur
saignant_, Marie had called it. But it did not look in the least like a
_cœur saignant_. It looked flushed and cheerful, like Mother emerging
from the luxury of a warm bath.

Milly’s, of course, was all white. White stocks, little white rose-buds,
with a sprig or two of dark box edging. It was Mother’s favorite.

Poor innocent! Marie, at the sideboard, had to turn her back when she
heard Mother exclaim, “Isn’t it pretty, Milly? Isn’t it sweetly pretty?
Most artistic. So original.” And she had said to Marie, “C’est très joli,
Marie. Très original.”

Marie’s smile was so remarkable that Milly, peeling a tangerine, remarked
to Mother, “I don’t think she likes you to admire them. It makes her
uncomfortable.”

But today—the glory of her opportunity made Marie feel quite faint as
she seized her flower scissors. _Tombeau d’un beau Monsieur._ She was
forbidden to cut the orchids that grew round the fountain basin. But what
were orchids for if not for such an occasion? Her fingers trembled as the
scissors snipped away. They were enough; Marie added two small sprays of
palm. And back in the dining-room she had the happy idea of binding the
palm together with a twist of gold thread deftly torn off the fringe of
the dining-room curtains. The effect was superb. Marie almost seemed to
see her _beau Monsieur_, very small, very small, at the bottom of the
bowl, in full evening dress with a ribbon across his chest and his ears
white as wax.

What surprised Milly, however, was that Miss Anderson should pay any
attention to Mr. Prodger’s coming. She rustled to breakfast in her best
black silk blouse, her Sunday blouse, with the large, painful-looking
crucifix dangling over the front. Milly was alone when Miss Anderson
entered the dining-room. This was unfortunate, for she always tried to
avoid being left alone with Miss Anderson. She could not say exactly
why; it was a feeling. She had the feeling that Miss Anderson might say
something about God, or something fearfully intimate. Oh, she would sink
through the floor if such a thing happened; she would expire. Supposing
she were to say “Milly, do you believe in our Lord?” Heavens! It simply
didn’t bear thinking about.

“Good-morning, my dear,” said Miss Anderson, and her fingers, cold, pale,
like church candles, touched Milly’s cheeks.

“Good-morning, Miss Anderson. May I give you some coffee?” said Milly,
trying to be natural.

“Thank you, dear child,” said Miss Anderson, and laughing her light,
nervous laugh, she hooked on her eyeglasses and stared at the basket of
rolls. “And is it today that you expect your guest?” she asked.

Now why did she ask that? Why pretend when she knew perfectly well? That
was all part of her strangeness. Or was it because she wanted to be
friendly? Miss Anderson was more than friendly; she was genial. But there
was always this something. Was she spying? People said at school that
Roman Catholics spied.... Miss Anderson rustled, rustled about the house
like a dead leaf. Now she was on the stairs, now in the upstairs passage.
Sometimes, at night, when Milly was feverish, she woke up and heard that
rustle outside her door. Was Miss Anderson looking through the keyhole?
And one night she actually had the idea that Miss Anderson had bored two
holes in the wall above her head and was watching her from there. The
feeling was so strong that next time she went into Miss Anderson’s room
her eyes flew to the spot. To her horror a large picture hung there. Had
it been there before?...

“Guest?” The crisp breakfast roll broke in half at the word.

“Yes, I think it is,” said Milly, vaguely, and her blue, flower-like eyes
were raised to Miss Anderson in a vague stare.

“It will make quite a little change in our little party,” said the
much-too-pleasant voice. “I confess I miss very much the society of men.
I have had such a great deal of it in my life. I think that ladies by
themselves are apt to get a little—h’m—h’m....” And helping herself to
cherry jam, she spilt it on the cloth.

Milly took a large, childish bite out of her roll. There was nothing to
reply to this. But how young Miss Anderson made her feel! She made her
want to be naughty, to pour milk over her head or make a noise with a
spoon.

“Ladies by themselves,” went on Miss Anderson, who realized none of this,
“are very apt to find their interests limited.”

“Why?” said Milly, goaded to reply. People always said that; it sounded
most unfair.

“I think,” said Miss Anderson, taking off her eyeglasses and looking a
little dim, “it is the absence of political discussion.”

“Oh, politics!” cried Milly, airily. “I hate politics. Father always
said——” But here she pulled up short. She crimsoned. She didn’t want to
talk about Father to Miss Anderson.

“Oh! Look! Look! A butterfly!” cried Miss Anderson, softly and hastily.
“Look, what a darling!” Her own cheeks flushed a slow red at the sight of
the darling butterfly fluttering so softly over the glittering table.

That was very nice of Miss Anderson—fearfully nice of her. She must have
realized that Milly didn’t want to talk about Father and so she had
mentioned the butterfly on purpose. Milly smiled at Miss Anderson as she
never had smiled at her before. And she said in her warm, youthful voice,
“He is a duck, isn’t he? I love butterflies. I think they are great
lambs.”


§

The morning whisked away as foreign mornings do. Mother had half decided
to wear her hat at lunch.

“What do you think, Milly? Do you think as head of the house it might be
appropriate? On the other hand one does not want to do anything at all
extreme.”

“Which do you mean, Mother? Your mushroom or the jampot?”

“Oh, not the jampot, dear.” Mother was quite used to Milly’s name for it.
“I somehow don’t feel myself in a hat without a brim. And to tell you
the truth I am still not quite certain whether I was wise in buying the
jampot. I cannot help the feeling that if I were to meet Father in it he
would be a little too surprised. More than once lately,” went on Mother
quickly, “I have thought of taking off the trimming, turning in upside
down, and making it into a nice little workbag. What do you think, dear?
But we must not go into it now, Milly. This is not the moment for such
schemes. Come on to the balcony. I have told Marie we shall have coffee
there. What about bringing out that big chair with the nice, substantial
legs for Mr. Prodger? Men are so fond of nice, substantial.... No, not by
yourself, love! Let me help you.”

When the chair was carried out Milly thought it looked exactly like Mr.
Prodger. It _was_ Mr. Prodger admiring the view.

“No, don’t sit down on it. You mustn’t,” she cried hastily, as Mother
began to subside. She put her arm through Mother’s and drew her back into
the salon.

Happily, at that moment there was a rustle and Miss Anderson was upon
them. In excellent time, for once. She carried a copy of the _Morning
Post_.

“I have been trying to find out from this,” said she, lightly tapping the
newspaper with her eyeglasses, “whether Congress is sitting at present.
But unfortunately, after reading my copy right through, I happened to
glance at the heading and discovered it was five weeks’ old.”

Congress! Would Mr. Prodger expect them to talk about Congress? The idea
terrified Mother. Congress! The American parliament, of course, composed
of senators—grey-bearded old men in frock coats and turn-down collars,
rather like missionaries. But she did not feel at all competent to
discuss them.

“I think we had better not be too intellectual,” she suggested, timidly,
fearful of disappointing Miss Anderson, but more fearful still of the
alternative.

“Still, one likes to be prepared,” said Miss Anderson. And after a pause
she added softly, “One never knows.”

Ah, how true that is! One never does. Miss Anderson and Mother seemed
both to ponder this truth. They sat silent, with head bent, as though
listening to the whisper of the words.

“One never knows,” said the pink-spotted dragons on the mantelpiece and
the Turks’ heads pondered. Nothing is known—nothing. Everybody just waits
for things to happen as they were waiting there for the stranger who came
walking towards them through the sun and shadow under the budding plane
trees, or driving, perhaps, in one of the small, cotton-covered cabs....
An angel passed over the Villa Martin. In that moment of hovering
silence something beseeching seemed to lift, seemed to offer itself, as
the flowers in the salon, uplifted, gave themselves to the light.

Then Mother said, “I hope Mr. Prodger will not find the scent of the
mimosa too powerful. Men are not fond of flowers in a room as a rule. I
have heard it causes actual hay-fever in some cases. What do you think,
Milly? Ought we perhaps——” But there was no time to do anything. A
long firm trill sounded from the hall door. It was a trill so calm and
composed and unlike the tentative little push they gave the bell that it
brought them back to the seriousness of the moment. They heard a man’s
voice; the door clicked and shut again. He was inside. A stick rattled
on the table. There was a pause, and then the door handle of the salon
turned and Marie, in frilled muslin cuffs and an apron shaped like a
heart, ushered in Mr. Prodger.

Only Mr. Prodger after all? But whom had Milly expected to see? The
feeling was there and gone again that she would not have been surprised
to see somebody quite different, before she realized this wasn’t quite
the same Mr. Prodger as before. He was smarter than ever; all brushed,
combed, shining. The ears that Marie had seen white as wax flashed as if
they had been pink enamelled. Mother fluttered up in her pretty little
way, so hoping he had not found the heat of the day too trying to be out
in ... but happily it was a little early in the year for dust. Then Miss
Anderson was introduced. Milly was ready this time for that fresh hand,
but she almost gasped; it was so very chill. It was like a hand stretched
out to you from the water. Then together they all sat down.

“Is this your first visit to the Riviera?” asked Miss Anderson,
graciously, dropping her handkerchief.

“It is,” answered Mr. Prodger composedly, and he folded his arms as
before. “I was in Florence until recently, but I caught a heavy cold——”

“Florence so——” began Mother, when the beautiful brass gong, that burned
like a fallen sun in the shadows of the hall, began to throb. First it
was a low muttering, then it swelled, it quickened, it burst into a clash
of triumph under Marie’s sympathetic fingers. Never had they been treated
to such a performance before. Mr. Prodger was all attention.

“That’s a very fine gong,” he remarked approvingly.

“We think it is so very Oriental,” said Mother. “It gives our little
meals quite an Eastern flavour. Shall we....”

Their guest was at the door bowing.

“So many gentlemen and only one lady,” fluttered Mother. “What I mean is
the boot is on the other shoe. That is to say—come, Milly, come, dear.”
And she led the way to the dining-room.

Well, there they were. The cold, fresh napkins were shaken out of their
charming shapes and Marie handed the omelette. Mr. Prodger sat on
Mother’s right, facing Milly, and Miss Anderson had her back to the long
windows. But after all—why should the fact of their having a man with
them make such a difference? It did; it made all the difference. Why
should they feel so stirred at the sight of that large hand outspread,
moving among the wine glasses? Why should the sound of that loud,
confident “Ah-hm!” change the very look of the dining-room? It was not
a favourite room of theirs as a rule; it was overpowering. They bobbed
uncertainly at the pale table with a curious feeling of exposure. They
were like those meek guests who arrive unexpectedly at the fashionable
hotel, and are served with whatever may be ready, while the real
luncheon, the real guests lurk important and contemptuous in the
background. And although it was impossible for Marie to be other than
deft, nimble and silent, what heart could she have in ministering to that
most uninspiring of spectacles—three ladies dining alone?

Now all was changed. Marie filled their glasses to the brim as if to
reward them for some marvellous feat of courage. These timid English
ladies had captured a live lion, a real one, smelling faintly of eau de
cologne, and with a tip of handkerchief showing, white as a flake of snow.

“He is worthy of it,” decided Marie, eyeing her orchids and palms.

Mr. Prodger touched his hot plate with appreciative fingers.

“You’ll hardly believe it, Mrs. Fawcett,” he remarked, turning to Mother,
“but this is the first hot plate I’ve happened on since I left the
States. I had begun to believe there were two things that just weren’t to
be had in Europe. One was a hot plate and the other was a glass of cold
water. Well, the cold water one can do without; but a hot plate is more
difficult. I’d got so discouraged with the cold wet ones I encountered
everywhere that when I was arranging with Cook’s Agency about my room
here I explained to them ‘I don’t care what the expense may be. But for
mercy’s sake find me an hotel where I can get a hot plate by ringing for
it.’”

Mother, though outwardly all sympathy, found this a little bewildering.
She had a momentary vision of Mr. Prodger ringing for hot plates to be
brought to him at all hours. Such strange things to want in any numbers.

“I have always heard the American hotels are so very well equipped,” said
Miss Anderson. “Telephones in all the rooms and even tape machines.”

Milly could see Miss Anderson reading that tape machine.

“I should like to go to America awfully,” she cried, as Marie brought in
the lamb and set it before Mother.

“There’s certainly nothing wrong with America,” said Mr. Prodger,
soberly. “America’s a great country. What are they? Peas? Well, I’ll just
take a few. I don’t eat peas as a rule. No, no salad, thank you. Not with
the hot meat.”

“But what makes you want to go to America?” Miss Anderson ducked forward,
smiling at Milly, and her eyeglasses fell into her plate, just escaping
the gravy.

Because one wants to go everywhere, was the real answer. But Milly’s
flower-blue gaze rested thoughtfully on Miss Anderson as she said, “The
ice-cream. I adore ice-cream.”

“Do you?” said Mr. Prodger, and he put down his fork; he seemed moved.
“So you’re fond of ice-cream, are you, Miss Fawcett?”

Milly transferred her dazzling gaze to him. It said she was.

“Well,” said Mr. Prodger quite playfully, and he began eating again, “I’d
like to see you get it. I’m sorry we can’t manage to ship some across.
I like to see young people have just what they want. It seems right,
somehow.”

Kind man! Would he have any more lamb?

Lunch passed so pleasantly, so quickly, that the famous piece of
gorgonzola was on the table in all its fatness and richness before there
had been an awkward moment. The truth was that Mr. Prodger proved most
easy to entertain, most ready to chat. As a rule men were not fond of
chat as Mother understood it. They did not seem to understand that it
does not matter very much what one says; the important thing is not to
let the conversation drop. Strange! Even the best men ignored that
simple rule. They refused to realize that conversation is like a dear
little baby that is brought in to be handed round. You must rock it,
nurse it, keep it on the move if you want it to keep smiling. What could
be simpler? But even Father.... Mother winced away from memories that
were not as sweet as memories ought to be.

All the same she could not help hoping that Father saw what a successful
little lunch party it was. He did so love to see Milly happy, and the
child looked more animated than she had done for weeks. She had lost that
dreamy expression, which, though very sweet, did not seem natural at her
age. Perhaps what she wanted was not so much Easton’s Syrup as taking out
of herself.

“I have been very selfish,” thought Mother, blaming herself as usual.
She put her hand on Milly’s arm; she pressed it gently as they rose from
the table. And Marie held the door open for the white and grey figure;
for Miss Anderson, who peered shortsightedly, as though looking for
something; for Mr. Prodger who brought up the rear, walking stately, with
the benign air of a Monsieur who had eaten well.


§

Beyond the balcony, the garden, the palms and the sea lay bathed in
quivering brightness. Not a leaf moved; the oranges were little worlds
of burning light. There was the sound of grasshoppers ringing their tiny
tambourines, and the hum of bees as they hovered, as though to taste
their joy in advance, before burrowing close into the warm wide-open
stocks and roses. The sound of the sea was like a breath, was like a sigh.

Did the little group on the balcony hear it? Mother’s fingers moved
among the black and gold coffee-cups; Miss Anderson brought the most
uncomfortable chair out of the salon and sat down. Mr. Prodger put his
large hand on to the yellow stone ledge of the balcony and remarked
gravely, “This balcony rail is just as hot as it can be.”

“They say,” said Mother, “that the greatest heat of the day is at about
half-past two. We have certainly noticed it is very hot then.”

“Yes, it’s lovely then,” murmured Milly, and she stretched out her hand
to the sun. “It’s simply baking!”

“Then you’re not afraid of the sunshine?” said Mr. Prodger, taking his
coffee from Mother. “No, thank you. I won’t take any cream. Just one lump
of sugar.” And he sat down balancing the little, chattering cup on his
broad knee.

“No, I adore it,” answered Milly, and she began to nibble the lump of
sugar....




SIX YEARS AFTER


It was not the afternoon to be on deck—on the contrary. It was exactly
the afternoon when there is no snugger place than a warm cabin, a warm
bunk. Tucked up with a rug, a hot-water bottle and a piping hot cup of
tea she would not have minded the weather in the least. But he—hated
cabins, hated to be inside anywhere more than was absolutely necessary.
He had a passion for keeping, as he called it, above board, especially
when he was travelling. And it wasn’t surprising, considering the
enormous amount of time he spent cooped up in the office. So, when he
rushed away from her as soon as they got on board and came back five
minutes later to say he had secured two deck chairs on the lee side and
the steward was undoing the rugs, her voice through the high sealskin
collar murmured “Good”; and because he was looking at her, she smiled
with bright eyes and blinked quickly, as if to say, “Yes, perfectly all
right—absolutely,” and she meant it.

“Then we’d better——” said he, and he tucked her hand inside his arm and
began to rush her off to where the two chairs stood. But she just had
time to breathe, “Not so fast, Daddy, please,” when he remembered too and
slowed down.

Strange! They had been married twenty-eight years, and it was still an
effort to him, each time, to adapt his pace to hers.

“Not cold, are you?” he asked, glancing sideways at her. Her little nose,
geranium pink above the dark fur, was answer enough. But she thrust her
free hand into the velvet pocket of her jacket and murmured gaily, “I
shall be glad of my rug.”

He pressed her tighter to his side—a quick, nervous pressure. He knew,
of course, that she ought to be down in the cabin; he knew that it was
no afternoon for her to be sitting on deck, in this cold and raw mist,
lee side or no lee side, rugs or no rugs, and he realized how she must be
hating it. But he had come to believe that it really was easier for her
to make these sacrifices than it was for him. Take their present case,
for instance. If he had gone down to the cabin with her, he would have
been miserable the whole time, and he couldn’t have helped showing it.
At any rate, she would have found him out. Whereas, having made up her
mind to fall in with his ideas, he would have betted anybody she would
even go so far as to enjoy the experience. Not because she was without
personality of her own. Good Lord! She was absolutely brimming with it.
But because ... but here his thoughts always stopped. Here they always
felt the need of a cigar, as it were. And, looking at the cigar-tip, his
fine blue eyes narrowed. It was a law of marriage, he supposed.... All
the same, he always felt guilty when he asked these sacrifices of her.
That was what the quick pressure meant. His being said to her being:
“You do understand, don’t you?” and there was an answering tremor of her
fingers, “I _understand_.”

Certainly, the steward—good little chap—had done all in his power to make
them comfortable. He had put up their chairs in whatever warmth there
was and out of the smell. She did hope he would be tipped adequately.
It was on occasions like these (and her life seemed to be full of such
occasions) that she wished it was the woman who controlled the purse.

“Thank you, steward. That will do beautifully.”

“Why are stewards so often delicate-looking?” she wondered, as her feet
were tucked under. “This poor little chap looks as though he’d got a
chest, and yet one would have thought ... the sea air....”

The button of the pigskin purse was undone. The tray was tilted. She saw
sixpences, shillings, half-crowns.

“I should give him five shillings,” she decided, “and tell him to buy
himself a good nourishing——”

He was given a shilling, and he touched his cap and seemed genuinely
grateful.

Well, it might have been worse. It might have been sixpence. It
might, indeed. For at that moment Father turned towards her and said,
half-apologetically, stuffing the purse back, “I gave him a shilling. I
think it was worth it, don’t you?”

“Oh, quite! Every bit!” said she.

It is extraordinary how peaceful it feels on a little steamer once the
bustle of leaving port is over. In a quarter of an hour one might have
been at sea for days. There is something almost touching, childish, in
the way people submit themselves to the new conditions. They go to bed in
the early afternoon, they shut their eyes and “it’s night” like little
children who turn the table upside down and cover themselves with the
table-cloth. And those who remain on deck—they seem to be always the
same, those few hardened men travellers—pause, light their pipes, stamp
softly, gaze out to sea, and their voices are subdued as they walk up
and down. The long-legged little girl chases after the red-cheeked boy,
but soon both are captured; and the old sailor, swinging an unlighted
lantern, passes and disappears....

He lay back, the rug up to his chin and she saw he was breathing deeply.
Sea air! If anyone believed in sea air, it was he. He had the strongest
faith in its tonic qualities. But the great thing was, according to him,
to fill the lungs with it the moment you came on board. Otherwise, the
sheer strength of it was enough to give you a chill....

She gave a small chuckle, and he turned to her quickly. “What is it?”

“It’s your cap,” she said. “I never can get used to you in a cap. You
look such a thorough burglar.”

“Well, what the deuce am I to wear?” He shot up one grey eyebrow and
wrinkled his nose. “It’s a very good cap, too. Very fine specimen of its
kind. It’s got a very rich white satin lining.” He paused. He declaimed,
as he had hundreds of times before at this stage. “Rich and rare were
the gems she wore.”

But she was thinking he really was childishly proud of the white satin
lining. He would like to have taken off his cap and made her feel it.
“Feel the quality!” How often had she rubbed between finger and thumb his
coat, his shirt cuff, tie, sock, linen handkerchief, while he said that.

She slipped down more deeply into her chair.

And the little steamer pressed on, pitching gently, over the grey,
unbroken, gently-moving water, that was veiled with slanting rain.

Far out, as though idly, listlessly, gulls were flying. Now they settled
on the waves, now they beat up into the rainy air, and shone against the
pale sky like the lights within a pearl. They looked cold and lonely.
How lonely it will be when we have passed by, she thought. There will be
nothing but the waves and those birds and rain falling.

She gazed through the rust-spotted railing along which big drops
trembled, until suddenly she shut her lips. It was as if a warning voice
inside her had said, “Don’t look!”

“No, I won’t,” she decided. “It’s too depressing, much too depressing.”

But immediately, she opened her eyes and looked again. Lonely birds,
water lifting, white pale sky—how were they changed?

And it seemed to her there was a presence far out there, between the sky
and the water; someone very desolate and longing watched them pass and
cried as if to stop them—but cried to her alone.

“Mother!”

“Don’t leave me,” sounded the cry. “Don’t forget me! You are forgetting
me, you know you are!” And it was as though from her own breast there
came the sound of childish weeping.

“My son—my precious child—it isn’t true!”

_Sh!_ How was it possible that she was sitting there on that quiet
steamer beside Father and at the same time she was hushing and holding a
little slender boy—so pale—who had just waked out of a dreadful dream?

“I dreamed I was in a wood—somewhere far away from everybody,—and I was
lying down and a great blackberry vine grew over me. And I called and
called to you—and you wouldn’t come—you wouldn’t come—so I had to lie
there for ever.”

What a terrible dream! He had always had terrible dreams. How often,
years ago, when he was small, she had made some excuse and escaped from
their friends in the dining-room or the drawing-room to come to the foot
of the stairs and listen. “Mother!” And when he was asleep, his dream had
journeyed with her back into the circle of lamplight; it had taken its
place there like a ghost. And now——

Far more often—at all times—in all places—like now, for instance—she
never settled down, she was never off her guard for a moment but she
heard him. He wanted her. “I am coming as fast as I can! As fast as I
can!” But the dark stairs have no ending, and the worst dream of all—the
one that is always the same—goes for ever and ever uncomforted.

This is anguish! How is it to be borne? Still, it is not the idea of her
suffering which is unbearable—it is his. Can one do nothing for the dead?
And for a long time the answer had been—Nothing!

       *       *       *       *       *

... But softly without a sound the dark curtain has rolled down. There
is no more to come. That is the end of the play. But it can’t end like
that—so suddenly. There must be more. No, it’s cold, it’s still. There is
nothing to be gained by waiting.

But—did he go back again? Or, when the war was over, did he come home
for good? Surely, he will marry—later on—not for several years. Surely,
one day I shall remember his wedding and my first grandchild—a beautiful
dark-haired boy born in the early morning—a lovely morning—spring!

“Oh, Mother, it’s not fair to me to put these ideas into my head! Stop,
Mother, stop! When I think of all I have missed, I can’t bear it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“I can’t bear it!” She sits up breathing the words and tosses the dark
rug away. It is colder than ever, and now the dusk is falling, falling
like ash upon the pallid water.

And the little steamer, growing determined, throbbed on, pressed on, as
if at the end of the journey there waited....




DAPHNE


I had been in Port Willin six months when I decided to give a one-man
show. Not that I was particularly keen, but little Field, the
picture-shop man, had just started a gallery and he wanted me—begged me,
rather—to kick off for him. He was a decent little chap; I hadn’t the
heart to refuse. And besides, as it happened, I had a good deal of stuff
that I felt it would be rather fun to palm off on any one who was fool
enough to buy it. So with these high aims I had the cards printed, the
pictures framed in plain white frames, and God knows how many cups and
saucers ordered for the Private View.

What was I doing in Port Willin? Oh well—why not? I’ll own it does sound
an unlikely spot, but when you are an impermanent movable, as I am, it’s
just those unlikely spots that have a trick of holding you. I arrived,
intending to stay a week and go on to Fiji. But I had letters to one or
two people, and the morning of my arrival, hanging over the side of the
ship while we were waiting in the stream, with nothing on earth to do
but stare, I took an extraordinary fancy to the shape—to the look of the
place.

It’s a small town, you know, planted at the edge of a fine deep harbour
like a lake. Behind it, on either side there are hills. The houses are
built of light painted wood. They have iron roofs coloured red. And there
are big dark plumy trees massed together, breaking up those light shapes,
giving a depth—warmth—making a composition of it well worth looking
at.... Well, we needn’t go into that— But it had me that fine morning.
And the first days after my arrival, walking, or driving out in one of
the big swinging, rocking cabs, I took an equal fancy to the people.

Not quite all of them. The men left me cold. Yes, I must say, colonial
men are not the brightest specimens. But I never struck a place where the
average of female attractiveness was so high. You can’t help noticing
it, for a peculiarity of Port Willin is the number of its teashops
and the vast quantity of tea absorbed by its inhabitants. Not tea
only—sandwiches, cream cakes, ices, fruit salad with fresh pineapples.
From eleven o’clock in the morning you meet with couples, and groups of
girls and young married women hurrying off to their first tea. It was a
real eleven o’clock function. Even the business men knocked off and went
to a café. And the same thing happened in the afternoon. From four until
half-past six the streets were gay as a garden. Which reminds me, it was
early spring when I arrived and the town smelled of moist earth and the
first flowers. In fact, wherever one went one got a strong whiff, like
the whiff of violets in a wood, which was enough in itself to make one
feel like lingering....

There was a theatre too, a big bare building plastered over with red
and blue bills which gave it an oriental look in that blue air, and a
touring company was playing “San Toy.” I went my first evening. I found
it, for some reason, fearfully exciting. The inside smelled of gas, of
glue and burnt paper. Whistling draughts cut along the corridors—a strong
wind among the orchestra kept the palms trembling, and now and again
the curtain blew out and there was a glimpse of a pair of large feet
walking rapidly away. But what women! What girls in muslin dresses with
velvet sashes and little caps edged with swansdown! In the intervals
long ripples of laughter sounded from the stalls, from the dress-circle.
And I leaned against a pillar that looked as though it was made of
wedding-cake icing—and fell in love with whole rows at a time....

Then I presented my letters, I was asked out to dine, and I met these
charmers in their own homes. That decided it. They were something I
had never known before—so gay, so friendly, so impressed with the idea
of one’s being an artist! It was rather like finding oneself in the
playground of an extremely attractive girls’ school.

I painted the Premier’s daughter, a dark beauty, against a tree hung with
long bell-like flowers, as white as wax. I painted a girl with a pig-tail
curled up on a white sofa playing with a pale-red fan ... and a little
blonde in a black jacket with pearl-grey gloves.... I painted like fury.

I’m fond of women. As a matter of fact I’m a great deal more at ease
with women than I am with men. Because I’ve cultivated them, I suppose.
You see, it’s like this with me. I’ve always had enough money to live on
and the consequence is I have never had to mix with people more than I
wished. And I’ve equally always had—well, I suppose you might call it a
passion—for painting. Painting is far and away the most important thing
in life—as I see it. But—my work’s my own affair. It’s the separate
compartment which is me. No strangers allowed in. I haven’t the smallest
desire to explain what it is I’m after—or to hear other men. If people
like my work I’m pleased. If they don’t—well, if I was a shrugging
person, I’d shrug. This sounds arrogant. It isn’t; I know my limitations.
But the truth about oneself always sounds arrogant, as no doubt you’ve
observed.

But women—well, I can only speak for myself—I find the presence of women,
the consciousness of women, an absolute necessity. I know they are
considered a distraction, that the very Big Pots seal themselves in their
hives to keep away. All I can say is work without women would be to me
like dancing without music or food without wine or a sailing boat without
a breeze. They just give me that ... what is it? Stimulus is not enough;
inspiration is far too much. That—well, if I knew what it is, I should
have solved a bigger problem than my own! And problems aren’t in my line.

I expected a mob at my Private View, and I got it, too.... What I hadn’t
reckoned on was that there would be no men. It was one thing to ask a
painter fellow to knock you up something to the tune of fifty guineas or
so, but it was quite another to make an ass of yourself staring. The
Port Willin men would as soon have gazed into shops. True, when you came
to Europe, you visited the galleries, but then you shop-gazed too. It
didn’t matter what you did in Europe. You could walk about for a week
without being recognized.

So there were little Field and I absolutely alone among all that
loveliness; it frightened him out of his life, but I didn’t mind, I
thought it rather fun, especially as the sightseers didn’t hesitate to
find my pictures amusing. I’m by no means an out-and-out modern, as they
say; people like violins and landscapes of telegraph poles leave me cold.
But Port Willin is still trying to swallow Rossetti, and Hope by Watts is
looked upon as very advanced. It was natural my pictures should surprise
them. The fat old Lady Mayoress became quite hysterical. She drew me over
to one drawing, she patted my arm with her fan.

“I don’t wonder you drew her slipping out,” she gurgled. “And how
depressed she looks! The poor dear never could have sat down in it. It’s
much too small. There ought to be a little cake of Pear’s Soap on the
floor.” And overcome by her own joke, she flopped on the little double
bench that ran down the middle of the room, and even her fan seemed to
laugh.

At that moment two girls passed in front of us. One I knew, a big fair
girl called May Pollock, pulled her companion by the sleeve. “Daphne!”
she said. “Daphne!” And the other turned towards her, then towards us,
smiled and was born, christened part of my world from that moment.

“Daphne!” Her quick beautiful smile answered....

       *       *       *       *       *

Saturday morning was gloriously fine. When I woke up and saw the sun
streaming over the polished floor I felt like a little boy who has been
promised a picnic. It was all I could do not to telephone to Daphne. Was
she feeling the same? It seemed somehow such a terrific lark that we
should be going off together like this, just with a couple of rucksacks
and our bathing suits. I thought of other week-ends, the preparation, the
emotional tension, the amount of managing they’d needed. But I couldn’t
really think of them; I couldn’t be bothered, they belonged to another
life....

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed to me suddenly so preposterous that two people should be as
happy as we were and not be happier. Here we were, alone, miles away
from everybody, free as air, and in love with each other. I looked
again at Daphne, at her slender shoulders, her throat, her bosom, and,
passionately in love, I decided, with fervour: Wouldn’t it be rather
absurd, then, to behave like a couple of children? Wouldn’t she even, in
spite of all she had said, be disappointed if we did?...

       *       *       *       *       *

And I went off at a tremendous pace, not because I thought she’d run
after me, but I did think she might call, or I might look round....

       *       *       *       *       *

It was one of those still, hushed days when the sea and the sky seem to
melt into one another, and it is long before the moisture dries on the
leaves and grasses. One of those days when the sea smells strong and
there are gulls standing in a row on the sand. The smoke from our wood
fire hung in the air and the smoke of my pipe mingled with it. I caught
myself staring at nothing. I felt dull and angry. I couldn’t get over the
ridiculous affair. You see, my _amour propre_ was wounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Monday morning was grey, cloudy, one of those mornings peculiar to
the sea-side when everything, the sea most of all, seems exhausted and
sullen. There had been a very high tide, the road was wet—on the beach
there stood a long line of sickly-looking gulls....

When we got on board she sat down on one of the green benches and,
muttering something about a pipe, I walked quickly away. It was
intolerable that we should still be together after what had happened. It
was indecent. I only asked—I only longed for one thing—to be free of this
still, unsmiling and pitiful—that was the worst of it—creature who had
been my playful Daphne.

       *       *       *       *       *

For answer I telephoned her at once and asked if I might come and see her
that evening. Her voice sounded grave, unlike the voice I remembered,
and she seemed to deliberate. There was a long pause before she said,
“Yes—perhaps that would be best.”

“Then I shall come at half-past six.”

“Very well.”

And we went into a room full of flowers and very large art photographs of
the Harbour by Night, A Misty Day, Moonrise over the Water, and I know I
wondered if she admired them.

“Why did you send me that letter?”

“Oh, but I had to,” said Daphne. “I meant every word of it. I only let
you come to-night to.... No, I know I shall disappoint you. I’m wiser
than you are for all your experience. I shan’t be able to live up to it.
I’m not the person for you. Really I’m not!”...




FATHER AND THE GIRLS


At midday, Ernestine, who had come down from the mountains with her
mother to work in the vineyards belonging to the hotel, heard the faint,
far-away _chuff-chuff_ of the train from Italy. Trains were a novelty
to Ernestine; they were fascinating, unknown, terrible. What were they
like as they came tearing their way through the valley, plunging between
the mountains as if not even the mountains could stop them? When she saw
the dark, flat breast of the engine, so bare, so powerful, hurled as it
were towards her, she felt a weakness; she could have sunk to the earth.
And yet she must look. So she straightened up, stopped pulling at the
blue-green leaves, tugging at the long, bright-green, curly suckers,
and, with eyes like a bird, stared. The vines were very tall. There
was nothing to be seen of Ernestine but her beautiful, youthful bosom
buttoned into a blue cotton jacket and her small, dark head covered with
a faded cherry-coloured handkerchief.

_Chiff-chuff-chaff._ _Chiff-chuff-chaff_, sounded the train. Now a wisp
of white smoke shone and melted. Now there was another, and the monster
itself came into sight and snorting horribly drew up at the little,
toy-like station five minutes away. The railway ran at the bottom of
the hotel garden which was perched high and surrounded by a stone wall.
Steps cut in the stone led to the terraces where the vines were planted.
Ernestine, looking out from the leaves like a bright bird, saw the
terrible engine and looked beyond it at doors swinging open, at strangers
stepping down. She would never know who they were or where they had come
from. A moment ago they were not here; perhaps tomorrow they would be
gone again. And looking like a bird herself, she remembered how, at home,
in the late autumn, she had sometimes seen strange birds in the fir tree
that were there one day and gone the next. Where from? Where to? She felt
an ache in her bosom. Wings were tight-folded there. Why could she not
stretch them out and fly away and away?...


§

From the first-class carriage tall, thin Emily alighted and gave her hand
to Father whose brittle legs seemed to wave in the air as they felt for
the iron step. Taller, thinner Edith followed, carrying Father’s light
overcoat, his field-glasses on a strap, and his new Baedeker. The blond
hotel porter came forward. Wasn’t that nice? He could speak as good
English as you and me. So Edith had no trouble at all in explaining how,
as they were going on by the morning train tomorrow, they would only
need their suit-cases, and what was left in the compartment. Was there a
carriage outside? Yes, a carriage was there. But if they cared to walk
there was a private entrance through the hotel gardens.... No, they
wouldn’t walk.

“You wouldn’t care to walk, would you, Father dear?”

“No, Edith, I won’t walk. Do you girls wanna walk?”

“Why no, Father, not without you, dear.”

And the blond hotel porter leading, they passed through the little knot
of sturdy peasants at the station gate to where the carriage waited under
a group of limes.

“Did you ever see anything as big as that horse, Edith!” cried Emily. She
was always the first to exclaim about things.

“It is a very big horse,” sang Edith, more sober. “It’s a farm horse,
from the look of it and it’s been working. See how hot it is.” Edith had
so much observation. The big, brown horse, his sides streaked with dark
sweat, tossed his head and the bells on his collar set up a loud jangling.

“Hu-yup!” called the young peasant driver warningly, from his seat on the
high box.

Father, who was just about to get in, drew back, a little scared.

“You don’t think that horse will run away with us, do you, Edith?” he
quavered.

“Why no, Father dear,” coaxed Edith. “That horse is just as tame as you
or me.” So in they got, the three of them. And as the horse bounded
forward his ears seemed to twitch in surprise at his friend the driver.
Call that a load? Father and the girls weighed nothing. They might have
been three bones, three broomsticks, three umbrellas bouncing up and down
on the hard seats of the carriage. It was a mercy the hotel was so close.
Father could never have stood that for more than a minute, especially at
the end of a journey. Even as it was his face was quite green when Emily
helped him out, straightened him, and gave him a little pull.

“It’s shaken you, dear, hasn’t it?” she said tenderly.

But he refused her arm into the hotel. That would create a wrong
impression.

“No, no, Emily. I’m all right. All right,” said Father, as staggering a
little he followed them through big glass doors into a hall as dim as a
church and as chill and as deserted.

My! Wasn’t that hall cold! The cold seemed to come leaping at them from
the floor. It clasped the peaked knees of Edith and Emily; it leapt high
as the fluttering heart of Father. For a moment they hesitated, drew
together, almost gasped. But then out from the Bureau a cheerful young
person, her smiling face spotted with mosquito bites, ran to meet them,
and welcomed them with such real enthusiasm (in English too) that the
chill first moment was forgotten.

“Aw-yes. Aw-yes. I can let you ave very naice rooms on de firs floor wid
a lif. Two rooms and bart and dressing-room for de chentleman. Beautiful
rooms wid sun but nort too hot. Very naice. Till tomorrow. I taike you.
If you please. It is dis way. You are tired wid the churney? Launch is at
half-pas tvelf. Hort worter? Aw-yes. It is wid de bart. If you please.”

Father and the girls were drawn by her cheerful smiles and becks and nods
along a cloister-like corridor, into the lift and up, until she flung
open a heavy, dark door and stood aside for them to enter.

“It is a suite,” she explained. “Wid a hall and tree doors.” Quickly she
opened them. “Now I gaw to see when your luggage is gum.”

And she went.

“Well!” cried Emily.

Edith stared.

Father craned his thin, old neck, looking, too.

“Did you—ever see the like, Edith?” cried Emily, in a little rush.

And Edith softly clasped her hands. Softly she sang “No, I never did,
Emily. I’ve never seen anything just like this before.”

“Sims to me a nice room,” quavered Father, still hovering. “Do you girls
wanna change it?”

Change it! “Why, Father dear, it’s just the loveliest thing we’ve ever
set eyes on, isn’t it, Emily? Sit down, Father dear, sit down in the
armchair.”

Father’s pale claws gripped the velvet arms. He lowered himself, he sank
with an old man’s quick sigh.

Edith still stood, as if bewitched, at the door. But Emily ran over to
the window and leaned out, quite girlish....

For a long time now—for how long?—for countless ages—Father and the girls
had been on the wing. Nice, Montreux, Biarritz, Naples, Mentone, Lake
Maggiore, they had seen them all and many, many more. And still they beat
on, beat on, flying as if unwearied, never stopping anywhere for long.
But the truth was—Oh, better not enquire what the truth was. Better not
ask what it was that kept them going. Or why the only word that daunted
Father was the word—home....

Home! To sit around, doing nothing, listening to the clock, counting up
the years, thinking back ... thinking! To stay fixed in one place as if
waiting for something or somebody. No! no! Better far to be blown over
the earth like the husk, like the withered pod that the wind carries and
drops and bears off again.

“Are you ready, girls?”

“Yes, Father dear.”

“Then we’d better be off if we’re to make that train.”

But oh, it was a weariness, it was an unspeakable weariness. Father made
no secret of his age; he was eighty-four. As for Edith and Emily—well,
he looked now like their elder brother. An old, old brother and two
ancient sisters, so the lovely room might have summed them up. But its
shaded brightness, its beauty, the flutter of leaves at the creamy stone
windows seemed only to whisper “Rest! Stay!”

Edith looked at the pale, green-panelled walls, at the doors that had
lozenges and squares of green picked out in gold. She made the amazing
discovery that the floor had the same pattern in wood that was traced
on the high, painted ceiling. But the colour of the shining floor was
marvellous; it was like tortoiseshell. In one corner there was a huge,
tilted stove, milky white and blue. The low wooden bed, with its cover
of quilted yellow satin, had sheaves of corn carved on the bed posts.
It looked to fanciful, tired Edith—yes,—that bed looked as if it were
breathing, softly, gently breathing. Outside the narrow, deep-set
windows, beyond their wreaths of green, she could see a whole, tiny
landscape bright as a jewel in the summer heat.

“Rest! Stay!” Was it the sound of the leaves outside? No, it was in the
air; it was the room itself that whispered joyfully, shyly. Edith felt so
strange that she could keep quiet no longer.

“This is a very old room, Emily,” she warbled softly. “I know what it
is. This hotel has not always been a hotel. It’s been an old château. I
feel as sure of that as that I’m standing here.” Perhaps she wanted to
convince herself that she was standing there. “Do you see that stove?”
She walked over to the stove. “It’s got figures on it. Emily,” she
warbled faintly, “It’s 1623.”

“Isn’t that too wonderful!” cried Emily.

Even Father was deeply moved.

“1623? Nearly three hundred years old.” And suddenly, in spite of his
tiredness, he gave a thin, airy, old man’s chuckle. “Makes yer feel quite
a chicken, don’t it?” said Father.

Emily’s breathless little laugh answered him; it too was gay.

“I’m going to see what’s behind that door,” she cried. And half running
to the door in the middle wall she lifted the slender steel catch. It led
into a larger room, into Edith’s and her bedroom. But the walls were the
same and the floor, and there were the same deep-set windows. Only two
beds instead of one stood side by side with blue silk quilts instead of
yellow. And what a beautiful old chest there was under the windows!

“Oh,” cried Emily, in rapture. “Isn’t it all too perfectly historical
for words, Edith! It makes me feel——” She stopped, she looked at Edith
who had followed her and whose thin shadow lay on the sunny floor.
“Queer!” said Emily, trying to put all she felt into that one word. “I
don’t know what it is.”

Perhaps if Edith, the discoverer, had had time, she might have satisfied
Emily. But a knock sounded at the outer door; it was the luggage boy.
And while he brought in their suitcases there came from downstairs the
ringing of the luncheon bell. Father mustn’t be kept waiting. Once a bell
had gone he liked to follow it up right then. So without even a glance
at the mirror—they had reached the age when it is as natural to avoid
mirrors as it is to peer into them when one is young—Edith and Emily were
ready.

“Are you ready, girls?”

“Yes, Father dear.”

And off they went again, to the left, to the right, down a stone
staircase with a broad, worn balustrade, to the left again, finding their
way as if by instinct—Edith first, then Father, and Emily close behind.

But when they reached the _salle à manger_, which was as big as a
ball-room, it was still empty. All gay, all glittering, the long French
windows open on to the green and gold garden, the _salle à manger_
stretched before them. And the fifty little tables with the fifty pots of
dahlias looked as if they might begin dancing with....




ALL SERENE


At breakfast that morning they were in wonderfully good spirits. Who
was responsible—he or she? It was true she made a point of looking her
best in the morning; she thought it part of her duty to him—to their
love, even, to wear charming little caps, funny little coats, coloured
mules at breakfast time, and to see that the table was perfect as he
and she—fastidious pair!—understood the word. But he, too, so fresh,
well-groomed and content, contributed his share.... She had been down
first, sitting at her place when he came in. He leaned over the back of
her chair, his hands on her shoulders; he bent down and lightly rubbed
his cheek against hers, murmuring gently but with just enough pride of
proprietorship to make her flush with delight, “Give me my tea, love.”
And she lifted the silver teapot that had a silver pear modelled on the
lid and gave him his tea.

“Thanks.... You know you look awfully well this morning!”

“Do I?”

“Yes. Do that again. Look at me again. It’s your eyes. They’re like a
child’s. I’ve never known anyone have such shining eyes as you.”

“Oh, dear!” She sighed for joy. “I do love having sweet things said to
me!”

“Yes, you do—spoilt child! Shall I give you some of this?”

“No, thank you.... Darling!” Her hand flew across the table and clasped
his hand.

“Yes?”

But she said nothing, only “Darling!” again. There was the look on his
face she loved—a kind of sweet jesting. He was pretending he didn’t know
what she meant, and yet of course he did know. He was pretending to
be feeling “Here she is—trust a woman—all ready for a passionate love
scene over the breakfast table at nine o’clock in the morning.” But she
wasn’t deceived. She knew he felt just the same as she did. That amused
tolerance, that mock despair was part of the ways of men—no more.

“May I be allowed to _use_ this knife please, or to put it down?”

Really! Mona had never yet got accustomed to her husband’s smile. They
had been married for three years. She was in love with him for countless
reasons, but apart from them all, a special reason all to itself, was
because of his smile. If it hadn’t sounded nonsense she would have said
she fell in love at first sight over and over again when he smiled. Other
people felt the charm of it, too. Other women, she was certain. Sometimes
she thought that even the servants watched for it....

“Don’t forget we’re going to the theatre to-night.”

“Oh, good egg! I had forgotten. It’s ages since we went to a show.”

“Yes, isn’t it? I feel quite thrilled.”

“Don’t you think we might have a tiny small celebration at dinner?”
(“Tiny small” was one of her expressions. But why did it sound so sweet
when he used it?)

“Yes, let’s. You mean champagne?” And she looked into the distance, and
said in a far-away voice: “Then I must revise the sweet.”

At that moment the maid came in with the letters. There were four for
him, three for her. No, one of hers belonged to him, too, rather a grimy
little envelope with a dab of sealing wax on the back.

“Why do you get all the letters?” she wailed, handing it across. “It’s
awfully unfair. I love letters and I never get any.”

“Well, I do like that!” said he. “How can you sit there and tell such
awful bangers? It’s the rarest thing on earth for me to get a letter in
the morning. It’s always you who get those mysterious epistles from girls
you were at college with or faded aunts. Here, have half my pear—it’s a
beauty.” She held out her plate.

The Rutherfords never shared their letters. It was her idea that they
should not. He had been violently opposed to it at first. She couldn’t
help laughing; he had so absolutely misunderstood her reason.

“Good God! my dear. You’re perfectly welcome to open any letters of mine
that come to the house—or to read any letters of mine that may be lying
about. I think I can promise you....”

“Oh no, no, darling, that’s not what I mean. I don’t suspect you.” And
she put her hands on his cheeks and kissed him quickly. He looked like an
offended boy. “But so many of Mother’s old friends write to me—confide in
me—don’t you know?—tell me things they wouldn’t for the world tell a man.
I feel it wouldn’t be fair to them. Don’t you see?”

He gave way at last. But “I’m old fashioned,” he said, and his smile was
a little rueful. “I like to feel my wife reads my letters.”

“My precious dear! I’ve made you unhappy.” She felt so repentant; she
didn’t know quite about what. “Of course I’d love to read....”

“No, no! That’s all right. It’s understood. We’ll keep the bond.” And
they had kept it.

He slit open the grimy envelope. He began to read. “Damn!” he said and
thrust out his under lip.

“Why, what is it? Something horrid?”

“No—annoying. I shall be late this evening. A man wants to meet me at the
office at six o’clock.”

“Was that a business letter?” She sounded surprised.

“Yes, why?”

“It looked so awfully unbusinesslike. The sealing-wax and the funny
writing—much more like a woman’s than a man’s.”

He laughed. He folded the letter, put it in his pocket and picked up
the envelope. “Yes,” he said, “it is queer, isn’t it. I shouldn’t have
noticed. How quick you are! But it does look exactly like a woman’s hand.
The capital R, for instance”—he flipped the envelope across to her.

“Yes, and that squiggle underneath. I should have said a rather
uneducated female....”

“As a matter of fact,” said Hugh, “he’s a mining engineer.” And he got
up, began to stretch and then stopped. “I say, what a glorious morning!
Why do I have to go to the office instead of staying at home and playing
with you?” And he came over to her and locked his arms round her neck.
“Tell me that, little lovely one.”

“Oh,” she leaned against him, “I wish you could. Life’s arranged badly
for people like you and me. And now you’re going to be late this evening.”

“Never mind,” said he. “All the rest of the time’s ours. Every single bit
of it. We shan’t come back from the theatre to find——”

“Our porch black with mining engineers.” She laughed. Did other
people—could other people—was it possible that any one before had ever
loved as they loved? She squeezed her head against him—she heard his
watch ticking—precious watch!

“What are those purple floppy flowers in my bedroom?” he murmured.

“Petunias.”

“You smell exactly like a petunia.”

And he raised her up. She drew towards him. “Kiss me,” said he.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was her habit to sit on the bottom stair and watch his final
preparations. Strange it should be so fascinating to see someone brush
his hat, choose a pair of gloves, and give a last quick look in the round
mirror. But it was the same when he was shaving. Then she loved to curl
up on the hard little couch in his dressing room; she was as absorbed, as
intent as he. How fantastic he looked, like a pierrot, like a mask, with
those dark eyebrows, liquid eyes and the brush of flesh colour on his
cheek-bones above the lather! But that was not her chief feeling. No, it
was what she felt on the stairs, too. It was, “So this is my husband, so
this is the man I’ve married, this is the stranger who walked across the
lawn that afternoon swinging his tennis racket and bowed, rolling up his
shirt-sleeves. This is not only my lover and my husband, but my brother,
my dearest friend, my playmate, even at times a kind of very perfect
father too. And here is where we live. Here is his room—and here is our
hall.” She seemed to be showing their house and him to her other self,
the self she had been before she had met him. Deeply admiring, almost
awed by so much happiness, that other self looked on....

“Will I do?” He stood there smiling, stroking on his gloves. But although
he wouldn’t like her to say the things she often longed to say about
his appearance, she did think she detected that morning just the very
faintest boyish showing off. Children who know they are admired look like
that at their mother.

“Yes, you’ll do....” Perhaps at that moment she was proud of him as a
mother is proud; she could have blessed him before he went his way.
Instead she stood in the porch thinking, “There he goes. The man I’ve
married. The stranger who came across the lawn.” The fact was never less
wonderful....

It was never less wonderful, never. It was even more wonderful if
anything and the reason was—Mona ran back into the house, into the
drawing-room and sat down to the piano. Oh, why bother about reasons— She
began to sing,

    See, love, I bring thee flowers
    To charm thy pain!

But joy—joy breathless and exulting thrilled in her voice, on the word
“pain” her lips parted in such a happy—dreadfully unsympathetic smile
that she felt quite ashamed. She stopped playing, she turned round on the
piano stool facing the room. How different it looked in the morning, how
severe and remote. The grey chairs with the fuchsia-coloured cushions,
the black and gold carpet, the bright green silk curtains might have
belonged to anybody. It was like a stage setting with the curtain still
down. She had no right to be there, and as she thought that a queer
little chill caught her; it seemed so extraordinary that anything, even a
chair, should turn away from, should not respond to her happiness.

“I don’t like this room in the morning, I don’t like it at all,” she
decided, and she ran upstairs to finish dressing. Ran into their big
shadowy bedroom ... and leaned over the starry petunias....




A BAD IDEA


Something’s happened to me—something bad. And I don’t know what to do
about it. I don’t see any way out for the life of me. The worst of it is,
I can’t get this thing into focus—if you know what I mean. I just feel
in a muddle—in the hell of a muddle. It ought to be plain to anyone that
I’m not the kind of man to get mixed up in a thing like this. I’m not
one of your actor Johnnies, or a chap in a book. I’m—well, I knew what
I was all right until yesterday. But now—I feel helpless, yes, that’s
the word, helpless. Here I sit, chucking stones at the sea like a child
that’s missed its mother. And everybody else has cut along home hours ago
and tea’s over and it’s getting on for time to light the lamp. I shall
have to go home too, sooner or later. I see that, of course. In fact,
would you believe it? at this very moment I wish I was there in spite of
everything. What’s she doing? My wife, I mean. Has she cleared away? Or
has she stayed there staring at the table with the plates pushed back?
My God! when I think that I could howl like a dog—if you know what I
mean....

I should have realized it was all U.P. this morning when she didn’t get
up for breakfast. I did, in a way. But I couldn’t face it. I had the
feeling that if I said nothing special and just treated it as one of her
bad headache days and went off to the office, by the time I got back this
evening the whole affair would have blown over somehow. No, that wasn’t
it. I felt a bit like I do now, “helpless.” What was I to do? Just go on.
That was all I could think of. So I took her up a cup of tea and a couple
of slices of thin bread and butter as per usual on her headache days. The
blind was still down. She was lying on her back. I think she had a wet
handkerchief on her forehead. I’m not sure, for I couldn’t look at her.
It was a beastly feeling. And she said in a weak kind of voice, “Put the
jug on the table, will you?” I put it down. I said, “Can I do anything?”
And she said, “No. I’ll be all right in half an hour.” But her voice, you
know! It did for me. I barged out as quick as I could, snatched my hat
and stick from the hall-stand and dashed off for the tram.

Here’s a queer thing—you needn’t believe me if you don’t want to—the
moment I got out of the house I forgot that about my wife. It was a
splendid morning, soft, with the sun making silver ducks on the sea.
The kind of morning when you know it’s going to keep hot and fine all
day. Even the tram bell sounded different, and the little school kids
crammed between people’s knees had bunches of flowers. I don’t know—I
can’t understand why—I just felt happy, but happy in a way I’d never been
before, happy to beat the band! That wind that had been so strong the
night before was still blowing a bit. It felt like her—the other—touching
me. Yes, it did. Brought it back, every bit of it. If I told you how it
took me, you’d say I was mad. I felt reckless—didn’t care if I was late
for the office or not and I wanted to do every one a kindness. I helped
the little kids out of the tram. One little chap dropped his cap, and
when I picked it up for him and said, “Here, sonny!” ... well, it was all
I could do not to make a fool of myself.

At the office it was just the same. It seemed to me I’d never known the
fellows at the office before. When old Fisher came over to my desk and
put down a couple of giant sweet peas as per usual with his “Beat ’em,
old man, beat ’em”—I didn’t feel annoyed. I didn’t care that he was
riddled with conceit about his garden. I just looked at them and I said
quietly, “Yes, you’ve done it this time.” He didn’t know what to make of
it. Came back in about five minutes and asked me if I had a headache.

And so it went on all day. In the evening I dashed home with the
home-going crowd, pushed open the gate, saw the hall-door open as it
always is and sat down on the little chair just inside to take off my
boots. My slippers were there, of course. This seemed to me a good sign.
I put my boots into the rack in the cupboard under the stairs, changed
my office coat and made for the kitchen. I knew my wife was there. Wait
a bit. The only thing I couldn’t manage was my whistling as per usual,
“I often lie awake and think, What a dreadful thing is work....” I had a
try, but nothing came of it. Well, I opened the kitchen-door and said,
“Hullo! How’s everybody?” But as soon as I’d said that—even before—I
knew the worst had happened. She was standing at the table beating the
salad dressing. And when she looked up and gave a kind of smile and said
“Hullo!” you could have knocked me down! My wife looked dreadful—there’s
no other word for it. She must have been crying all day. She’d put some
white flour stuff on her face to take away the marks—but it only made
her look worse. She must have seen I spotted something, for she caught
up the cup of cream and poured some into the salad bowl—like she always
does, you know, so quick, so neat, in her own way—and began beating
again. I said, “Is your head better?” But she didn’t seem to hear. She
said, “Are you going to water the garden before or after supper?” What
could I say? I said, “After,” and went off to the dining-room, opened the
evening paper and sat by the open window—well, hiding behind that paper,
I suppose.

I shall never forget sitting there. People passing by, going down the
road, sounded so peaceful. And a man passed with some cows. I—I envied
him. My wife came in and out. Then she called me to supper and we sat
down. I suppose we ate some cold meat and salad. I don’t remember. We
must have. But neither of us spoke. It’s like a dream now. Then she
got up, changed the plates, and went to the larder for the pudding.
Do you know what the pudding was? Well, of course, it wouldn’t mean
anything to you. It was my favorite—the kind she only made me on special
occasions—honey-comb cream....




A MAN AND HIS DOG


To look at Mr. Potts one would have thought that there at least went
someone who had nothing to boast about. He was a little insignificant
fellow with a crooked tie, a hat too small for him and a coat too large.
The brown canvas portfolio that he carried to and from the Post Office
every day was not like a business man’s portfolio. It was like a child’s
school satchel; it did up even with a round-eyed button. One imagined
there were crumbs and an apple core inside. And then there was something
funny about his boots, wasn’t there? Through the laces his coloured socks
peeped out. What the dickens had the chap done with the tongues? “Fried
’em,” suggested the wit of the Chesney bus. Poor old Potts! “More likely
buried ’em in his garden.” Under his arm he clasped an umbrella. And in
wet weather when he put it up, he disappeared completely. He was not. He
was a walking umbrella—no more—the umbrella became his shell.

Mr. Potts lived in a little bungalow on Chesney Flat. The bulge of the
water tank to one side gave it a mournful air, like a little bungalow
with the toothache. There was no garden. A path had been cut in the
paddock turf from the gate to the front door, and two beds, one round,
one oblong, had been cut in what was going to be the front lawn. Down
that path went Potts every morning at half-past eight and was picked up
by the Chesney bus; up that path walked Potts every evening while the
great kettle of a bus droned on. In the late evening, when he crept as
far as the gate, eager to smoke a pipe—he wasn’t allowed to smoke any
nearer to the house than that—so humble, so modest was his air, that the
big, merrily-shining stars seemed to wink at each other, to laugh, to
say, “Look at him! Let’s throw something!”

When Potts got out of the tram at the Fire Station to change into the
Chesney bus he saw that something was up. The car was there all right,
but the driver was off his perch; he was flat on his face half under the
engine, and the conductor, his cap off, sat on a step rolling a cigarette
and looking dreamy. A little group of business men and a woman clerk
or two stood staring at the empty car; there was something mournful,
pitiful about the way it leaned to one side and shivered faintly when the
driver shook something. It was like someone who’d had an accident and
tries to say: “Don’t touch me! Don’t come near me! Don’t hurt me!”

But all this was so familiar—the cars had only been running to Chesney
the last few months—that nobody said anything, nobody asked anything.
They just waited on the off chance. In fact, two or three decided to walk
it as Potts came up. But Potts didn’t want to walk unless he had to. He
was tired. He’d been up half the night rubbing his wife’s chest—she had
one of her mysterious pains—and helping the sleepy servant girl heat
compresses and hot-water bottles and make tea. The window was blue and
the roosters had started crowing before he lay down finally with feet
like ice. And all this was familiar, too.

Standing at the edge of the pavement and now and again changing his brown
canvas portfolio from one hand to the other Potts began to live over
the night before. But it was vague, shadowy. He saw himself moving like
a crab, down the passage to the cold kitchen and back again. The two
candles quivered on the dark chest of drawers, and as he bent over his
wife her big eyes suddenly flashed and she cried:

“I get no sympathy—no sympathy. You only do it because you have to. Don’t
contradict me. I can see you grudge doing it.”

Trying to soothe her only made matters worse. There had been an awful
scene ending with her sitting up and saying solemnly with her hand
raised: “Never mind, it will not be for long now.” But the sound of these
words frightened her so terribly that she flung back on the pillow and
sobbed, “Robert! Robert!” Robert was the name of the young man to whom
she had been engaged years ago, before she met Potts. And Potts was very
glad to hear him invoked. He had come to know that meant the crisis was
over and she’d begin to quieten down....

By this time Potts had wheeled round; he had walked across the pavement
to the paling fence that ran beside. A piece of light grass pushed
through the fence and some slender silky daisies. Suddenly he saw a bee
alight on one of the daisies and the flower leaned over, swayed, shook,
while the little bee clung and rocked. And as it flew away the petals
fluttered as if joyfully.... Just for an instant Potts dropped into the
world where this happened. He brought from it the timid smile with which
he walked back to the car. But now everybody had disappeared except one
young girl who stood beside the empty car reading.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the tail of the procession came Potts in a cassock so much too large
for him that it looked like a night-shirt and you felt that he ought to
be carrying not a hymn and a prayer book but a candle. His voice was a
very light plaintive tenor. It surprised everybody. It seemed to surprise
him, too. But it was so plaintive that when he cried “for the wings,
for the wings of a dove” the ladies in the congregation wanted to club
together and buy him a pair.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lino’s nose quivered so pitifully, there was such a wistful, timid look
in his eyes, that Potts’ heart was wrung. But of course he would not show
it. “Well,” he said sternly, “I suppose you’d better come home.” And he
got up off the bench. Lino got up, too, but stood still, holding up a paw.

“But there’s one thing,” said Potts, turning and facing him squarely,
“that we’d better be clear about before you do come. And it’s this.”
He pointed his finger at Lino who started as though he expected to be
shot. But he kept his bewildered wistful eyes upon his master. “Stop this
pretence of being a fighting dog,” said Potts more sternly than ever.
“You’re not a fighting dog. You’re a watch dog. That’s what you are. Very
well. Stick to it. But it’s this infernal boasting I can’t stand. It’s
that that gets me.”

In the moment’s pause that followed while Lino and his master looked at
each other it was curious how strong a resemblance was between them. Then
Potts turned again and made for home.

And timidly, as though falling over his own paws, Lino followed after the
humble little figure of his master....




SUCH A SWEET OLD LADY


Why did old Mrs. Travers wake so early nowadays? She would like to
have slept for another three hours at least. But no, every morning at
almost precisely the same time, at half-past four, she was wide awake.
For—nowadays, again—she woke always in the same way, with a slight start,
a small shock, lifting her head from the pillow with a quick glance as if
she fancied someone had called her, or as if she were trying to remember
for certain whether this was the same wallpaper, the same window she
had seen last night before Warner switched off the light.... Then the
small, silvery head pressed the white pillow again and just for a moment,
before the agony of lying awake began, old Mrs. Travers was happy. Her
heart quietened down, she breathed deeply, she even smiled. Yet once
more the tide of darkness had risen, had floated her, had carried her
away; and once more it had ebbed, it had withdrawn, casting her up where
it had found her, shut in by the same wallpaper, stared at by the same
window—still safe—still _there_!

Now the church clock sounded from outside, slow, languid, faint, as if
it chimed the half hour in its sleep. She felt under the pillow for
her watch; yes, it said the same. Half-past four. Three and a half
hours before Warner came in with her tea. Oh dear, would she be able
to stand it? She moved her legs restlessly. And, staring at the prim,
severe face of the watch, it seemed to her that the hands—the minute
hand especially—knew that she was watching them and held back—just a
very little—on purpose.... Very strange, she had never got over the
feeling that watch hated her. It had been Henry’s. Twenty years ago, when
standing by poor Henry’s bed, she had taken it into her hands for the
first time and wound it, it had felt cold and heavy. And two days later,
when she undid a hook of her crape bodice and thrust it inside, it had
lain in her bosom like a stone.... It had never felt at home there. Its
place was—ticking, keeping perfect time, against Henry’s firm ribs. It
had never trusted her, just as he had never trusted her in those ways.
And on the rare occasions when she had forgotten to wind it, she had felt
a pang of almost terror, and she had murmured as she fitted the little
key: “Forgive me, Henry!”

Old Mrs. Travers sighed, and pushed the watch under the pillow again.
It seemed to her that lately this feeling that it hated her had become
more definite.... Perhaps that was because she looked at it so often,
especially now that she was away from home. Foreign clocks never go.
They are always stopped at twenty minutes to two. Twenty minutes to two!
Such an unpleasant time, neither one thing nor the other. If one arrived
anywhere lunch was over and it was too early to expect a cup of tea....
But she mustn’t begin thinking about tea. Old Mrs. Travers pulled herself
up in the bed, and like a tired baby, she lifted her arms and let them
fall on the eiderdown.

The room was gay with morning light. The big French window on to the
balcony was open and the palm outside flung its quivering spider-like
shadow over the bedroom walls. Although their hotel did not face the
front, at this early hour you could smell the sea, you could hear it
breathing, and flying high on golden wings sea-gulls skimmed past. How
peaceful the sky looked, as though it was tenderly smiling! Far away—far
away from this satin-stripe wallpaper, the glass-covered table, the
yellow brocade sofa and chairs, and the mirrors that showed you your side
view, your back view, your three-quarters view as well.

Ernestine had been enthusiastic about this room.

“It’s just the very room for you, Mother! So bright and attractive and
non-depressing! With a balcony, too, so that on wet days you can still
have your chair outside and look at those lovely palms. And Gladys can
have the little room adjoining, which makes it so beautifully easy for
Warner to keep her eye on you both.... You couldn’t have a nicer room,
could you, Mother? I can’t get over that sweet balcony! So nice for
Gladys! Cecil and I haven’t got one at all....”

But all the same, in spite of Ernestine, she never sat on that balcony.
For some strange reason that she couldn’t explain she hated looking at
palms. Nasty foreign things, she called them in her mind. When they were
still they drooped, they looked draggled like immense untidy birds, and
when they moved, they reminded her always of spiders. Why did they never
look just natural and peaceful and shady like English trees? Why were
they forever writhing and twisting or standing sullen? It tired her even
to think of them, or in fact of anything foreign....




HONESTY


There was an expression Rupert Henderson was very fond of using. “If you
want my _honest_ opinion....” He had an honest opinion on every subject
under the sun, and nothing short of a passion for delivering it. But
Archie Cullen’s pet phrase was “I cannot _honestly_ say....” Which meant
that he had not really made up his mind. He had not really made up his
mind on any subject whatsoever. Why? Because he could not. He was unlike
other men. He was minus something—or was it plus? No matter. He was not
in the least proud of the fact. It depressed him—one might go so far as
to say—terribly at times.

Rupert and Archie lived together. That is to say, Archie lived in
Rupert’s rooms. Oh, he paid his share, his half in everything; the
arrangement was a purely, strictly business arrangement. But perhaps it
was because Rupert had invited Archie that Archie remained always—his
guest. They each had a bedroom, there was a common sitting-room, and
a largeish bath-room which Rupert used as a dressing-room as well.
The first morning after his arrival Archie had left his sponge in the
bath-room, and a moment after there was a knock at his door and Rupert
said, kindly but firmly, “Your sponge, I fancy.” The first evening
Archie had brought his tobacco jar into the sitting room and placed it
on a corner of the mantelpiece. Rupert was reading the newspaper. It
was a round china jar, the surface painted and roughened to represent
a sea-urchin. On the lid was a spray of china seaweed with two berries
for a knob. Archie was excessively fond of it. But after dinner, when
Rupert took out his pipe and pouch, he suddenly fixed his eyes on this
object, blew through his moustaches, gasped, and said in a wondering,
astonished voice, “I say! Is that yours or Mrs. Head’s?” Mrs. Head was
their landlady.

“It’s mine,” said Archie, and he blushed and smiled just a trifle timidly.

“I _say_!” said Rupert again—this time very meaningly.

“Would you rather I....” said Archie, and he moved in his chair to get up.

“No, no! Certainly not! On no account!” answered Rupert, and he actually
raised his hand. “But perhaps”—and here he smiled at Archie and gazed
about him—“perhaps we might find some spot for it that was a trifle less
conspicuous.”

The spot was not decided on, however, and Archie nipped his sole personal
possession into his bedroom as soon as Rupert was out of the way.

But it was chiefly at meals that the attitude of host and guest was
most marked. For instance, on each separate occasion, even before they
sat down Rupert said, “Would you mind cutting the bread, Archie?” Had
he not made such a point of it, it is possible that Archie in a moment
of abstractedness might have grasped the bread knife.... An unpleasant
thought! Again, Archie was never allowed to serve. Even at breakfast,
the hot dishes and the tea, both were dispensed by Rupert. True, he half
apologized about the tea; he seemed to feel the necessity of some slight
explanation, there.

“I’m rather a fad about my tea,” said he. “Some people, females
especially, pour in the milk first. Fatal habit, for more reasons than
one. In my opinion, the cup should be filled just _so_ and the tea then
coloured. Sugar, Archie?”

“Oh, please,” said Archie, almost bowing over the table. Rupert was so
very impressive.

“But I suppose,” said his friend, “you don’t notice any of these little
things.”

And Archie answered vaguely, stirring, “No, I don’t suppose I do.”

Rupert sat down and unfolded his napkin.

“It would be very inconsistent with your character and disposition,” said
he genially, “if you did! Kidneys and bacon? Scrambled eggs? Either?
Both? Which?”

Poor Archie hated scrambled eggs, but, alas! he was practically certain
that scrambled eggs were expected of him too. This ‘psychological
awareness,’ as Rupert called it, which existed between them, might after
a time make things a trifle difficult. He felt a little abject as he
murmured, “Eggs, please.” And he saw by Rupert’s expression that he had
chosen right. Rupert helped him to eggs largely.


§

Psychological awareness ... perhaps it was that which explained their
intimacy. One might have been tempted to say it was a case of mutual
fascination. But whereas Archie’s reply to the suggestion would have
been a slow “Possibly!” Rupert would have flouted it at once.

“Fascination! The word’s preposterous in this connection. What on earth
would there be in Cullen to fascinate me even if I was in the habit of
being fascinated by my fellow-creatures; which I certainly am not. No,
I’ll own I am deeply interested. I confess my belief is, I understand
him better than anybody else. And if you want my honest opinion, I am
certain that my—my—h’m—influence over—sympathy for—him—call it what
you like, is all to the good. There is a psychological awareness....
Moreover, as a companion, instinctively I find him extremely agreeable.
He stimulates some part of my mind which is less active without him. But
fascination—wide of the mark, my dear—wide!”

But supposing one remained unconvinced? Supposing one still played with
the idea. Wasn’t it possible to see Rupert and Archie as the python and
the rabbit keeping house together? Rupert that handsome, well-fed python
with his moustaches, his glare, his habit of uncoiling before the fire
and swaying against the mantelpiece, pipe and pouch in hand. And Archie,
soft, hunched, timid, sitting in the lesser armchair, there and not
there, flicking back into the darkness at a word but emerging again at
a look—with sudden wholly unexpected starts of playfulness (instantly
suppressed by the python). Of course, there was no question of anything
so crude and dreadful as the rabbit being eaten by his housemate.
Nevertheless, it was a strange fact,—after a typical evening the one
looked immensely swelled, benign and refreshed and the other, pale,
small and exhausted.... And more often than not, Rupert’s final comment
was—ominous this—as he doused his whisky with soda:

“This has been very absorbing, Archie.” And Archie gasped out, “Oh,
_very_!”


§

Archie Cullen was a journalist and the son of a journalist. He had no
private money, no influential connections, scarcely any friends. His
father had been one of those weak, disappointed, unsuccessful men who see
in their sons a weapon for themselves. He would get his own back on life
through Archie. Archie would show them the stuff he—his father was made
of. Just you wait till my son comes along! This, though highly consoling
to Mr. Cullen _père_, was terribly poor fun for Archie. At two and a
half his infant nose was put to the grindstone and even on Sundays it
was not taken off. Then his father took him out walking and improved the
occasion by making him spell the shop signs, count the yachts racing in
the harbour, divide them by four and multiply the result by three.

But the experiment was an amazing success. Archie turned away from the
distractions of life, shut his ears, folded his feet, sat over the table
with his book and when the holidays came he didn’t like them; they made
him uneasy; so he went on reading for himself. He was a model boy. On
prize-giving days his father accompanied him to school, carried the great
wad of stiff books home for him and, flinging them on the dining-room
table, he surveyed them with an exultant smile. My prizes! The little
sacrifice stared at them, too, through his spectacles, as other little
boys stared at puddings. He ought, of course, at this juncture to have
been rescued by a doting mother who, though cowed herself, rose on
the....




SUSANNAH


Of course there would have been no question of their going to the
exhibition if Father had not had the tickets given to him. Little girls
cannot expect to be given treats that cost extra money when only to feed
them, buy them clothes, pay for their lessons and the house they live
in takes their kind generous Father all day and every day working hard
from morning till night—“except Saturday afternoons and Sundays,” said
Susannah.

“Susannah!” Mother was very shocked. “But do you know what would happen
to your poor Father if he didn’t have a holiday on Saturday afternoons
and Sundays?”

“No,” said Susannah. She looked interested. “What?”

“He would die,” said their mother impressively.

“Would he?” said Susannah, opening her eyes. She seemed astounded, and
Sylvia and Phyllis, who were four and five years older than she, chimed
in with, “Of course,” in a very superior tone. What a little silly-billy
she was not to know that! They sounded so convinced and cheerful that
their mother felt a little shaken and hastened to change the subject....

“So that is why,” she said a little vaguely, “you must each thank Father
separately before you go.”

“And then he will give us the money?” asked Phyllis.

“And then I shall ask him for whatever is necessary,” said their mother
firmly. She sighed suddenly and got up. “Run along, children, and ask
Miss Wade to dress you and get ready herself and then come down to the
dining-room. And now, Susannah, you are not to let go Miss Wade’s hand
from the moment you are through the gates until you are out again.”

“Well—what if I go on a horse?” inquired Susannah.

“Go on a horse—nonsense, child! You’re much too young for horses! Only
big girls and boys can ride.”

“There’s roosters for small children,” said Susannah undaunted. “I know,
because Irene Heywood went on one and when she got off she fell over.”

“All the more reason why you shouldn’t go on,” said her mother.

But Susannah looked as though falling over had no terrors for her. On the
contrary.

About the exhibition, however, Sylvia and Phyllis knew as little as
Susannah. It was the first that had ever come to their town. One morning,
as Miss Wade, their lady help, rushed them along to the Heywoods’, whose
governess they shared, they had seen carts piled with great long planks
of wood, sacks, what looked like whole doors, and white flagstaffs,
passing through the wide gate of the Recreation Ground. And by the time
they were bowled home to their dinners, there were the beginnings of a
high thin fence, dotted with flagstaffs, built all round the railings.
From inside, came a tremendous noise of hammering, shouting, clanging; a
little engine, hidden away, went _Chuff-chuff-chuff_. _Chuff!_ And round,
woolly balls of smoke were tossed over the palings.

First it was the day after the day after tomorrow, then plain day after
tomorrow, then tomorrow, and at last, the day itself. When Susannah woke
up in the morning, there was a little gold spot of sunlight watching her
from the wall; it looked as though it had been there for a long time,
waiting to remind her: “It’s today—you’re going today—this afternoon.
Here she is!”


(_Second Version_)

That afternoon they were allowed to cut jugs and basins out of a draper’s
catalogue, and at tea-time they had real tea in the doll’s tea set on the
table. This was a very nice treat, indeed, except that the doll’s tea-pot
wouldn’t pour out even after you’d poked a pin down the spout and blown
into it.

But the next afternoon, which was Saturday, Father came home in high
feather. The front door banged so hard that the whole house shook, and he
shouted to Mother from the hall.

“Oh, how more than good of you, darling!” cried Mother, “but how
unnecessary too. Of course, they’ll simply love it. But to have spent
all that money! You shouldn’t have done it, Daddy dear! They’ve totally
forgotten all about it. And what is this! Half-a-crown?” cried Mother.
“No! Two shillings, I see,” she corrected quickly, “to spend as well.
Children! Children! Come down, downstairs!”

Down they came, Phyllis and Sylvia leading, Susannah holding on. “Do you
know what Father’s done?” And Mother held up her hand. What was she
holding? Three cherry tickets and a green one. “He’s bought you tickets.
You’re to go to the circus, this very afternoon, all of you, with Miss
Wade. What do you say to that?”

“Oh, Mummy! Lovely! Lovely!” cried Phyllis and Sylvia.

“Isn’t it?” said Mother. “Run upstairs. Run and ask Miss Wade to get you
ready. Don’t dawdle. Up you go! All of you.”

Away flew Phyllis and Sylvia, but still Susannah stayed where she was at
the bottom of the stairs, hanging her head.

“Go along,” said Mother. And Father said sharply, “What the devil’s the
matter with the child?”

Susannah’s face quivered. “I don’t want to go,” she whispered.

“What! Don’t want to go to the Exhibition! After Father’s—— You naughty,
ungrateful child! Either you go to the Exhibition, Susannah, or you will
be packed off to bed at once.”

Susannah’s head bent low, lower still. All her little body bent forward.
She looked as though she was going to bow down, to bow down to the
ground, before her kind generous Father and beg for his forgiveness....




SECOND VIOLIN


A February morning, windy, cold, with chill-looking clouds hurrying over
a pale sky and chill snowdrops for sale in the grey streets. People look
small and shrunken as they flit by; they look scared as if they were
trying to hide inside their coats from something big and brutal. The
shop doors are closed, the awnings are furled, and the policemen at the
crossings are lead policemen. Huge empty vans shake past with a hollow
sound; and there is a smell of soot and wet stone staircases, a raw,
grimy smell....

Flinging her small scarf over her shoulder again, clasping her violin,
Miss Bray darts along to orchestra practice. She is conscious of her cold
hands, her cold nose and her colder feet. She can’t feel her toes at all.
Her feet are just little slabs of cold, all of a piece, like the feet
of china dolls. Winter is a terrible time for thin people—terrible! Why
should it hound them down, fasten on them, worry them so? Why not, for a
change, take a nip, take a snap at the fat ones who wouldn’t notice? But
no! It is sleek, warm, cat-like summer that makes the fat one’s life a
misery. Winter is all for bones....

Threading her way, like a needle, in and out and along, went Miss Bray,
and she thought of nothing but the cold. She had just come out of her
kitchen, which was pleasantly snug in the morning, with her gas-fire
going for her breakfast and the window closed. She had just drunk three
large cups of really boiling tea. Surely, they ought to have warmed
her. One always read in books of people going on their way warmed and
invigorated by even one cup. And she had had three! How she loved her
tea! She was getting fonder and fonder of it. Stirring the cup, Miss
Bray looked down. A little fond smile parted her lips, and she breathed
tenderly, “I love my tea.”

But all the same, in spite of the books, it didn’t keep her warm. Cold!
Cold! And now as she turned the corner she took such a gulp of damp, cold
air that her eyes filled. _Yi-yi-yi_, a little dog yelped; he looked as
though he’d been hurt. She hadn’t time to look round, but that high,
sharp yelping soothed her, was a comfort even. She could have made just
that sound herself.

And here was the Academy. Miss Bray pressed with all her might against
the stiff, sulky door, squeezed through into the vestibule hung with
pallid notices and concert programmes, and stumbled up the dusty stairs
and along the passage to the dressing-room. Through the open door
there came such shrill loud laughter, such high, indifferent voices
that it sounded like a play going on in there. It was hard to believe
people were not laughing and talking like that ... on purpose. “Excuse
me—pardon—sorry,” said Miss Bray, nudging her way in and looking quickly
round the dingy little room. Her two friends had not yet come.

The First Violins were there; a dreamy, broad-faced girl leaned against
her ’cello; two Violas sat on a bench, bent over a music book, and the
Harp, a small grey little person, who only came occasionally, leaned
against a bench and looked for her pocket in her underskirt....

       *       *       *       *       *

“I’ve a run of three twice, ducky,” said Ma, “a pair of queens make
eight, and one for his nob makes nine.”

With an awful hollow groan Alexander, curling his little finger high,
pegged nine for Ma. And “Wait now, wait now,” said she, and her quick
short little hands snatched at the other cards. “My crib, young man!” She
spread them out, leaned back, twitched her shawl, put her head on one
side. “H’m, not so bad! A flush of four and a pair!”

“Betrayed! Betrayed!” moaned Alexander, bowing his dark head over the
cribbage board, “and by a woo-man.” He sighed deeply, shuffled the cards
and said to Ma, “Cut for me, my love!”

Although of course he was only having his joke like all professional
young gentlemen, something in the tone in which he said “my love!” gave
Ma quite a turn. Her lips trembled as she cut the cards, she felt a
sudden pang as she watched those long slim fingers dealing.

Ma and Alexander were playing cribbage in the basement kitchen of number
9 Bolton Street. It was late, it was on eleven, and Sunday night,
too—shocking! They sat at the kitchen table that was covered with a worn
art serge cloth spotted with candle grease. On one corner of it stood
three glasses, three spoons, a saucer of sugar lumps and a bottle of gin.
The stove was still alight, and the lid of the kettle had just begun to
lift, cautiously, stealthily, as though there was someone inside who
wanted to have a peep and pop back again. On the horse-hair sofa against
the wall by the door, the owner of the third glass lay asleep, gently
snoring. Perhaps because he had his back to them, perhaps because his
feet poked out from the short overcoat covering him, he looked forlorn,
pathetic, and the long fair hair covering his collar looked forlorn and
pathetic, too.

“Well, well,” said Ma, sighing as she put out two cards and arranged the
others in a fan, “such is life. I little thought when I saw the last of
you this morning that we’d be playing a game together tonight.”

“The caprice of destiny,” murmured Alexander. But, as a matter of fact,
it was no joking matter. By some infernal mischance that morning he and
Rinaldo had missed the train that all the company travelled by. That was
bad enough. But being Sunday, there was no other train until midnight,
and as they had a full rehearsal at 10 o’clock on Monday it meant going
by that, or getting what the company called the beetroot. But God! what a
day it had been. They had left the luggage at the station and come back
to Ma’s, back to Alexander’s frowsy bedroom with the bed unmade and water
standing about. Rinaldo had spent the whole day sitting on the side of
the bed swinging his leg, dropping ash on the floor and saying, “I wonder
what made us lose that train. Strange we should have lost it. I bet the
others are wondering what made us lose it, too.” And Alexander had stayed
by the window gazing into the small garden that was so black with grime
even the old lean cat who came and scraped seemed revolted by it, too. It
was only after Ma had seen the last of her Sunday visitors....




MR. AND MRS. WILLIAMS


That winter Mr. and Mrs. Williams of The Rowans, Wickenham, Surrey,
astonished their friends by announcing that they were going for a three
weeks’ holiday to Switzerland. Switzerland! How very enterprising and
exciting! There was quite a flutter in Wickenham households at the
news. Husbands coming home from the city in the evening were greeted
immediately with:

“My dear, have you heard the news about the Williams?”

“No! What’s up now?”

“They’re off to Switzerland.”

“Switzerland! What the dickens are they going there for?”

That, of course, was only the extravagance of the moment. One knew
perfectly well why people went. But nobody in Wickenham ever plunged
so far away from home at that time of year. It was not considered
“necessary”—as golf, bridge, a summer holiday at the sea, an account at
Harrods’ and a small car as soon as one could afford it, were considered
necessary....

“Won’t you find the initial expenditure very heavy?” asked stout old
Mrs. Prean, meeting Mrs. Williams quite by chance at their nice obliging
grocer’s. And she brushed the crumbs of a sample cheese biscuit off her
broad bosom.

“Oh, we shall get our kit over there,” said Mrs. Williams.

“Kit” was a word in high favour among the Wickenham ladies. It was left
over from the war, of course, with “cheery,” “wash-out,” “Hun,” “Boche,”
and “Bolshy.” As a matter of fact, Bolshy was post-war. But it belonged
to the same mood. (“My dear, my housemaid is an absolute little Hun,
and I’m afraid the cook is turning Bolshy....”) There was a fascination
in those words. To use them was like opening one’s Red Cross cupboard
again, and gazing at the remains of the bandages, body-belts, tins of
anti-insectide and so on. One was stirred, one got a far-away thrill,
like the thrill of hearing a distant band. It reminded you of those
exciting, busy, of course anxious, but tremendous days when the whole of
Wickenham was one united family. And, although one’s husband was away,
one had for a substitute three large photographs of him in uniform. One
in a silver frame on the table by the bed, one in the regimental colours
on the piano, and one in leather to match the dining-room chairs.

“Cook strongly advised us to buy nothing here,” went on Mrs. Williams.

“_Cook!_” cried Mrs. Prean, greatly astounded. “What can——”

“Oh—_Thomas_ Cook, of course I mean,” said Mrs. Williams, smiling
brightly. Mrs. Prean subsided.

“But you will surely not depend upon the resources of a little Swiss
village for clothes?” she persisted, deeply interested, as usual, in
other people’s affairs.

“Oh, no, certainly not.” Mrs. Williams was quite shocked. “We shall get
all we need in the way of clothes from Harrods’.”

That was what Mrs. Prean had wished to hear. That was as it should be.

“The great secret my dear” (she always knew the great secret), “the
great secret,”—and she put her hand on Mrs. Williams’ arm and spoke very
distinctly—“is plenty of long-sleeved woven combies!”

“Thank you, m’m.”

Both ladies started. There at their side was Mr. Wick, the nice grocer,
holding Mrs. Prean’s parcel by a loop of pink string. Dear me—how very
awkward! He must have ... he couldn’t possibly not have.... In the
emotion of the moment Mrs. Prean, thinking to gloss it over tactfully,
nodded significantly at Mrs. Williams and said, accepting the parcel,
“And that is what I always tell my dear son!” But this was too swift for
Mrs. Williams to follow.

Her embarrassment continued, and ordering the sardines, she just stopped
herself from saying “Three large pairs, Mr. Wick, please,” instead of
“Three large tins.”


2

As a matter of fact it was Mrs. Williams’ Aunt Aggie’s happy release
which had made their scheme possible. Happy release it was! After fifteen
years in a wheel-chair passing in and out of the little house at Ealing
she had, to use the nurse’s expression, “just glided away at the last.”
Glided away ... it sounded as though Aunt Aggie had taken the wheel-chair
with her. One saw her, in her absurd purple velvet, steering carefully
among the stars and whimpering faintly, as was her terrestrial wont, when
the wheel jolted over a particularly large one.

Aunt Aggie had left her dear niece Gwendolen two hundred and fifty
pounds. Not a vast sum by any means, but quite a nice little windfall.
Gwendolen, in that dashing mood that only women know, decided immediately
to spend it—part of it on the house and the rest on a treat for Gerald.
And the lawyer’s letter happening to come at tea-time together with a
copy of the _Sphere_ full of the most fascinating, thrilling photographs
of holiday-makers at Mürren and St. Moritz and Montana, the question of
the treat was settled.

“You would like to go to Switzerland, wouldn’t you, Gerald?”

“Very much.”

“You’re—awfully good at skating and all that kind of thing—aren’t you?”

“Fairly.”

“You do feel it’s a thing to be done—don’t you?”

“How do you mean?”

But Gwendolen only laughed. That was so like Gerald. She knew, in his
heart of hearts he was every bit as keen as she was. But he had this
horror of showing his feelings like all men. Gwendolen understood it
perfectly and wouldn’t have had him different for the world....

“I’ll write to Cook’s at once and tell them we don’t want to go to a very
fashionable place, and we don’t want one of those big jazzy hotels! I’d
much prefer a really small out-of-the-way place where we could really go
in for the sports seriously.” This was quite untrue, but, like so many of
Gwendolen’s statements, it was made to please Gerald. “Don’t you agree?”

Gerald lit his pipe for reply.

As you have gathered, the Christian names of Mr. and Mrs. Williams were
Gwendolen and Gerald. How well they went together! They sounded married.
Gwendolen-Gerald. Gwendolen wrote them, bracketed, on bits of blotting
paper, on the backs of old envelopes, on the Stores’ catalogue. They
looked married.

Gerald, when they were on their honeymoon, had made an awfully good joke
about them. He had said one morning, “I say, has it ever struck you that
both our names begin with _G_? Gwendolen-Gerald. You’re a _G_,” and he
had pointed his razor at her—he was shaving—“and I’m a _G_. Two _Gs_.
Gee-Gee. See?”

Oh, Gwendolen saw immediately. It was really most witty. Quite brilliant!
And so—sweet and unexpected of him to have thought of it. Gee-Gee. Oh,
_very_ good! She wished she could have told it to people. She had an
idea that some people thought Gerald had not a very strong sense of
humour. All the more precious for that reason, however.

“My dear, did you think of it at this moment? I mean—did you just make it
up on the spot?”

Gerald, rubbing the lather with a finger, nodded. “Flashed into my
mind while I was soaping my face,” he said seriously. “It’s a queer
thing,”—and he dipped the razor into the pot of hot water—“I’ve noticed
it before. Shaving gives me ideas.” It did, indeed, thought Gwendolen....




WEAK HEART


Although it sounded all the year round, although it rang out sometimes as
early as half-past six in the morning, sometimes as late as half-past ten
at night, it was in the spring, when Bengel’s violet patch just inside
the gate was blue with flowers that that piano ... made the passers-by
not only stop talking, but slow down, pause, look suddenly—if they were
men—grave, even stern, and if they were women—dreamy, even sorrowful.

Tarana Street was beautiful in the spring; there was not a single house
without its garden and trees and a plot of grass big enough to be called
“the lawn.” Over the low painted fences, you could see, as you ran by,
whose daffys were out, whose wild snowdrop border was over and who had
the biggest hyacinths, so pink and white, the colour of cocoanut ice.
But nobody had violets that grew, that smelled in the spring sun like
Bengel’s. Did they really smell like that? Or did you shut your eyes and
lean over the fence because of Edie Bengel’s piano?

A little wind ruffles among the leaves like a joyful hand looking for the
finest flowers; and the piano sounds gay, tender, laughing. Now a cloud,
like a swan, flies across the sun, the violets shine cold, like water,
and a sudden questioning cry rings from Edie Bengel’s piano.

... Ah, if life must pass so quickly, why is the breath of these flowers
so sweet? What is the meaning of this feeling of longing, of sweet
trouble—of flying joy? Goodbye! Farewell! The young bees lie half awake
on the slender dandelions, silver are the pink tipped arrowy petals of
the daisies; the new grass shakes in the light. Everything is beginning
again, marvellous as ever, heavenly fair. “Let me stay! Let me stay!”
pleads Edie Bengel’s piano.

It is the afternoon, sunny and still. The blinds are down in the front to
save the carpets, but upstairs the slats are open and in the golden light
little Mrs. Bengel is feeling under her bed for the square bonnet box.
She is flushed. She feels timid, excited, like a girl. And now the tissue
paper is parted, her best bonnet, the one trimmed with a jet butterfly,
which reposes on top, is lifted out and solemnly blown upon.

Dipping down to the glass she tries it with fingers that tremble. She
twitches her dolman round her slender shoulders, clasps her purse and
before leaving the bedroom kneels down a moment to ask God’s blessing on
her “goings out.” And as she kneels there quivering, she is rather like
a butterfly herself, fanning her wings before the Lord. When the door is
open the sound of the piano coming up through the silent house is almost
frightening, so bold, so defiant, so reckless it rolls under Edie’s
fingers. And just for a moment the thought comes to Mrs. Bengel and is
gone again, that there is a stranger with Edie in the drawing-room, but
a fantastic person, out of a book, a—a—villain. It’s very absurd. She
flits across the hall, turns the door handle and confronts her flushed
daughter. Edie’s hands drop from the keys. She squeezes them between her
knees, her head is bent, her curls are fallen forward. She gazes at her
mother with brilliant eyes. There is something painful in that glance,
something very strange. It is dusky in the drawing-room, the top of the
piano is open. Edie has been playing from memory; it’s as though the air
still tingles.

“I’m going, dear,” said Mrs. Bengel softly, so softly it is like a sigh.

“Yes, Mother,” came from Edie.

“I don’t expect I shall be long.”

Mrs. Bengel lingers. She would very much like just a word, of sympathy,
of understanding, even from Edie, to cheer her on her way.

But Edie murmurs, “I’ll put the kettle on in half an hour.”

“Do, dear!” Mrs. Bengel grasped at that even. A nervous little smile
touched her lips. “I expect I shall want my tea.”

But to that Edie makes no reply; she frowns, she stretches out a hand,
quickly unscrews one of the piano candle-sticks, lifts off a pink china
ring and screws all tight again. The ring has been rattling. As the
front door bangs softly after her mother Edie and the piano seem to
plunge together into deep dark water, into waves that flow over both,
relentless. She plays on desperately until her nose is white and her
heart beats. It is her way of getting over her nervousness and her way
too of praying. Would they accept her? Would she be allowed to go? Was it
possible that in a week’s time she would be one of Miss Farmer’s girls,
wearing a red and blue hat band, running up the broad steps leading to
the big grey painted house that buzzed, that hummed as you went by? Their
pew in Church faced Miss Farmer’s boarders. Would she at last know the
names of the girls she had looked at so often? The pretty pale one with
red hair, the dark one with a fringe, the fair one who held Miss Farmer’s
hand during the sermon?... But after all....

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Edie’s fourteenth birthday. Her father gave her a silver brooch
with a bar of music, two crotchets, two quavers and a minim headed by a
very twisted treble clef. Her mother gave her blue satin gloves and two
boxes for gloves and handkerchiefs, hand-painted the glove box with a
sprig of gold roses tying up the capital G. and the handkerchief box with
a marvellously lifelike butterfly quivering on the capital H. From the
aunts in....

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a tree at the corner of Tarana Street and May Street. It grew
so close to the pavement that the heavy boughs stretched over, and on
that part of the pavement there was always a fine sifting of minute twigs.

       *       *       *       *       *

But in the dusk, lovers parading came into its shade as into a tent.
There, however long they had been together, they greeted each other
again with long kisses, with embraces that were sweet torture, agony to
bear, agony to end.

       *       *       *       *       *

Edie never knew that Roddie “loved” it, Roddie never knew that it meant
anything to Edie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Roddie, spruce, sleek with water, bumped his new bike down the wooden
steps, through the gate. He was off for a spin, and looking at that tree,
dark in the glow of evening, he felt the tree was watching him. He wanted
to do marvels, to astonish, to shock, to amaze it.

Roddie had a complete new outfit for the occasion. A black serge suit, a
black tie, a straw hat so white it was almost silver, a dazzling white
straw hat with a broad black band. Attached to the hat there was a thick
guard that somehow reminded one of a fishing line and the little clasp on
the brim was like a fly.... He stood at the graveside, his legs apart,
his hands loosely clasped, and watched Edie being lowered into the
grave—as a half-grown boy watches anything, a man at work, or a bicycle
accident, or a chap cleaning a spring-carriage wheel—but suddenly as
the men drew back he gave a violent start, turned, muttered something
to his father and dashed away, so fast that people looked positively
frightened, through the cemetery, down the avenue of dripping clay
banks into Tarana Road, and started pelting for home. His suit was very
tight and hot. It was like a dream. He kept his head down and his fists
clenched, he couldn’t look up, nothing could have made him look higher
than the tops of the fences—What was he thinking of as he pressed along?
On, on until the gate was reached, up the steps, in at the front door,
through the hall, up to the drawing-room.

“Edie!” called Roddie. “Edie, old girl!”

And he gave a low strange squawk and cried “Edie!” and stared across at
Edie’s piano.

But cold, solemn, as if frozen, heavily the piano stared back at Roddie.
Then it answered, but on its own behalf, on behalf of the house and the
violet patch, the garden, the velvet tree at the corner of May Street,
and all that was delightful: “There is nobody here of that name, young
man!”




WIDOWED


They came down to breakfast next morning absolutely their own selves.
Rosy, fresh, and just chilled enough by the cold air blowing through the
bedroom windows to be very ready for hot coffee.

“Nippy.” That was Geraldine’s word as she buttoned on her orange coat
with pink-washed fingers. “Don’t you find it decidedly nippy?” And her
voice, so matter-of-fact, so natural, sounded as though they had been
married for years.

Parting his hair with two brushes (marvellous feat for a woman to watch)
in the little round mirror, he had replied, lightly clapping the brushes
together, “My dear, have you got enough _on_?” and he, too, sounded as
though well he knew from the experience of years her habit of clothing
herself underneath in wisps of chiffon and two satin bows.... Then they
ran down to breakfast, laughing together and terribly startling the shy
parlour-maid who, after talking it over with Cook, had decided to be
invisible until she was rung for.

“Good-morning, Nellie, I think we shall want more toast than _that_,”
said the smiling Geraldine as she hung over the breakfast table. She
deliberated—“Ask Cook to make us four more pieces, please.”

Marvellous, the parlour-maid thought it was. And as she closed the door
she heard the voice say, “I do so hate to be short of toast, don’t you?”

He was standing in the sunny window. Geraldine went up to him. She put
her hand on his arm and gave it a gentle squeeze. How pleasant it was to
feel that rough man’s tweed again. Ah, how pleasant! She rubbed her hand
against it, touched it with her cheek, sniffed the smell.

The window looked out on to flower beds, a tangle of michaelmas daisies,
late dahlias, hanging heavy, and shaggy little asters. Then there came
a lawn strewn with yellow leaves with a broad path beyond and a row of
gold-fluttering trees. An old gardener, in woollen mitts, was sweeping
the path, brushing the leaves into a neat little heap. Now, the broom
tucked in his arm, he fumbled in his coat pocket, brought out some
matches, and scooping a hole in the leaves he set fire to them.

Such lovely blue smoke came breathing into the air through those dry
leaves; there was something so calm and orderly in the way the pile
burned that it was a pleasure to watch. The old gardener stumped away and
came back with a handful of withered twigs. He flung them on and stood
by, and little light flames began to flicker.

“I do think,” said Geraldine, “I do think there is nothing nicer than a
real satisfactory fire.”

“Jolly, isn’t it,” he murmured back, and they went to their first
breakfast.

Just over a year ago, thirteen months, to be exact, she had been standing
before the dining-room window of the little house in Sloane Street. It
looked over the railed gardens. Breakfast was over, cleared away and done
with ... she had a fat bunch of letters in her hand that she meant to
answer, snugly, over the fire. But before settling down, the autumn sun,
the freshness had drawn her to the window. Such a perfect morning for the
Row. Jimmie had gone riding.

“Goodbye, dear thing.”

“Goodbye, Gerry mine.” And then the morning kiss, quick and firm. He
looked so handsome in his riding kit. She imagined him as she stood
there ... riding. Geraldine was not very good at imagining things.
But there was mist, a thud of hooves and Jimmie’s moustache was damp.
From the garden there sounded the creak of a gardener’s barrow. An old
man came into sight with a load of leaves and a broom lying across.
He stopped; he began to sweep. “What enormous tufts of irises grew in
London gardens,” mused Geraldine. “Why?” And now the smoke of a real fire
ascended.

“There is nothing nicer,” she thought, “than a really satisfactory fire.”

Just at that moment the telephone bell rang. Geraldine sat down at
Jimmie’s desk to answer it. It was Major Hunter.

“Good morning, Major. You’re a very early bird!”

“Good morning, Mrs. Howard. Yes. I am.” (Geraldine made a little
surprised face at herself. How odd he sounded!) “Mrs. Howard, I’m coming
round to see you ... now ... I’m taking a taxi.... Please don’t go out.
And—and—” the voice stammered, “p-please don’t let the servants go out.”

“_Par_-don?” This last was so very peculiar, though the whole thing had
been peculiar enough, that Geraldine couldn’t believe what she heard.
But he was gone. He had rung off. What on earth—and putting down the
receiver, she took up a pencil and drew what she always drew when she sat
down before a piece of blotting-paper—the behind of a little cat with
whiskers and tail complete. Geraldine must have drawn that little cat
hundreds of times, all over the world, in hotels, in clubs, at steamer
desks, waiting at the Bank. The little cat was her sign, her mark. She
had copied it from a little girl at school when she thought it most
wonderful. And she never tried anything else. She was ... not very good
at drawing. This particular cat was drawn with an extra firm pen and even
its whiskers looked surprised.

“Not to let the servants go out!” But she had never heard anything so
peculiar in her life. She must have made a mistake. Geraldine couldn’t
help a little giggle of amusement. And why should he tell her he was
taking a taxi? And why—above all—should he be coming to see her at that
hour of the morning?

Then—it came over her—like a flash she remembered Major Hunter’s mania
for old furniture. They had been discussing it at the Carlton the
last time they lunched together. And he had said something to Jimmie
about some—Jacobean or Queen Anne—Geraldine knew nothing about these
things—something or other. Could he possibly be bringing it round? But
of course. He must be. And that explained the remark about the servants.
He wanted them to help getting it into the house. What a bore! Geraldine
did hope it would tone in. And really, she must say she thought Major
Hunter was taking a good deal for granted to produce a thing that size
at that hour of the day without a word of warning. They hardly knew him
well enough for that. Why make such a mystery of it too? Geraldine hated
mysteries. But she had heard his head was rather troublesome at times
ever since the Somme affair. Perhaps this was one of his bad days. In
that case, a pity Jimmie was not back. She rang. Mullins answered.

“Oh, Mullins, I’m expecting Major Hunter in a few moments. He’s bringing
something rather heavy. He may want you to help with it. And Cook better
be ready, too.”

Geraldine’s manner was slightly lofty with her servants. She enjoyed
carrying things off with a high hand. All the same Mullins did look
surprised. She seemed to hover for a moment before she went out. It
annoyed Geraldine greatly. What was there to be surprised at? What could
have been simpler? she thought, sitting down to her batch of letters, and
the fire, and the clock and her pen began to whisper together.

There was the taxi—making an enormous noise at the door. She thought she
heard the driver’s voice, too, arguing. It took her a long moment to
clasp her writing case and to get up out of the low chair. The bell rang.
She went straight to the dining-room door——

And there was Major Hunter in his riding kit, coming quickly towards her,
and behind him, through the open door at the bottom of the steps she saw
something big, something grey. It was an ambulance.

“There’s been an accident,” cried Geraldine sharply.

“Mrs. Howard.” Major Hunter ran forward. He put out his icy cold hand and
wrung hers. “You’ll be brave, won’t you?” he said, he pleaded.

But of course she would be brave.

“Is it serious?”

Major Hunter nodded gravely. He said the one word “Yes.”

“Very serious?”

Now he raised his head. He looked her full in the eyes. She’d never
realized until that moment that he was extraordinarily handsome though in
a melodrama kind of way. “It’s as bad as it can be, Mrs. Howard,” said
Major Hunter simply. “But—go in there,” he said hastily and he almost
pushed her into her own dining-room. “We must bring him in—where can we——”

“Can he be taken upstairs?” asked Geraldine.

“Yes, yes of course.” Major Hunter looked at her so strangely—so
painfully.

“There’s his dressing-room,” said Geraldine. “It’s on the first floor.
I’ll lead the way,” and she put her hand on the Major’s arm. “It’s quite
all right, Major,” she said, “I’m not going to break down—” and she
actually smiled, a confident brilliant smile.

To her amazement as Major Hunter turned away he burst out with, “Ah, my
God! I’m so sorry.”

Poor man. He was quite overcome. “Brandy afterwards,” thought Geraldine.
“Not now, of course.”

It was a painful moment when she heard those measured deliberate steps in
the hall. But Geraldine, realizing this was not the moment, and there
was nothing to be gained by it, refrained from looking.

“This way, Major.” She skimmed on in front, up the stairs, along the
passage; she flung open the door of Jimmie’s gay living breathing
dressing-room and stood to one side—for Major Hunter, for the two
stretcher-bearers. Only then she realized that it must be a scalp
wound—some injury to the head. For there was nothing to be seen of
Jimmie; the sheet was pulled right over....


THE END

